U.S. Force May Help U.N.Troops To Regroup
A United States armada of 8 warships and 2,000 marines off the Adriatic coast could provide air cover, troop-carrying helicopters and hostage-rescue commandos in a NATO operation to help move United Nations peacekeepers in Bosnia to safer  positions.
But the Clinton Administration's new willingness to consider sending ground troops to Bosnia poses risks to American military forces that until now have had a tightly circumscribed role in the Balkans.


Prosecutor's Office Criticized
A State Attorney General's report on a fatal accident involving members of the Warren County Prosecutor's office recommends the suspension of a detective and has harsh words for the county office's lack of a policy about drinking on the job.
The report, released yesterday, followed an earlier Attorney General's office finding that said a county prosecutor drank more than a case of beer in a bar on Jan. 11 when he was supposed to be working.
The deputy first assistant prosecutor, Scott A. Smith, later drove into another car in an accident that killed him, a co-worker and two others.


Californian Is Indicted on Securities Claims
A California man has been indicted on charges of filing false claims to obtain almost $5 million from 48 funds set up to reimburse investors harmed by possible securities frauds, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
Mal Yerasi, 62, of Rowland Hills, Calif., was indicted by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan on 11 counts of mail fraud in connection with the filing of claims between November 1991 and January 1995.


Making Friends for New Works
The high point of the Friends and Enemies of New Music concert on Tuesday evening at the Greenwich House Music School came, as expected, when Angelina Reaux sang three songs and a monologue by Ned Rorem with Mr.
Rorem at the piano.
The composer called his setting of "Anna la Bonne," a soliloquy by Jean Cocteau, "an opera six-and-a-half minutes long," and Ms.
Reaux treated it accordingly, with overt, wide-ranging expressiveness.
Then, after the childlike  "Journey," she turned "Visits to St. Elizabeths," based on Elizabeth Bishop's evocation of Ezra Pound's confinement in a mental hospital, into a scathingly sane mad scene.
Mr.
Rorem's collaborations were wise and affectionate, his timing especially exquisite in the chordal washes of "Smile, Death."


Rockets Hope Home Is Finally Where a Victory Is
The San Antonio Spurs have not controlled Hakeem Olajuwon.
They have not controlled a single game of the three played so far on their home court.
And forget about trying to control Dennis Rodman.
As a result, the Houston Rockets hold a 3-2 lead in the Western Conference finals, a bizarre series in which neither team has won at home.


Clinton Speaks: Battling Forces of Disintegration
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's speech today at the United States Air Force Academy, as provided by the Federal News Service, a private transcription company:
Our security objectives over the last 50 years have been dictated by straightforward events, often beyond our control, but at least they were straightforward and clear.
In World War II, the objective was simple: win the war.
In the cold war, the objective was clear: contain communism and prevent nuclear war.
In the post-cold-war world, the objectives are often more complex,  and it is clear that American security in the 21st century will be determined by forces that are operating both beyond and within our own borders. . . .


Mobil Is Reducing Its Operations in Europe
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it would close a large refinery in  Germany and cut back operations at two refineries in France and Britain, sharply reducing its operations in Europe.
The move comes as Mobil is seeking to save $1 billion in costs and cut 4,000  jobs from its worldwide staff, as well as 700 jobs from its operations in the United States.


Chilean Vows to Avoid Prison in Letelier Case
The former chief of the Chilean military's secret police, convicted of the assassination of the opposition leader Orlando Letelier in 1976, vowed today not to go to jail despite a Supreme Court ruling on Tuesday that upheld a seven-year prison sentence imposed by a lower court.
The general, Manuel Contreras Sepulveda, the head of the secret police during the Government of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, said in a television interview this morning, "I'm not going to any jail as long as there is no real justice."


A 30th, With Poignancy and Pizazz
What will certainly prove to be one of the most inspired birthday celebrations of the dance year occurred on Tuesday night when Jennifer Muller/The Works opened its 30th anniversary season at the Joyce Theater.
The program, one of two to be presented during a weeklong engagement, included the obligatory world premiere and a suite of excerpts from dances choreographed by Ms.
Muller between 1975 and 1988.
Then came "Speeds," a signature Muller work created in 1974.
This group piece is a jazzy, boisterous romp through a score by Ms.
Muller's  longtime collaborator, Burt Alcantara.
William Katz's white suits, tunics and hats have the trademark Muller chic.
And the dance courses happily along, through tender, fleeting duets and carefully plotted free-for-alls for a stageful of dancers.
Interspersed are cross-stage lineups of slithering dancers  who look like the "Bayadere" Shades gone funky.
There are periodic cries of "Change," which give the dance a quaint feel.
Blessedly, the kinds of self-conscious stage directions dancers called out to one another in the 1970's  are mostly a thing of the past.


Britain and France to Send More Troops
Britain and France, which had recently voiced doubts about their role as peacekeepers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have stiffened their resolve to remain at least temporarily as a result of the crisis over the Bosnia Serbs' seizure of United Nations hostages.
France offered a plan today for an international "rapid reaction" force of 4,000 to 5,000 troops in central Bosnia to be flown to other regions in the event of trouble.
Such an arrangement could alter the deployment of the 22,000 peacekeepers now in Bosnia, reducing their vulnerability at remote outposts and  possibly broadening their role.


El Daily News, a Spanish Paper, To Begin Publishing Next Week
New York City will get a new newspaper next Wednesday when The Daily News begins publication of El Daily News, a separate Spanish-language publication for distribution at 4,000 outlets in areas of the city with the highest concentration of Hispanic residents.
El Daily News, priced at 50 cents and published weekdays, is to have its own  staff and carry local and international news, particularly from Latin America; community news, sports and entertainment news, including television listings.
Each issue, from 48 to 64 pages, will include a translation in English.


UNITED PARCEL SERVICE TO INVEST $1 BILLION IN EUROPE
United Parcel Service of America Inc., the world's largest package delivery service, said yesterday that it would invest more than $1 billion in Europe in the next five years to strengthen its regional operations.
Under the plan, U.P.S. will spend $300 million on ground vehicles, $300 million on buildings, $200 million on information technology and more than $300 million on aircraft support.
U.P.S., based in Atlanta, named Edwin Reitman to the newly established position of president of U.P.S.-Europe.
The company said its international express delivery volume grew 36.3 percent in the first quarter compared with the period a year earlier.


TOM BROWN OFFERS $200 MILLION FOR PRESIDIO OIL
Tom Brown Inc. offered to buy the Presidio Oil Company yesterday for $200 million.
Tom Brown, a petroleum producer based in Midland, Tex., did not offer details of its offer, which was made in a letter to the chairman of Presidio, George P. Giard Jr.
Tom Brown, which said the deal would relieve Presidio of its heavy debt load, said a combination of the companies would be better than a debt restructuring.
Robert L. Smith, president of Presidio, said the company had no immediate comment.
Presidio missed a $3.3 million interest payment on its 13.25  percent senior gas-indexed notes on May 15.
The company has 30 days to make the  payment before it defaults.


Glenn Burke, 42, A Major League Baseball Player
Glenn Burke, a former outfielder for the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Oakland  Athletics who was the first major league baseball player to publicly acknowledge his homosexuality, died Tuesday at Fairmont Hospital in San Leandro, Calif.
He was 42.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Pamela Pitts, the A's director of baseball administration.


10 Join Trade Group
Ten nations from the African region joined the new World Trade Organization today, bringing its total membership to 96.
The latest admissions, approved at a session of the organization's ruling General Council, were Botswana, the Central African Republic, Djibouti, Guinea Bissau, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, the Maldives,  Mauritania and Togo.
The World Trade Organization, begun on Jan. 1, is replacing the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which had 126 members.


Court Backs Grand Union Bankruptcy Plan
The Grand Union Company's Chapter 11 reorganization plan was confirmed today  by a United States Bankruptcy Court judge.
Under the plan, 10 million shares of new stock will be issued to holders of Grand Union's senior subordinated notes.


Japanese Harpist Wins Concert Competition
The Japanese harpist Mariko Anraku has won first prize in the 1995 Concert Artists Guild New York Competition, the guild has announced.
The prize includes  management by the guild leading to recital and orchestral appearances, a New York recital, a commissioned work from a composer of her choice and eligibility  to participate in the guild's San Juan Islands Chamber Music Festival and Artists in Radio residencies.
Ms.
Anraku also received the I.T.T.
Corporation Prize and the Channel Classics Prize.
Ms.
Anraku was recently appointed associate principal harpist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra.
She has received the Pro Musicis International Award, first prize at the Japan International Harp Competition and third prize at the Israel International Harp Competition.


International Briefs;ABN Amro Raises Its Offer for Orco
ABN Amro Bank N.V. said yesterday that it would offer 84.47 guilders a share, or a total of 460 million guilders ($291 million), for Orco Bank N.V., a bank based in Curacao, part of the Netherlands Antilles.
ABN Amro first expressed interest in Orco in February and said it expected to pay about 73.80 guilders a share.
That initial offer caused protests by VEB,  a shareholders organization, and by Jaap Kroonenberg, a real estate broker who owns a 33 percent stake in Orco.
They said the price was less than Orco was worth.
ABN Amro said it had raised its bid because Orco's interest income and proceeds from its bond portfolio had risen.
ABN Amro was asked to bid for Orco by the central bank of the Netherlands Antilles and by Orco itself.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Bosnian Serbs Call for Talks; U.N. Refuses, Seeing a Ploy
Apparently convinced that they can talk their way out of their current isolation, the Bosnian Serbs offered today to hold international talks on the release of over 320 United Nations soldiers taken hostage after NATO bombing raids last week.
"We are calling for immediate discussions," said Miroslav Toholj, who serves  as information minister of the Bosnian Serbs.
He added that the talks should focus on the release of the hostages and future "security guarantees" for the Serbs.


Russian Town Hit by Quake To Be Sealed
This oil town, crushed in an earthquake on Sunday in Russia's Far East, is little more than a cemetery.
Shoddy, Soviet-era apartment blocks lie in mounds like tumbled tombstones, and rescue workers are now pulling more corpses than survivors from the ruins.
"We feared the worst, but held out hope until today," said Sergei Kopytov, 42, as he stood in front of the remains of his apartment building at 17 Pruchistkaya Street.


German Scholar Unmasked as Former SS Officer
The war was ending and Berlin was in ruins when Hans-Ernst Schneider shed the uniform of a Nazi SS officer and slipped into obscurity, abandoning his name and his history.


An Italian Master Works His Glass Alchemy
THERE are magicians who saw people in half or make them disappear in miracles of illusion.
And there is Lino Tagliapietra, a magician whose miracles are real.
Dipping his blowpipe into a 2,000-degree mass of molten glass, Mr.
Tagliapietra breathes gentle puffs of air through the tube and then in a flash,  with a snip of steel tweezers, a pull and a tug, creates a planet Saturn, wreathed in rings.
Or a delicate gleaming goblet with a base like an inverted parasol that pings musically at the tap of a finger.


White Quits as WNYW Anchor
CARL WHITE, a WNYW-TV/Channel 5 sportscaster since 1986, resigned yesterday but will remain at the station until July 1.
White has been under pressure from the station to improve his error-prone presentation.
The station has sought replacements, including two former members  of the football Giants, GEORGE MARTIN and HARRY CARSON, as well as JON KELLY, a  Chicago sportscaster, but no successor was named.
White replaced BILL MAZER as the weeknight sports anchor in 1991.


Wolfensohn to Step Down As Kennedy Center Head
James D. Wolfensohn, who had hoped to remain as chairman of the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts even after assuming the presidency of the World Bank on Thursday, has decided instead to relinquish the arts position, a spokeswoman for the center said tonight.
Confirming a report of Mr.
Wolfensohn's decision in The Washington Post, the  spokeswoman, Tiki Davies, said that Mr.
Wolfensohn would leave the Kennedy Center at the end of the year, and that the center's board would start a search  for his successor.


Fixed Marriages in Contexts
To The Home Section:
Shoba Narayan's article, "When Life's Partner Comes Pre-Chosen" (May 4) was of particular interest to me since I, too, have come to the United States from India.


Events: Lectures, Walks And Craft Exhibitions
Craft Talk American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.


Flames Drop King as Coach
The Calgary Flames dismissed Coach DAVE KING yesterday, announcing that the team was not renewing his contract.
"It is the decision of the organization to move forward under new direction," General Manager DOUG RISEBROUGH said.


MCA's Value Growing, Seagram Chief Tells Shareholders
The president of Seagram, Edgar M. Bronfman Jr., told investors yesterday that MCA Inc. had become more valuable since Seagram first offered to gain control of it, but he did not provide details of his plans for the entertainment company.
Seagram, which officially takes over MCA next week, also reported a sharp gain in earnings resulting from the sale of its stake in Du Pont.


In Bosnia, the West Blunders On
To the Editor:
Re "Air Strike in Bosnia" (editorial, May 26):


Spanking Has Its Uses
To The Home Section: The controversy over spanking is at least 20 years old.
It developed from popular psychological theory that children are innately good.
After putting in my time as a parent, my vision is that children are born innocent but innately self-involved.
And given the fact that they do not speak your language and are not familiar with your cultural norms, they can be difficult to communicate with effectively.
Spanking is generally resorted to by good parents when it is clear that the  child is not getting the message.
Sometimes these are issues of personal safety.
Sometimes it is done when it is clear that while the child may be getting the message, the child would still prefer to get its own way.


Sports of The Times;U.C.L.A's Ringer From Down Under
THE film clip on the Tuesday morning edition of ESPN's Sportscenter showed a  blond, pony-tailed pitcher winding up and firing away.
The studio host announced with great amusement that the pitcher's name, coincidentally, was Tonya Harding.
The pitch went in hard and fast.
Strike, at the knees.
Now, the pitcher name's wasn't actually Tonya, but Tanya, rhyming with "can ya." Like the skater, however, there appears to be something fishy with her story.


Fleming to Quit Knoxville
The Fleming Companies, a food distribution concern, will close its Knoxville, Tenn., distribution center, consolidating the business at facilities in Nashville and Johnson City, Tenn.


Germany to Reorganize New York Tourist Office
The German Government promised today to reorganize its official tourism office in New York after a series of scandals that culminated last week with the disclosure of a policy document saying no American "blacks, Jews, Hispanics and  Asiatics" should be encouraged to visit Germany.
Gunter Rexrodt, the Economics Minister, whose office pays 85 percent of the New York office's $30 million-plus annual expenses, said the German Government official who oversaw the New York office, Ulrich Geisendorfer, would be dismissed.
He said the office would be thoroughly reorganized by July and that Government money might be withdrawn.


Evidence Shows Link of 2 Centuries of Drought to Maya Decline
New evidence from a Mexican lake bed has revealed that an unusually severe drought about 1,200 years ago may well have contributed to the abrupt decline of classic Maya civilization.
Scientists from the University of Florida said an analysis of sediments beneath Lake Chichancanab on the Yucatan Peninsula provided "the first unambiguous evidence" for a period of extreme aridity between A.D. 800 and 1000.
The drought was the harshest in the region in 8,000 years and coincided with the widespread collapse of Maya culture, a time of spreading warfare and finally the abandonment of many great cities of monumental architecture.


Giuliani in a Strange Ethics Stumble
From the day that I started exploring running for mayor, I have made it clear to every political leader almost from the first discussion we have had that there will be no jobs or patronage; only decisions made on the merits.
Rudolph W. Giuliani when he was running for mayor in 1989.
MAYBE today, the Mayor would amend his campaign quote to say that he would make decisions on the merits only after days of bad publicity, a near rebellion  from the city's hospitals agency and indications that persistent press inquiries weren't going away.
Because it took all of that to persuade Mr.
Giuliani to kill his nomination of a politically connected candidate to run the Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx.
That candidate was Leonard R. Piccoli, ally and former top aide to State Senator Guy J. Velella, the Bronx Republican leader and one of the few Republicans currently enthusiastic about the Mayor.
Mr.
Piccoli was Mr.
Velella's choice, and City Hall went along, even though Mr.
Piccoli had to resign from the very same job nine years ago amid accusations of mismanagement.


Accounts
Pirelli Armstrong Tire Corp., Tokyo, to Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam, Tokyo, a joint  venture of Dentsu Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., to handle its account in Japan, previously handled by various local agencies on a project basis.
Other Y.&amp; R. offices handle advertising for Pirelli in markets including the United States and Europe.
Billings were estimated at more than $1 million.
Turner Program Services, Atlanta, the syndication division of Turner Broadcasting System, to Big Fat TV, New York, to introduce a first-run late-night series, "Lauren Hutton and . . . " The billings were not disclosed.


Stocks Higher in Japan
Stock prices were higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 157.78 points, or 1.02 percent, at 15,594.57.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei plunged 326.18 points, or 2.07 percent.


Corrections
An article on May 22 about New York City's small experimental schools referred incorrectly to a comment by the Harvard psychologist Howard Gardner about "an indispensable ingredient of quality education." Mr.
Gardner was defending traditional disciplines like science and history.
He was not also defending standardized tests; he opposes them.


On-Line Performance Art
IMAGINE a fusion of MTV, alternative radio and edgy P.S. 122-style performance art.
That's the funky downtown vibe of Visual Radio Inc., a new arts and entertainment service that integrates on-line and CD-ROM technologies.
The service provides a monthly disk that contains a visual sampler of the performances of more than 100 artists -- musicians, poets, film makers, dancers  -- nationwide and also provides access through the Internet or to a direct-dial bulletin board.
Terrence Peck designed the service with a Romanian architect, Lucian Andrei.
On the computer screen, Mr.
Andrei created a loft performance space with a spotlighted stage (below) on which tiny animated performance artists can each present two-minute cameos with the click of a mouse.


R. L. Robbins, 56, Technology Expert
Richard Lewis Robbins, an environmentalist who also was an expert on law firm technology, died on Sunday at his home in Chicago.
He was 56.
His family said only that he died after a brief illness.


Pacers Can't Find Magic At the End
Mark Jackson dribbled quickly up the floor, looked for Reggie Miller and decided to take the Eastern Conference finals into his own hands.
He let fly a 25-footer from the right of the key with 6 seconds remaining tonight and the Indiana Pacers trailing by 3.
The ball hit the front of the rim, Anfernee Hardaway grabbed the rebound and the Team That Wouldn't Die finally retired for the night.
The Orlando Magic held off Indiana in Game 5, 108-106, at Orlando Arena in another thrilling contest that was not decided until the final  seconds.


Second Group of Fish Dealers Agrees to Lease at Fulton Market
In a move virtually assuring that the Fulton Fish Market will remain in Manhattan, the city reached an agreement yesterday with a second major group of  fish wholesalers on a long-term lease.


Utility to Sell Air Pollution Rights to Merck
Public Service Electric &amp; Gas Company is trying something new to win customers' loyalty: It is selling them the right to pollute.
Cheap.
In the first deal likely to make it past all the regulatory hurdles, Public Service and Merck &amp; Company plan to announce an agreement today that will let boilers at Merck's plant in Rahway, N.J., emit tons more than the new limit of smog-causing chemicals this summer because it has bought the right to do so from P.S.E.&amp; G., which polluted less than expected in 1992.


Reverse Play: Jets Sign 2d Pick, Work on No. 1
Joe Linta was extremely pleased yesterday.
The Jets gave the rookie Hugh Douglas only about $4 million to sign a four-year contract.
Linta, you see, is the agent for tight end Kyle Brady, the Jets' No. 1 draft  pick.


No Indictment In a Shooting
A grand jury in Brooklyn has voted not to indict a police officer in the shooting of a 16-year-old boy who apparently pointed a toy pistol at the officer, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said yesterday.
At the time of the incident, neighbors said the police officer shot the teen-ager immediately after asking him to halt, and the boy's family said it was unlikely he would even carry a replica of a gun.
But the grand jury found that charges against the officer, Robert Rodriguez, were not warranted.


France Revives Plan to Sell Big Steelmaker
The French Government announced plans today for the sale of Usinor Sacilor, one of the world's largest steelmakers, resuming a privatization program that was interrupted by the recent presidential campaign.
Shares in Usinor will be put up for sale "in the coming weeks if market conditions permit," Alain Madelin, France's new Economy Minister, said.
The sale, which is to be accompanied by a capital increase of $1 billion, will be the first privatization by the conservative Government appointed two weeks ago by the new French President, Jacques Chirac.


QVC Seeks Whitman as Host
If products bear the label "Made in New Jersey," the home shopping network QVC would like Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to go on the air to sell them.
The network is trying to find goods made in every state that appeal to a national audience.
It has already featured 18 states and 10 governors.
Governor Whitman is considering the proposal, an aide said.


Films and Recordings Threaten Nation's Character, Dole Says
In his quest to gather support from conservative Republicans for his Presidential bid, Senator Bob Dole made a withering attack tonight on the entertainment industry for what he said was a barrage of movies and recordings that are slashing the social fabric of the nation.
"We have reached the point where our popular culture threatens to undermine our character as a nation," said Mr.
Dole, whose speech propelled him into the forefront of Republican candidates denouncing Hollywood for producing what he called "nightmares of depravity" involving sex and violence.


William Goldfarb, Psychiatrist, 80
Dr.
William Goldfarb, a psychiatrist and founding director of the Henry Ittleson Center for Child Research in Riverdale, died on Tuesday at a Salt Lake  City nursing home to which he had moved in April.
He was 80 and had lived in Manhattan.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Simpson Judge Rules Jurors Can See Many Photos of Victims
The lawyers defending O. J. Simpson suffered a major setback today when Judge Lance A. Ito ruled that more than three dozen graphic photographs of the two murder victims could be shown to jurors.
In deciding one of the most bitterly fought evidentiary issues in the trial,  Judge Ito described some of the photographs as "horrible" and "terrible." His written decision gave prosecutors almost all they had asked for, saying the value of the pictures as evidence outweighed their potentially prejudicial effect on the jurors.


A Poor Plan for Nynex
The future of telephone service in New York State will be shaped today when the state Public Service Commission votes on a poorly fashioned plan to loosen regulations on Nynex, which provides residential phone service to over seven million customers.
The plan, which the commission's staff negotiated with Nynex, would slightly lower and then freeze residential rates for up to seven years.
In return, Nynex would be allowed to keep whatever extra money it earns from cutting costs and selling new communications services.
The goal is to entice Nynex into lower costs and greater innovation.
But the plan will not work unless drastically altered.
For starters, the duration of the plan is too long.
To lock in rates today based on seven-year projections of inflation and productivity invites serious problems.
Either the rates wind up too low, forcing Nynex to cut back services,  or too high, thereby generating windfall profit with which to subsidize -- to its competitors' detriment -- entry into new fields.
Consumer groups complain, with justification, that the plan will not force Nynex to improve its poor service record.
They also claim that the proposed rate reductions are skimpy, falling below those achieved in other states.


Man Confesses to 1974 Killing
In 1974, 4-year-old Brenda Probasco was found dead 16 miles from her home here in Gloucester County.
Now, a former neighbor has been charged with her murder.
Though Edwin C. Blood, 51, was an early suspect, the authorities said they did not have enough evidence to charge him until he confessed to New Jersey State Police detectives while being questioned recently at a New Hampshire prison.
Mr.
Blood was nearing the end of 10 years in prison after pleading guilty to molesting another girl.


Dreamworks In Computer Animation Step
Silicon Graphics Inc. and Dreamworks, the new entertainment company formed by Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen, said today that they would jointly develop a system for computer animation.
The companies said that together they expected to provide about $50 million in financing to cover development costs and related hardware and software.


US. LEADS NATIONS IN SURPRISE BUYING TO PROP UP DOLLAR
The Clinton Administration and a dozen foreign countries took the currency markets by surprise today, buying billions of dollars in an intervention that appeared to have stopped yet another slump in the dollar.
After several days of sliding slowly down toward its record lows of mid-April, the dollar bounced back sharply today against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
But when trading ended, the dollar had not quite reached the levels that traders said would signal a new stability.


Legis-flation
When the Supreme Court overturned the so-called Gun-Free School Zones Act of  1990, the ban on guns within a thousand feet of a school, it said Congress had exceeded the Government's power over interstate commerce.
But there was a nonlegal reason for sinking the statute: its name.
The act is one of many laws with names so manipulative that only a brave legislator would dare vote against them.
In the case of the Gun-Free School Zones Act, would urban lawmakers want critics to charge they favored guns in playgrounds?


Yzerman Undergoes Surgery
STEVE YZERMAN underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee and could rejoin the Detroit Red Wings during the Western Conference finals against Chicago, according to a published report.
The Detroit News, citing an unidentified source, said yesterday that the surgery was performed Monday at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit and that Yzerman  could return for a possible fifth game of the series on June 11. (AP)


Market Place;A mutual fund's appetite for restricted stocks is costly.
IT is a rare mutual fund that manages to suffer a double-digit percentage loss in a single day -- even a day when the stock market has a small swoon.
Even more unusual is a fund that racks up such a huge loss because of a single stock.


New Overtime Rule For 1998 World Cup
FIFA, soccer's governing body, today approved the use of sudden-death overtime for the 1998 World Cup in France.
Until now, when games were tied at the end of regulation time, teams played a full 30 minutes of overtime.
Under the new rule, if games are still tied at the end of 30 extra minutes, they will  still be decided by penalty kicks.
Brazil beat Italy on penalty kicks after 120 scoreless minutes in last summer's World Cup final.
The new rule will get its first test in a major tournament next summer at the European championship.


New Director Named For Doubleday Clubs
Roger Cooper, an executive at St.
Martin's Press, has been appointed vice president and editorial director of the Doubleday Book and Music Clubs, the company announced yesterday.
He has been senior vice president and publisher of  St.
Martin's mass-market division for two years.
Mr.
Cooper succeeds Arlene Friedman, who will become president and publisher  of Doubleday Publishing, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, which is owned by Bertelsmann.
Both appointments take effect during the summer.


A 2-Day, 5-Set Match Is Too Much for Sampras
It was 4-3 in the fifth set in favor of Gilbert Schaller when a large and confused white dove landed on Center Court.
The dazed dove strutted its 15 seconds of fame and was then shooed off the dusty surface by a couple of ushers.
Before flying off the premises, the bird swooped back over the court, directly over the head of Pete Sampras, who casually knocked a ball in its direction.


Garden Calendar: Tours, Talks, a Concert, a Party
Rose Garden Tours New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.


Silas Leaving Nets for Suns
PAUL SILAS, a Nets assistant coach for two seasons under CHUCK DALY and BUTCH BEARD, has taken a similar position with the Phoenix Suns.
Silas, who was considered a candidate for the vacant head coaching job with the Boston Celtics, came to terms with the Suns last night.


Ethnic Fighting in Burundi
Fighting broke out today between gunmen and Government troops in a Hutu area  of the capital, the Mayor and military officials said.
Burundi radio said one soldier was killed.
The shooting began as envoys of the Organization for African Unity strove to  calm ethnic tensions.


Senior Class
IN 1979, at age 25, Patricia Moore turned herself into an old woman.
She put  splints on her knees so that she walked haltingly.
She wore clouded contact lenses, impairing her vision, and layers of latex that mimicked the natural wrinkles of an 80-year-old.
"I was studying for my gerontology degree, and I wanted to see firsthand how older people are treated," she said.
She found out.
On the streets of New York she was ignored or cursed for her awkwardness.
She was shortchanged by shopkeepers.
A gang of boys stole her purse and beat her for the sport of it.
"There was a lot of vulgarity, a lot of anger," she said.


CHRONICLE
When ANN M. FORTS was 7, she took umbrage at the newsletter her family received that dealt with her condition, Down syndrome.
She began crossing out the word "Down" and writing "up" in its place and has been doing that ever since.
Ms.
Forts, now 28, turned the design into a logo for a line of T-shirts,  caps and pens she sells to benefit the National Down Syndrome Congress.
"I don't like the word 'Down,' she said yesterday from San Francisco, where she is to address a conference of the American Association on Mental Retardation. "I am so upbeat.
I show people how to be pleasant with other people.
Most people should be happy and know that they are on top like I am."


CABARET
Mock-Operatic Tradition Meeting 50's-Style Rock Phylicia Rashad Rainbow and Stars


International Briefs;Group Seeks Share Of Italian TV Empire
Prince Walid bin Talal, the Saudi billionaire, is leading a consortium seeking to buy a large share in the television empire of the former Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, Saudi Arabian financial sources said yesterday.
The sources were confirming a report in the Roman newspaper La Repubblica that the Prince had met Mr.
Berlusconi on Sunday to discuss the possible deal but added that any agreement would not be concluded before Italy's general elections, expected in October.
La Repubblica said the consortium led by the Prince was seeking a 35 percent stake in Mr.
Berlusconi's three national television stations.
The consortium also consists of Time Warner Inc. and the German media executive Leo Kirch.
(Reuters)


White House Intruder Put in Mental Ward
The man who scaled the White House fence last week and was then shot by a Secret Service officer has been moved from a jail to a mental hospital after being interviewed by a psychologist.
A Federal prosecutor disclosed the move today at a hearing for the 37-year-old White House intruder, Leland William Modjeski of Falls Church, Va.,  who is charged with assault and with carrying a firearm across state lines with  intent to commit a felony.
The prosecutor, Eric Dubelier, made the disclosure in asking Magistrate Alan Kay to order that Mr.
Modjeski's medical records be released to the court as an aid in deciding whether he should continue to be held.


Citing Rising Costs, Port Authority Kills Airport Rail Plan
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decided not to build a 22-mile railway from Manhattan to Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports  in Queens because of rising costs, dealing a major setback to a decades-old search for an affordable and convenient way to transport travelers between the airports and the city's center.
The rail line would have been the largest new public-works venture in the region in years, an undertaking that recalled the mammoth projects of earlier eras: the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, the subways, the Hudson River tunnels.
But its demise reflects the pressures of today, when public spending is a political  concern and a new generation of Republicans wants to shrink government and rein  in its aspirations.


ONEX SUES LABATT TO GAIN ACCESS TO CONFIDENTIAL DATA
The Onex Corporation filed suit in a Canadian court yesterday seeking to force John Labatt Ltd. to surrender confidential data being given to potential rival bidders.
The suit was the latest move in a bitter takeover fight for Labatt, the Canadian brewer.
Onex, a Toronto buyout firm, is offering $1.7 billion for Labatt.
Onex said in a statement that it was seeking access to Labatt's special information rooms, where the company allows prospective rival buyers to view confidential data on the company.
The chairman of Labatt, Samuel  Pollock, called the lawsuit coercive and accused Onex of trying to distract the  brewer while it was seeking a better offer.
He said the brewer was making "good  progress" in talks with unidentified rival buyers.


The Slippery Slope in Bosnia
The Clinton Administration has recklessly blurred the clear and prudent line  it once drew against using American ground forces in combat in Bosnia.
Yesterday the President declared that he would respond favorably to any NATO request for American troops to help reposition the United Nations peacekeeping forces there.
Such a mission could easily open the way to direct American involvement in the fighting, if, for example, the Bosnian Serbs chose to disrupt the U.N. redeployment.
Until now, the Administration had insisted that American ground troops would  only be used to evacuate the U.N. peacekeepers from Bosnia or to police a negotiated peace that all sides committed themselves to observe.
Those missions, though entailing risks, would be defined and limited.
Plunging into a redeployment mission would be an invitation to open-ended combat in U.N. operations whose goals and methods seem to change almost daily.


Morrison Knudsen Says Bank Accord Is Near to Avert Bankruptcy
Struggling to stave off a bankruptcy filing, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation said yesterday that although it would slip into default at midnight on $122 million in bank loans, it was close to an agreement with its banks for an extension.


Killer's Parole Was Bungled, Report Says
The supervision of a convicted Pennsylvania killer who now stands accused of  killing a New Jersey police officer was mishandled by parole officials in both states, according to a report issued today by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The Governor said that it was clear that there were "errors in judgment and understanding by the New Jersey officials" and that "substantive changes must be made to the parole system in New Jersey." In particular, she said, she would consider whether to change a process that has allowed low-level parole officers  to decide whether a parolee from another state with a history of serious crimes  should be allowed to settle in New Jersey.


Man Held in Theft That Cost a Woman's Legs
A man wanted in a subway purse-snatching in which a woman lost both legs beneath a train turned himself in to the police yesterday.
He faces charges that could put him behind bars for about 40 years if he is convicted.
The Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said the suspect, Kenneth Timber, 36, would be charged with first-degree robbery in the incident, in which Samella Thompson, a visitor from Trinidad, fell beneath the wheels of an F train at the Van Wyck Boulevard Station in Queens on Monday.
She and her sister, Angela Edwards, were chasing a man who had stolen Ms.
Edwards's purse.
The first-degree robbery charge involves serious injury to someone not involved in the crime and is punishable by 8 1/3 to 25 years in prison.


Lab's Fate Is in Air Force Numbers;New York Officials Say Pentagon Tailors Its Data to Politics
Last October, anticipating a new round of military base closings, Air Force analysts used a computer to estimate how much the Defense Department would save  if it closed its high-tech military laboratory in Rome, N.Y., and merged it with a lab elsewhere.
Their October cost-benefit analysis found that moving the lab would be so expensive -- $133.8 million -- that it would far outweigh the $1.5 million in annual savings from closing it.
Indeed, the computer determined it would take more than 100 years to recoup the price of the move.
So the Air Force ranked the Rome laboratory among the last installations it would consider closing.


Executive Changes
CAMPBELL SOUP CO., Camden, N.J., named Dale Morrison president of its Pepperidge Farm bakery and confectionery division, succeeding Charles McCarthy, who resigned.
Mr.
Morrison was also elected a corporate vice president of Campbell.


PEPSI-COLA PLANNING TO TEST LOW-FAT MILKSHAKES
The Pepsi-Cola Company, a unit of Pepsico Inc., said yesterday that it would  begin testing a line of low-fat milkskakes in Texas and Oklahoma.
Pepsi will produce the drinks, called Smooth Moos Smoothies, through a venture with the nation's biggest dairy cooperative, Mid-America Dairymen Inc. of Springfield, Mo.
The new product, Pepsi's first in the $19 billion dairy beverage category, will come in 9.5-ounce glass bottles in four flavors: double chocolate, French vanilla, strawberry and banana.
The drinks will be made with skim milk and have  two grams of fat per bottle.
Pepsi-Cola, based in Somers, N.Y., is the nation's  second-largest soft drink company after the Coca-Cola Company.


Bottling The Stuff Of Dreams
These are busy days at Vical Inc., a small biotechnology company here.
Using  a second-generation approach to biotech drug development known as gene therapy,  Vical is collaborating with industry giants like Merck &amp; Company and Baxter International Inc. to develop everything from a vaccine for hepatitis to treatments for cancer, hemophilia and cystic fibrosis.
Two of its cancer treatments recently produced encouraging results in clinical trials, and there has just been a breakthrough with a flu vaccine.
Across town, things are also hopping at Viagene Inc., one of the first gene therapy companies to attract a deep-pocket buyer.
In April, the Chiron Corporation agreed to pay about $113 million for Viagene in a deal that amounted to a big vote of confidence in the company's quest for vaccines to combat cancer and viral diseases, including AIDS.


Chicago Title in Job Cuts
The Chicago Title and Trust Company said today that it would cut 300 jobs nationally by midsummer in response to slowing home sales.
The cuts will be largely staff and support jobs in clerical, financial, legal and information services, Chicago Title, the nation's largest title insurer, said today.
The Chicago-based company has about 7,000 employees.


INSIDE
Giuliani's Choice to Run Bronx Hospital Bows Out


People
Marshall Ross was named senior vice president and creative director at Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, succeeding Ernie Cox, who left to join J. Walter Thompson Chicago, a unit of the WPP Group, as a senior partner and group creative director.
Mr.
Ross was previously senior vice president and executive creative director at Campbell Mithun Esty, Chicago.


New Federal Landlord Takes Charge in Chicago
A few months ago, when he was still riding high as the widely praised "visionary" chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority, Vincent Lane told Federal officials that it would take at least a billion dollars to turn the problem-plagued agency around.
But instead of coming up with an extra billion any time soon, the Federal Government took over the housing authority on Tuesday and today announced some of its plans for the country's second-biggest and most troubled public housing agency.


Arafat Says Saudis Pledge Financial Aid
Saudi Arabia will give the struggling Palestinian Authority some financial help, the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, said today.
Mr.
Arafat, in Saudi Arabia on a two-day visit, said King Fahd had "promised  all kinds of assistance on all levels," but he did not say how much the King had pledged.


Upsala College Closes Doors
After 102 years, Upsala College has closed its doors forever, crushed by $12.5 million in debt.
The Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools held off withdrawing Upsala's accreditation until yesterday so that about 200 seniors could graduate.


Bridge
For the second time in its 67-year history, the Goldman Open Pairs, the oldest event of its kind in the world, has been won by a married couple.
In play Sunday in Manhattan, the winners, thanks to a 69 percent final session, were Robb and Linda Gordon of Manhattan.
The only other married winners were Tobias and Jan Stone in 1957.
On the diagramed deal, Robb Gordon as West made a well-judged opening lead against a four-spade contract.
With a choice between the club queen, the diamond king and the heart two, he chose the last.
This was obviously a singleton, since in the partnership style he would have doubled one spade to show three-card heart support.


Jerusalem Journal;The Arabs in Zion: What Symbols for Them?
It takes roughly 50 seconds to sing Israel's national anthem.
As Micha Goldman sees it, that is plenty of time to offend nearly one-fifth of the population.
They are the million Arabs and Druse with Israeli citizenship, who he feels cannot possibly relate to "Hatikva," a haunting melody of Eastern European origin that means "The Hope" in Hebrew.
It is sung with these words:


Adrift Isles Try to Regroup at Draft
The Devils still have the Stanley Cup on their minds, and the Rangers are wondering what went wrong.
The Islanders, meanwhile, are looking toward the coming draft as a way to put back together a once-proud franchise that is in disarray.
Over an informal lunch today, General Manager Don Maloney talked about the state of his beleaguered Islanders, who finished this season with the second-worst record in the National Hockey League.
Maloney's team is currently without a coach, has 10 players who have played out their options and is still trying to sign its top draft choice from a year ago, Todd Bertuzzi, before it is forced to let him slip back into this year's draft.


Smith Has Shoulder Surgery
Shoulder surgery on 40-year-old shortstop OZZIE SMITH yesterday was described as a success by St.
Louis Cardinals doctors, and he is expected to miss six to eight weeks.


2 Maxwell Sons Go on Trial With 2 Associates in London
The late Robert Maxwell's sons and two business associates went on trial for  fraud today, accused of misusing pension fund assets from the Maxwell companies.
All four have pleaded not guilty.


METRO DIGEST
AIRPORT RAIL PLAN IS KILLED The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decided not to build a 22-mile railway from Manhattan to Kennedy and La Guardia Airports in Queens, dealing a major setback to a decades-old search for an affordable and convenient way to transport travelers between the airports and the city's center. [Page A1.]


V.M.I., a Constitutional Throwback
Virginia, unmoved by social progress, continues to tax its citizens to subsidize the Virginia Military Institute.
V.M.I. is the country's oldest military college.
It also refuses to admit women.
The Clinton Administration, like the Bush Administration before it, objects to this flagrant sex discrimination and now asks the Supreme Court to strike it down.
The V.M.I. case is ripe for high court review.
The constitutional evasions offered by the state and the school are overripe for high court repudiation.


Casino Expansion Is Planned
Harrah's Casino officials said yesterday that they plan a $24.7 million expansion.
The money will be used to build 10,000 square feet of new gambling space and  add a restaurant, the casino's president, Hector Mon, said.


Clinton Talks of Ground Role in Bosnia
President Clinton said today that the United States should be prepared to help the United Nations not only in withdrawing its forces from Bosnia if that became necessary, but in moving and strengthening those forces if needed.
"We have obligations to our NATO allies," the President told this year's graduating class at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo, "and I do not believe we can leave them in the lurch. So I must carefully review any request involving a temporary use of our ground forces." [Excerpts from the speech, page A10.]


Herman Meyers; Taxi Union Leader, 84
Herman Meyers, an organizer and former vice president of the Taxi Drivers and Allied Workers Union in New York City, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
A driver of a medallion cab, Mr.
Meyers became a member of the Taxi Drivers Organizing Committee in the 1960's.
The union was chartered in 1966 and now represents about 5,000 drivers, as well as garage workers and airport dispatchers.
At his death, Mr.
Meyers was a member of the executive council.


H. Don Reynolds, 83, Specialist in Aviation Law
H.
Don Reynolds, whose career in commercial aviation spanned the days of propeller planes to those of supersonic airliners, died on Monday at his home in Phoenix.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Bill Is Aimed at Drunken Drivers
State Senator Gordon A. MacInnes thinks it is time to get tough on drunken driving.
Senator MacInnes, Democrat of Morris County, will introduce legislation today to make prison mandatory for any driver convicted of causing a death while intoxicated and for anyone who causes a death while driving after losing a license for drunken driving.


Yankees' Coast Trip Mercifully Ends at 1-8
Buck Showalter stood claustrophobic in a Kingdome tunnel, where he could hear -- not see -- the Yankees lose another game.
Tino Martinez's three-run homer in the seventh inning tonight was the loud, desultory conclusion to the Yankees' worst road trip since 1991.
It lifted Seattle to a 11-9 victory and a three-game sweep of the series.


Reds Win 9th in Row But Sanders Is Hurt
Reds 11, Pirates 1


Chairman of Total Decides To Accept Alcatel's Offer
Serge Tchuruk, chairman of the French oil company Total S.A., told shareholders at the company's annual meeting today that he had decided to accept an offer to lead Alcatel Alsthom S.A., the giant French conglomerate.
Alcatel, which has interests in telecommunications, transportation and energy, said Tuesday evening that it had offered the positions of chairman and chief executive to Mr.
Tchuruk, who is 57.
He will take the positions on June 22, replacing Pierre Suard, who was forced to step down in April because of fraud and corruption charges against him.


High Water's Coming. Pass It On.


Developing a Perfect Swing Can Be a Pain in the Back
The most graphic images come from other sports.
Larry Bird stretched out in agony on the floor of the Boston Garden.
Joe Montana grimacing in pain with a back injury that would require surgery -- and that many thought would end his career -- nine years ago.
Every professional sport holds the risk of back injury.
But when it comes to  aching backs, for sheer numbers and variety, no sport compares to golf and no professional athletes injure their backs with the frequency and severity of the  touring golf professionals.


COMPAQ CUTS PRICES FOR A TOP SERVER PRODUCT
The Compaq Computer Corporation said yesterday that it had cut prices for one of its leading server products, the Prosignia 300, by up to 16 percent.
Servers  are powerful computers designed to connect a group of smaller computers, giving  them access to the same data and programs.
The Prosignia 300 is a smaller server typically used to connect up to 25 computers, and can be used in bank branches and small offices, a Compaq spokesman said.
The Prosignia 300 5-90 will now cost $3,999, while the 5-75 will cost $3,549.
Compaq, based in Houston, said the price cuts would take effect immediately.
Shares of Compaq rose $1.25, to $39.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Great Outdoors, Now in SoHo
IT seems that many design enthusiasts are shifting their interests from acquisition to activity, getting off the sofa and going outdoors to play.
As if  to underscore the point, Patagonia, the California sports clothes retailer, unfurled its banner over the landmark SoHo cast-iron building it renovated at 101 Wooster Street, between Prince and Spring Streets (below).
The store is on a retail strip known as a Who's Who of New York's modern design retailers.
A California carpenter made the store's fixtures from railroad ties and weathered planks from an old mill.


Council to Redraw Community Districts
After considerable debate, the New York City Council agreed yesterday to change the boundaries of several community board districts, including those of a district in the Bronx that had been the subject of heated debate.
The Council approved the controversial plan, supported by a group of merchants and homeowners in Westchester Square in the North Bronx, to sever ties with the largely poor and working-class Hispanic residents of Community Board 9's southern section.
The group had sought to move the neighborhood's 10,000 people into Board 10, a neighboring district to the north made up largely of middle-class Italian, Irish and Jewish residents.


California to Be Given Federal Land for a Nuclear Waste Dump
The Clinton Administration agreed today to transfer a long-contested tract of desert to California as a place to bury radioactive waste, despite repeated promises to environmentalists that it would not act until lawsuits were settled  and hearings were held.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said he would transfer the land as a result  of findings by a National Academy of Sciences panel that concluded this month that the dump would not pose a serious risk of contaminating water supplies.


U.N. Peacekeepers Arrive in Angola
About 300 Uruguayan infantrymen, some carrying guitars and tea-making kits, arrived here today, the first contingent of United Nations peacekeepers to assume duty in Africa's most persistent civil war.
It is the second attempt by the United Nations to resolve the Angolan war.


Jacobi Choice Gets a Nudge And Bows Out
The Giuliani administration's choice for executive director of Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx dropped from the running yesterday after disclosures that he had previously mismanaged the same hospital and had once written a character reference for a reputed organized crime figure.


Essay;War on the World
By taking hundreds of peacekeepers hostage, using them as human shields and calling them "prisoners of war," the Bosnian Serbs have declared war on the world.
Will the world fight back? Not likely; it prefers to disengage in high dudgeon.


International Briefs;British Aerospace Reopens VSEL Bidding
British Aerospace P.L.C. reopened the bidding for VSEL P.L.C. yesterday with  an offer that values the submarine maker at L678 million, or $1.08 billion.
Analysts said they expected General Electric P.L.C. of Britain, known as G.E.C., to match or top British Aerospace's offer.
Last week, Britain's Trade and Industry Secretary, Michael Heseltine, overruled a recommendation from antitrust regulators that G.E.C. be blocked from bidding on the ground that a takeover of VSEL by G.E.C. would limit competition in military shipbuilding.
Mr.
Heseltine cleared both companies to bid again, and G.E.C. has until June 13  to make a new offer.
G.E.C. is not related to General Electric of the United States.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Scribner Buys 1916 Novella By Mitchell
A 13,000-word romantic novella written by Margaret Mitchell when she was a teen-ager was sold yesterday to Scribner, the publisher of her only novel, "Gone With the Wind."
The book, titled "Lost Laysen," is a tale of honor and unrequited love set in the South Pacific.
It was written in 1916 in pencil in a pair of blue cover composition books that like a message in a bottle went unread for more than half a century until being found in a cache of papers left by a lifelong friend of the author.


U S West Requests Delay on Cable Bid
U S West Inc. said today that it had asked the Federal Communications Commission to delay consideration of its requests to build cable-television networks while it conducts a marketing trial and decides which technology to deploy.
The request came a month after the Bell Atlantic Corporation made a similar request to the F.C.C. to delay a ruling on its two requests to offer video and cable-TV services.


Broten's Prowess on Offense Is Pleasant Surprise for Devils
When the Devils acquired Neal Broten on Feb. 27, they expected the 35-year-old to center their checking line, kill penalties and win face-offs in the defensive zone.
He has fulfilled those responsibilities and much more.
The Devils needed a veteran center to replace Bernie Nicholls, who went to Chicago as a free agent after being a key member of last year's team that fell one victory shy of reaching the Stanley Cup finals.
Lou Lamoriello, the Devils'  president and general manager, pulled the trigger on a deal that sent Corey Millen to Dallas for Broten.
Little did he know what a valuable player Broten would be this spring.


A Plan to Ease Commuting
The Garden State and gridlock: inevitable together?
It is no surprise that the main objective of a 20-year, $27 billion transportation plan for 13 counties is making commuting easier.
The plan unveiled yesterday by the Northern New Jersey Transportation Planning Authority  outlines 287 solutions, including a rail station in Secaucus where passengers could make connections between the state's major rail lines and trains into Manhattan.


Bomb Inquiry Continues Its Hunt for Conspirators
Six weeks after the Oklahoma City bombing, the Federal authorities have unearthed little evidence that the plot involved anyone other than the two men already charged, law-enforcement officials say.
Nevertheless, investigators have refused to shelve their theory of a larger conspiracy, driven by a belief that so enormous a crime could not have been carried out by just two people and tantalized by witnesses who report fleeting glimpses of another suspect, still identified only as John Doe No. 2.


First Members Are Named to Washington Financial Control Board
President Clinton today named a former governor of the Federal Reserve Board  to head a new financial control board that will have final authority over every  aspect of the District of Columbia's finances until the city's fiscal crisis ends.
In Andrew F. Brimmer, Mr.
Clinton appointed a specialist in monetary policy,  with a deep interest in urban finance, to reverse trends that have led the city  to a budget deficit of more than $700 million.
Mr.
Brimmer, 68, an economist, served on the Federal Reserve Board from 1966 to 1974.


Kelly to Have Wrist Surgery
Second baseman Pat Kelly finally saw a hand specialist in New York today, and the news was fitting in this Yankee season of standing-room-only on the disabled list.
Kelly was found to have a torn ligament in his left wrist and will undergo arthroscopic surgery on Thursday that will sideline him for four weeks and perhaps the rest of the season.
Over the weekend, Kelly, batting .315 in 24 games, underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test in Oakland, Calif., and doctors guessed he would return to the lineup in a few days.
But the soreness did not dissipate.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF


Moeller Draws a $409 Fine
GARY MOELLER, former Michigan football coach, was ordered by a judge in Southfield, Mich., yesterday to pay $409 in fines and fees on charges stemming from a drunken scene earlier this month in a restaurant.
District Judge BRYAN LEVY ordered no probation or other punishment for Moeller, saying that what Moeller, 54, went through after his arrest has exceeded the offense.
He lost his job as Michigan football coach. (AP)


Phillies' Stopper Builds on His Inner Toughness
At first glance, Heathcliff Slocumb doesn't seem to be your typical top fireman paid big bucks to stomp out the biggest conflagrations and silence the biggest lineups without mussing a hair on his Fu Manchu.
He doesn't sweat tobacco juice or wear fatigues.
He doesn't cause thousands to rise simultaneously and sing along to "Wild Thing" or cause batters to tremble at the thought of uncontrolled fury in the form of a runaway train of a  fastball.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 26
May 19
May 27
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.9
7.7
7.5 Distillate production, daily
3.2
2.9
3.5 Gasoline stocks
209.5
208.2
215.8 Distillate stocks
115.1
113.9
110.3 Crude imports, daily
7.0
8.0
6.4 Product imports, daily
1.3
1.8
2.3 Crude stocks
326.5
330.0
333.2 Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6 Refinery utilization (%)
95.2
94.0
95.3


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13


Gerulaitis's Mother Files Suit in Son's Carbon Monoxide Death
A week after criminal charges were announced in the death of Vitas Gerulaitis, his mother filed suit yesterday against eight defendants, including  the owner of the Long Island estate where Mr.
Gerulaitis died of carbon monoxide poisoning last fall.
Prosecutors have charged that a new swimming pool heater, installed at a cost of $8,000, was improperly vented and sent deadly fumes into a pool house where Mr.
Gerulaitis, the retired tennis star, was taking a nap.


Job Cuts Seen at Fokker
N.V.
Fokker said today that company work councils had agreed to 945 job reductions, equal to 11 percent of the troubled Dutch aircraft maker's work force.
The restructuring is part of the company's efforts to become more competitive in the world market.
A Fokker spokesman, Leo Steijn, said the company hoped to cut a total of 1,760 jobs by the second half of 1996.
Fokker, which is controlled by Daimler-Benz Aerospace A.G., currently employs about 8,500.


Rain and Favorable Crop Report Send Cotton Prices Tumbling
Cotton prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange after rain relieved dryness in southern Texas, where the first cotton of the new crop  will be picked.
Fears of a cotton shortage were also eased by an Agriculture Department report that the American crop over all was in good shape.
Despite the plunge, cotton prices remain historically high.


Giuliani Chides Cortines For Resisting Use of Police
Escalating the debate over whether the Police Department or the Board of Education should control school security, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani criticized school board members and Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines for resisting the police takeover that he seeks.
"I think most parents and most teachers would feel far safer if this were in  the hands of the N.Y.P.D. rather than in the hands of the school board and the Chancellor, who has not shown a great capacity at management in general and certainly not in the area of law enforcement," the Mayor said at a press briefing at City Hall.


Civilian Uses Are Proposed For Satellites
The military satellite navigation system used to pinpoint the locations of missiles and submarines, as well as soldiers and travelers, should be adapted to emphasize civilian and commercial needs, according to a study released today.
Civilian use of the system, the Global Positioning System, now exceeds that of the military, and the Federal Government should encourage further use by removing some restrictions on it and encouraging more international participation in planning uses of the technology, said the report by two independent study groups.


Palestinians Deserve a Bit of Jerusalem
To the Editor:
Re Douglas J. Feith's "To Promote Peace, Move the Embassy" (Op-Ed, May 29): Mr.
Feith assumes that by moving the United States Embassy to Jerusalem, we Americans would show Arabs that "America's support for Israel on Jerusalem is a  closed question," and he further assumes that the evidence of an invulnerable United States-backed Israel will force reality-sobered Arabs beyond "signing ceremonies" to "real peace."


COMPANY BRIEFS


A Drugstore With Style
WHERE many drugstores resemble soulless warehouses, the Chelsea branch of Stadtlander's Pharmacy, 126 Eighth Avenue, at 16th Street, is nearly a design destination in itself, with W.P.A.-style murals that depict scenes like "Empowerment." Susan Perelman, its marketing director, said, "We wanted a place  devoted to living and giving." The design, by Foresight Design of San Francisco, includes a consultation room and a gift shop, where 90 percent of the proceeds goes to charities for the chronically ill.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about gypsy moths misstated the commercial status of the insecticide Sevin.
It is sold for a number of uses, not including the control of gypsy moths; it is not banned.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Shrubs for Shady Spots


Richer for Failing
When the head of National Medical Care announced a takeover attempt for that  company last month, analysts were quick to praise the offer.
This was not, they  insisted, another Kirk Kerkorian bid.
That day should have convinced everyone that the naysayers were right: Mr.
Kerkorian's $22.8 billion takeover bid for the Chrysler Corporation was dead in  the water.
Since he announced his offer on April 12, Mr.
Kerkorian had been transformed in the eyes of Wall Street from a credible suitor to the personification of an empty bidder.


Dancin' Dolphins


A Home Depot TV Series
Home Depot Inc. said today that it would begin producing a one-hour television series on home improvement to be shown, beginning in September, on the Discovery Channel cable network.


How New York City Privatized Street Cleaning and Rued It
To the Editor:
The statement by Prof.
E.
S.
Savas, the "prophet" of privatization (news article, May 25), that "introducing competition into the delivery of public services" is "new" displays astonishing ignorance.


Winners and Losers in Custody Battles
Television news magazines, like other gossips, love child-custody fights: the fate of a child; the emotions of parents, biological or adoptive; the intimations of abuse.
Who can resist?
Tonight, "48 Hours" offers an anthology of incidents from here and there.
The point of "Who Gets the Kids?" is fuzzy, but the selections do give a glimpse of how children are tossed this way and that by the animosities of their parents and the vagaries of the law.


Mets' Jones, Off the Bench, Saves Best for Last
Tim Bogar went in as a pinch-runner.
Joe Orsulak went up as a pinch-hitter.
Todd Hundley, sore heel and all, replaced the catcher.
David Segui filled in at  first base.
All the while, Chris Jones sat on the Mets' bench and waited for his opportunity.
It is his job to come off the bench and make an impact.
It is something he thinks about, every inning of every game he does not start.
In the  past, that role made him nervous.
Now, he believes he has the knack.


Joseph B. Cramer; Psychiatrist, 80
Dr.
Joseph B. Cramer, the founding director of the division of child psychiatry at the Albert Einstein School of Medicine in the Bronx, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
Dr.
Cramer was 80.
A psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, Dr.
Cramer spent much of his career forging links between the fields of psychiatry and pediatrics.
He contributed chapters on childhood psychiatric disorders to more than half a dozen books.


Stunning Surge On Wall Street: Dow Up 86.46
The stock market, after falling in recent sessions, vaulted yesterday to all-time highs, dumbfounding analysts as the Dow Jones industrial average soared to its biggest one-day percentage gain in a year and its biggest point gain in more than three.
No single explanation seemed to suffice.
The Government reported more data that reinforced Wall Street's view that the economy is slowing enough to contain inflation but without choking corporate profits.
The dollar rose in value after the world's leading central banks took concerted action to buy it.
And the market seemed to chase the usual rumors, including a breakthrough in trade talks with Japan that proved unfounded.


Mexicans Get Little From Our Bailout
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman, in the face of a failed economic policy in Mexico and a disastrous United States-led rescue plan, chooses to attack those who challenge  these policies as do-nothing, shortsighted, reckless populists (column, May 24).
It is Mr.
Friedman who is fundamentally uninformed about this sordid affair.


Phil Burleson, 61, Jack Ruby's Lawyer
Phil L. Burleson, the Dallas lawyer whose legal skills allowed Jack Ruby to carry a presumption of innocence to the grave, died on Monday at Medical City Hospital in Dallas.
He was 61.
His family said he died of a heart attack.


A Grand Hotel, Still Pink, Still Posh
Wandering into the Polo Lounge of the soon-to-reopen Beverly Hills Hotel, Kermit Beriker, the general manager, happily greeted several workers who were applying final touches to the lush forest green pillars.
"Nothing has changed here -- it's exactly as it was," Mr.
Beriker said, walking into the lobby.
"We're back!"


International Briefs;Sega to Cut Price Of Player in Japan
Sega Enterprises Ltd. will cut the price of its Saturn game player in Japan as of June 16 as a price war heats up in the home video game player market.
Sega will reduce the price of the Saturn player to 34,800 yen ($419) from 44,800 yen.
It will also include a free copy of a new version of the video game Virtual Fighter with each machine sold for a one-month period.
On Tuesday, Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. said it would sell a new version of its Playstation machine for 29,800 yen starting in July.
The machine now sells for 39,800 yen.
Sony and Sega are locked in a fierce struggle  for dominance in the estimated $15 billion world video game market.
Both introduced similar machines last year that used new technology to offer more realistic images and faster game speeds.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about Patrick J. Buchanan's campaign for President misattributed a quotation about conservatives  like Ralph Reed of the Christian Coalition who have not endorsed his candidacy.
The comment -- "They want to go with a winner. The concern about Buchanan is: Can he win?" -- was made by Mr.
Buchanan, not Mr.
Reed.


5 Years Of Living Another Woman's Life
As Alexandra Lapierre's research dragged on and on, her friends worried that  she had become too obsessed by the subject of her latest book.
"Is Fanny you?" they would ask when she set off on yet another trip retracing the tumultuous life of the Indiana farm girl who married Robert Louis Stevenson.
"Do you really want to spend five years with this woman?" they wondered anxiously.
Ms.
Lapierre laughed at the memory.
She, too, often asked herself whether, in the end, anyone would care about Fanny.
Yet she was caught.
"I did not identify with Fanny in the sense that she was more adventurous than I am," the petite 39-year-old French writer explained.
"But she appealed to me because  she dared to live her life. I became a bit like an actress who feels herself in  a role. I lived with Fanny day and night."


Talks on State Sentencing Law May Lead to a Deal on Budget
State leaders inched closer to agreement on a budget tonight as they seemed to resolve some of their differences over a new criminal-sentencing law that would toughen terms for violent offenders but allow judges to send nonviolent criminals to drug treatment centers rather than to prison.
Keeping in character with their prolonged negotiations, however, the leaders  could not agree on whether they had agreed.
They varied in their opinions on whether they could conclude their negotiations and pass budget bills by the end  of the week.
The budget is now 61 days late and is fast approaching last year's  record for tardiness, June 8.


Spanking Is Constructive
To The Home Section:
After reading "Spanking Is Becoming the New Don't" (May 11), I felt that another point of view may be appropriate.


CHRONICLE
FAY VINCENT, the former baseball commissioner and movie company executive, has long wanted to establish a program emulating the Chubb Fellows at Yale University.
Now he and his sisters, Dr.
JOANNA E. VINCENT and BARBARA J. VINCENT, will do so at Carleton College in Northfield, Minn.
"The Chubb Fellows are people from all walks of life who go to the university and spend two or three days meeting with students there," he said, referring to the program intended to draw students into public service.
He decided on Carleton because its president, Stephen Lewis, and he were classmates and friends at Williams College.
The fellowship is named in memory of Mr.
Vincent's  mother, Alice Lynch Vincent.


New Force Is Suggested For Bosnia
In a report on the future of the paralyzed mission in Bosnia, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali suggested today that the Security Council consider replacing the United Nations peacekeeping operation with a multinational military force under the command of armies contributing troops.
The option of authorizing a new military force with the power to impose peace reflects the fast-moving events of the last few days in and around Bosnia, where the United States, Britain and France have sent land and sea forces to bolster the United Nations presence.


On the Waterfront


WILLIAMS UNIT TO BUY PEKIN ENERGY FOR $167 MILLION
Williams Energy Ventures said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Pekin Energy Company for $167 million from a partnership of Texaco Inc. and CPC International Inc.
Pekin, a producer of fuel-grade ethanol based in Pekin, Ill., makes about 100 million gallons a year of fuel-grade and industrial ethanol and  related products.
Williams Energy Ventures is a subsidiary of the Williams Companies, an oil and gas pipeline company based in Tulsa, Okla.


Air Force Jet Strikes Texas Apartments, Killing 2
A twin-engine Air Force jet on a routine training mission crashed into an apartment complex here today, killing at least 2 people on the ground and injuring 24 others, local fire officials said.
The pilot and co-pilot ejected from the jet and parachuted into a nearby field, Air Force officials said.
Both were later treated for minor injuries and  released.


ROBERTS PHARMACEUTICAL SHARES FALL ON WEAK EARNINGS
Shares of the Roberts Pharmaceutical Corporation dropped 18 percent yesterday after the company said it expected its earnings for the second quarter and the rest of the year to fall below Wall Street's expectations.
Citing poor results at its home-care and contract research divisions, the company, based in Eatontown, N.J., said it would just about break even for its second quarter, which ends June 30.
Investment analysts surveyed by First Call Inc. had projected earnings of 31 cents a share for the quarter and $1.21 a share for the year.
Shares of Roberts fell $4.125, to $19.375, in Nasdaq trading.


U.S. Says It Plans to Propose New Concessions to Serbia
The Clinton Administration has decided to offer new concessions to President  Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, and plans to propose indefinitely suspending most  of the trade and financial sanctions against Yugoslavia, Administration officials said today.
According to the officials, Mr.
Milosevic will be asked to grant diplomatic recognition to Bosnia and Herzegovina and denounce the taking of United Nations  hostages by Bosnian Serb forces.
The hope is that Mr.
Milosevic will exert his considerable power as President of Serbia to press for a settlement of the Balkan conflict, which has continued for nearly four years.


Hanson Spinoff: U.S. Industries
The British conglomerate Hanson P.L.C. said yesterday that it had completed the spinoff of its United States operations into a new company called U.S.
Industries, with $3 billion in annual sales.
U.S.
Industries has interests in consumer, building and industrial products.
Some of its more famous names include Jacuzzi whirlpools and Farberware cookware.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section last Thursday about Stanley Marcus, chairman emeritus of Neiman Marcus, misstated the middle name of a former editor in chief of Vogue magazine.
She was Edna Woolman Chase, not Wellman.


Excerpts From Dole's Statement: Don't Reinforce a Failure
Following are excerpts from a statement issued today by Senator Bob Dole:
The decision Monday by France, Spain, Germany, Britain, Russia and the U.S. (the "contact group" for the former Yugoslavia) to add forces and equipment to the United Nations Protection Force (Unprofor) appears to be nothing more than a policy of reinforcing failure.


Lab's Fate Is in Air Force Numbers;New York Officials Say Pentagon Tailors Its Data to Politics
Last October, anticipating a new round of military base closings, Air Force analysts used a computer to estimate how much the Defense Department would save  if it closed its high-tech military laboratory in Rome, N.Y., and merged it with a lab elsewhere.
Their October cost-benefit analysis found that moving the lab would be so expensive -- $133.8 million -- that it would far outweigh the $1.5 million in annual savings from closing it.
Indeed, the computer determined it would take more than 100 years to recoup the price of the move.
So the Air Force ranked the Rome laboratory among the last installations it would consider closing.


Ewing Undergoes Knee Surgery
Patrick Ewing had arthroscopic surgery yesterday to repair torn cartilage in  the back of his right knee, the same knee that required surgery last summer.
The Knicks' team doctor said he expected the center to regain full strength in six to eight weeks, meaning Ewing should be ready for training camp in October.
"We expect a full and complete recovery, and we don't anticipate any delay in him starting the season on time," said Dr.
Norman Scott, the team physician, who performed the procedure.


The Pop Life
Music Festival


Bosnia Snubs Serb-Led Team
Bosnia refused today to play the Serb-led Yugoslav team in a European basketball championship qualifying match on Thursday.
The Bosnian team, however, will participate in the tournament, said Lubomir Kotleba, a representative of the International Federation of Basketball Associations.


Plague Charge Is Denied
A white supremacist charged with improperly buying bubonic plague cultures by mail pleaded not guilty today.
The defendant, Larry Wayne Harris, 43, of Lancaster, entered the plea at his  arraignment in Fairfield County Common Pleas Court.
Mr.
Harris, who has said he belongs to white separatist groups, said he had been developing antidotes for the plague because of the potential invasion of germ-carrying rats from Iraq.


Securities Laws Protect Investors
To the Editor:
In your May 26 news article on the zeal of Representative Christopher Cox, Republican of California, to reform our securities laws, he may have misled readers about what constitutes a frivolous lawsuit.


Treasury Prices Are Mixed; 30-Year Bond Yields 6.64
Treasury prices closed mixed yesterday as the bond market reacted to several  economic reports that reduced the odds that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates soon.
The 30-year bond rose 6/32 , to a price of 112 20/32 for a yield of 6.64 percent, down from 6.66 percent on Tuesday.
Intermediate notes were mixed.
A 10-year maturity moved lower in price to yield 6.28 percent, up from 6.27 percent on Tuesday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock trading on Tuesday referred  incorrectly to a report to which a decline of technology stocks was linked.
The  report, on orders for equipment used to make computer chips, is issued by Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International, not the Semiconductor Industry Association.


All This and Noodles, Too
MARK MILLER, anthropologist, chef and restaurateur (Red Sage, Coyote Cafe), is forsaking the cuisine of the American West for the Far East with a chain of what he calls "affordable, casual, Asian-fusion" noodle shops, due in September  in Washington.
Like all his theme restaurants, these will feature inventive design.
Olvia Demetriou and Theodore Adamstein, architects, are creating canopies (in drawing, above) that Ms.
Demetriou likened to "paper umbrellas that come in cocktails." Bamboo lamps by Robert Lewis will hang from fanciful giant chopsticks in the ceiling.


Kerkorian Bid for Chrysler Is Ended, at Least for Now
Kirk Kerkorian withdrew his hostile bid of $55 a share for the Chrysler Corporation today, but at the same time announced he had hired an investment bank to advise him on options, including another takeover attempt.
The only step Mr.
Kerkorian's representatives ruled out today was selling his 36 million Chrysler shares, roughly 10 percent of the company.


Cuomo and State Democrats Spar Over His Excess Funds
The New York State Democratic Party -- politically humbled, broke, unable even to afford its own office space -- is in desperate need of more than $400,000 to pay off its debts.
Former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the party's defeated  standard-bearer, just happens to have $400,000 in leftover campaign funds, and a group of party committee members suggested this week that he share with the party.
But Mr.
Cuomo, unhappy with the direction his party has taken since his defeat in November -- particularly the support some of its leaders have shown for several initiatives offered by the man who who defeated him, Gov.
George E.  Pataki -- is in no mood to share.
He said yesterday that he may use the money to fight the death penalty and statewide tax cuts, both of which have been supported by Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, the state's leading Democrat, along with other elected party officials in Albany.
He even dropped broad hints  that he might need the money for a political race.


Remembering Agnew
To the Editor:
The installation of a marble bust of Spiro T. Agnew for display in the corridor of the Senate is a sad reminder of the chaotic late 1960's and the Republican Party's attempts to obscure history (news article, May 25).


CBS and NBC Take Promotion Partners
To publicize their prime-time programming for the 1995-96 season, the CBS and NBC television networks are sponsoring large promotional partnerships.
CBS has teamed up with Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company for an integrated promotion meant to create awareness of the new CBS fall schedule and attract customers to  Sears stores for an annual anniversary sale.
The network declined to discuss the budget.


Magic And Spice, All In a Rug
CHRISTINE VAN DER HURD first visited the rug bazaars of Tangiers as a teen-ager on vacation with her parents, who were antique dealers in London.
It was her formative introduction to rug and textile design, which she later studied at the Winchester School of Art in England.


Growth Revised Downward To 2.7% for First Quarter
Economic growth sputtered to its slowest pace in one and a half years during  the first three months, the Commerce Department said today, with no signs of a pickup for the second quarter.
The department revised downward its growth estimate for the gross domestic product to an annual rate of 2.7 percent for January through March from the 2.8  percent published a month ago.


Richard S. Silver, 90, an Expert on Golfing Rules
Dr.
Richard S. Silver, a Manhattan dentist whose expertise on the rules of golf earned him national recognition on subjects like water hazards and unplayable lies, died last Saturday at the Central Island Health Care Center in  Plainview, L.I.
He was 90 years old.


Man in the News: Andrew Felton Brimmer;New Washington Leader
Andrew F. Brimmer was brought in today to help shore up the sagging fortunes  of the District of Columbia more than a decade after predicting the city was in for "steady erosion" of its financial base.
As the head of a five-member financial control board, Mr.
Brimmer, a 68-year-old former Federal Reserve Board governor, is expected to hand out tough medicine to a city that has been mired in financial crisis for more than a year.
It is a prescription that will appeal to the city's critics on Capitol Hill.


U.S. Called Ready to Compromise on Date for Japan Trade Talks
In a small step intended to accommodate complaints by Asian and European trade officials, the Clinton Administration is leaning toward moving up the date of the next round of talks with Japan on trade in automobiles and auto parts, several American officials said today.
Last week, the Administration rebuffed a Japanese call for urgent negotiations, proposing that the talks be held in Washington on June 20 or 21.
Instead, officials said today, the Administration is now leaning toward offering dates of June 15 or 16 for the discussions, possibly to be held in Geneva.
American punitive tariffs on Japanese luxury cars are scheduled to take effect on June 28.


Jones Comes Out Swinging


Economic Scene;Why hasn't a weaker dollar cut America's trade deficit?
THE dollar, everyone knows, has taken a pounding in the last year while the yen is flying high.
Yet trade accounts have not responded: indeed the United States deficit has swelled while Japan's surplus has continued to climb.
Doesn't that prove adjustments in exchange rates have little or no influence over trade  flows?
The search for an alternative theory of what drives foreign trade accounts has taken on a new urgency after the latest round of exchange-rate gyrations.
For if exchange rates don't matter, the assumption that free markets in currencies can more or less keep the world trading system on an even keel no longer holds.


Robert J. Billings Is Dead at 68; Helped Form the Moral Majority
Robert J. Billings, the evangelistic Christian educator who helped rouse the  religious right into a potent political force as a founder of the Moral Majority, died on Sunday at the Lakeland Regional Medical Center in Florida.
He  was 68 and had lived in Haines City, Fla., since 1992.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


NATO and Russian Officials Meet to Try to Forge Closer Link
After decades of rivalry, Russia and NATO began a high-level discussion today meant to forge closer ties between the alliance and its one-time enemy and to gain Moscow's cooperation in building new security arrangements for Europe.
Six months after Russia angrily suspended its membership in the associate status that NATO calls the Partnership for Peace, breaking with NATO over the alliance's plans to expand, Russia reversed its stance and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev promised a new willingness to work with the alliance.


Cuban Pitcher Lends Intrigue to Draft
Baseball's annual draft of amateur players is always an uncertain venture, even for teams selecting the first few players.
This year's draft, which begins  today, provides an extra degree of gamble.
The wild-card name on the list of players under consideration is Ariel Prieto, a Cuban pitcher, who has attracted the attention of scouts while playing for the Palm Springs (Calif.) Suns of the independent Western League.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Alex Cole, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rich Becker, outfielder, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.


THEATER
The Seeing and the Blind (But Who Is Which?) 'Blinks' Theater by the Blind Through Sunday


Hammer Thrower From U.S.C. Wins Title With a Record Toss
Balazs Kiss, whose picture is on the cover of the program for this meet, became more than just a cover story today.
The 6-foot-1 1/2-inch, 220-pound junior from the University of Southern California won his third straight National Collegiate Athletic Association hammer throw title, and he did it in style as the N.C.A.A.
Division I championships opened.
Kiss won by almost 20 feet and set a meet record of 261 feet 3 inches.
In fact, he broke the record three times.


A Bid to Recall Board Members
Because people are angry at three school board members here, this Monmouth County borough will be the first community to test a new state law allowing recall of elected officials.
Opponents of the board members blame them for the dismissal of a popular vice principal and for late-night decisions made at meetings after the public had left.
The board members will have the chance to include their side of the story on the recall petitions.


Christopher Reeve, Thrown From Horse, Is Suffering Paralysis
Christopher Reeve, the star of four "Superman" movies, is paralyzed and cannot breathe on his own after shattering two spinal bones in a horse-riding accident, his surgeon said today.
The actor's prognosis was uncertain.
Mr.
Reeve's headlong fall in a weekend equestrian competition caused multiple fractures to his first and second cervical vertebrae, bones in the spinal column near the base of his skull, said Dr.
John A. Jane, his surgeon.


2 Issues Create Friction as Hotel Worker Contract Talks Stall
Over the last three days, while New York City was busy promoting itself for the benefit of 1,500 tour operators convening at the Jacob K. Javits Center, contract talks were stalling between the Hotel Association of New York and the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council.
The collective bargaining agreement between the two organizations expires on  June 30, and talks, which began in early April, broke off suddenly -- though temporarily -- on Tuesday, leaving some union officials predicting a strike at the height of tourist season.


Journal;Up at Newt's Place
Nearly six months after his ascendancy, Newt Gingrich still has not met with  Jane Alexander to hear her case for the National Endowment for the Arts.
But he  did make time to see Melanie Griffith, an N.E.A. proponent whose acting credits  include "Working Girl" and "Something Wild" rather than Ms.
Alexander's somewhat less lubricious "First Monday in October."
"Whoever thought of bringing Melanie, it was genius," said the playwright Wendy Wasserstein, another member of the cadre that lobbied the Hill last week for N.E.A. programs supporting writers.
Republican lawmakers tripped over themselves to press her flesh and pose with her for pictures.
"I saw Strom Thurmond come back to life shaking Melanie's hand," said Ms.
Wasserstein.


California Governor Vows To Cut Affirmative Action
Condemning affirmative action programs as "unfair" and "unjust," Gov.
Pete Wilson said today that he intended to curtail them sharply throughout California government wherever legally possible.
In an open letter to Californians, Mr.
Wilson said that merit, not race or sex, would mainly be the basis for state employment, promotion, contracting and  school admission policies except where Federal and state laws and judicial decisions mandated affirmative action.


PLC MEDICAL SHARES SOAR ON FASTER F.D.A. REVIEW
Shares of PLC Medical Systems Inc. jumped 31 percent yesterday after the company said its heart laser had been granted an expedited review by the Food and Drug Administration.
PLC, based in Milford, Mass., is developing a laser system that drills 15 to 30 tiny holes into the heart muscle, increasing blood flow to oxygen-starved tissue.
The company submitted its premarket approval application to the F.D.A. on April 19.
The agency granted the expedited review because the laser would be used for patients who had no alternatives for treatment.
Shares of PLC rose $2.375, to $10, on the American Stock Exchange.


Coalition Challenges Time Warner Over Gangsta Rap
The campaign against Time Warner Inc.'s involvement in gangsta rap reached the company's board yesterday, as the conservative political thinker William J.  Bennett sent letters to Warner's directors demanding that the company stop distributing rap with violent or sexually degrading lyrics.
Although rap is only a small part of Time Warner's music business, and the gangsta rap genre is a smaller category still, such an action by the board could reverberate throughout the company's music division, which is one of Warner's most lucrative lines.


Coalition Challenges Time Warner Over Gangsta Rap
The campaign against Time Warner Inc.'s involvement in gangsta rap reached the company's board yesterday, as the conservative political thinker William J.  Bennett sent letters to Warner's directors demanding that the company stop distributing rap with violent or sexually degrading lyrics.
Although rap is only a small part of Time Warner's music business, and the gangsta rap genre is a smaller category still, such an action by the board could reverberate throughout the company's music division, which is one of Warner's most lucrative lines.


Triple Trouble in the Air
Radar in the air-traffic control center for the New York City region has blacked out three times in the past two months.
That is three times too many.
The Federal Aviation Administration says none of the three breakdowns posed any danger, because air-traffic controllers had other ways to maintain the standard safe distance between planes in the air.
They were able to communicate  with pilots and other centers by radio and record the information by hand, rather than doing it all electronically.


CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER OF GENERAL MAGIC RESIGNS
General Magic Inc. said yesterday that its chief financial officer, Marco DeMiroz, 37, had resigned.
Michael Stern, vice president of business affairs, will take over his position until a replacement is named, a company spokeswoman  said.
Mr.
DeMiroz, who had worked at General Magic for three years, could not be reached for comment yesterday.
General Magic, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., designs computer programs that make it easier to send and receive electronic mail, faxes and voice messages.
The company went public in February.
Shares of General Magic fell 43.75 cents, to $11.25, in Nasdaq trading.


Bank Theft Suspect Is Arrested in a Cab
Thirty minutes after robbing the Hudson City Savings Bank branch here today,  the F.B.I. said, a Lodi man was arrested as he rode a taxi over the George Washington Bridge.
The man, John Tirico, 35, is expected to be charged in two other robberies, including one at the same bank on May 18, said Barry W. Mawn, special agent in charge of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New Jersey operations.


Woman Won't Be Evicted
A dying woman who was facing eviction will be allowed to remain in her home here under an agreement with Citibank, her lawyer said today.
The woman, Doris Sanders, 48, is in Syosset Community Hospital, where she underwent surgery on Monday.
She has cancer, and hospital officials said today that she was in guarded condition.


To avoid a blending of agencies, three soft-drink brands are shifting their accounts.
TWO big beverage marketers took part yesterday in account switches for three  leading brands -- Fruitopia, 7Up and Cherry Coke -- with billings estimated at more than $60 million.
The Coca-Cola Company is significantly expanding its relationship with the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago by assigning that agency the worldwide responsibilities for its Fruitopia line of fruit and tea drinks.
To work on Fruitopia, Burnett will resign its account for the 7Up line of sodas, which it handled for a decade.
The account will be reassigned after a closed review.


Old Sounds Were Smooth And the Young Hopes High
Don't tell Frantz Conde that bip-bip-bip and dum-diddy-dum are nonsense syllables.
The group harmonies of doo-wop music make some serious sense to him and the members of his a cappella quartet, Khulaje.
"It's really about this admixture that makes things beautiful," said Mr.
Conde, a 20-year-old Brooklynite who likens his art to a musical collage.
"There's no other expression like vocal expression. You can play a trumpet or sax, but when you blend with others, it's something else."


AIR FRANCE AND BOEING REVISE DEAL ON ORDERS
Air France reached an agreement yesterday with the Boeing Company to revise its airplane orders, increasing the number of planes but postponing delivery until 1999 to 2001, without incurring penalties.
The new order could be worth as much as $988 million to Boeing, compared with $578 million for the old orders.
Air France said it expected to reach a similar agreement soon with the European  airplane consortium Airbus Industrie.
The airline said its previous orders for 7 Boeing jets had been replaced by an order for 15 planes -- 7 wide-body 767-300 extended-range aircraft and 8 narrow-body 737-500's -- to be delivered between 1999 and March 2001.
Shares of Boeing, which is based in Seattle, gained 62.5 cents, to $58.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Financial Curbs for Capital
President Clinton has chosen the head of a board that will control the finances of the District of Columbia.
Page B12.


How New York City Privatized Street Cleaning and Rued It;Drowning in Trash
To the Editor:
It is sad that Prof.
E.
S.
Savas has had better luck all over the world bringing people the ideas he has regarding privatization than on his home turf:  our no-longer-fair New York City (news article, May 25)!


Editors' Note
A front-page article yesterday described a confidential report prepared for President Clinton about forms of affirmative action and proposals for Administration policy toward them.
The first sentence said the Administration panel had "concluded that most hiring and other preferences based on race or sex are justified in employment and education." The second sentence added that the officials "found problems with some purchasing programs that reserve Federal contracts for companies owned by blacks or women."


Washington Intrigue With Poetic Overtones
SHELLEY'S HEART By Charles McCarry 558 pages. Random House. $23.


Californian Assails Affirmative Action
Condemning affirmative action programs as "unfair" and "unjust," Gov.
Pete Wilson of California said yesterday that he intended to sharply curtail them throughout the state's government wherever the law allowed.
In an open letter to the people of California, Mr.
Wilson said that merit --  not race or sex -- would be the basis for state employment, promotion, contracting and school admission policies.
He said his policy would apply except in cases where laws and court decisions have mandated affirmative action policies.


How New York City Privatized Street Cleaning and Rued It;Snow Shoveler Sense
To the Editor:
E.
S.
Savas's remark (news article, May 25) that snow clearance workers spent 50 percent of their time on coffee breaks, fueling breaks, warm-up breaks and wash-up breaks suggests the learned doctor has never shoveled snow.


Orange County: Reluctant Fiscal Test Case
Faced with the nuts and bolts of dismantling much of their bankrupt government, the residents of Orange County are finding themselves divided, angry about the options they face, but unable to turn back from a course that many conservatives had encouraged even before the county's financial debacle.
As deadlines approach and tough decisions are made, Orange County's bitter struggle to reverse years of government growth is providing an accidental laboratory of sorts in the new less-is-more civics of the 1990's.


AT HOME WITH: Ellie Covan;Enter, Living Room Left
HI there!" Ellie Covan calls down cheerily, waiting for her visitor to climb the long, steep flight of stairs to the second-floor loft on the Bowery where she lives and works. Five nights a week, strangers fill the stairway, on their way up to living-room performances of madcap music and dance with names like "Opera Vindaloo" or "Brand New Dance," or readings of "homotexts" or science fiction.
A little more than a decade ago, Ms.
Covan was a wandering young American who had settled momentarily in Paris, reading a short story of hers called "My First Real Boyfriend" to a dozen new friends gathered for an impromptu salon in a borrowed apartment.
Now, she runs a small theater -- capacity, 57; yearly budget, $150,000 -- that is one of the few surviving performance-art clubs in New York and the only one of its kind to be found in a home.


No Headline
People here regard government as a vending machine.
They put in a quarter and they still want a dollar's worth of services." -- FRANK BENEST, city manager of Brea in Orange County. [B12:1.]


BUSINESS DIGEST
Surprise Intervention Halts Decline in Dollar The Clinton Administration and a dozen foreign countries bought billions of dollars in a surprise currency intervention that appeared to halt yet another slump in the dollar.
The dollar surged, though not to the levels that traders said would signal a new stability.


Virtual Relaxation
AS if virtual-reality videos and virtual-reality murder-mystery games were not enough, now there is a virtual-reality massage lounger, a chair that is supposed to relax bodies and minds stressed out by life in the high-tech 90's.
If only that throbbing that's been killing me all morning were a virtual-reality backache.


Students on the Net Have Rights Too
To the Editor:
Re "Youth's Parody on the Internet Brings Punishment and a Free-Speech Fight" (news article, May 28): I am appalled by the actions of Karin Cathey, the high school principal who disciplined a student, Paul Kim, by withdrawing support for him as a National Merit finalist.


Sales Discrepancies Lead Ticketmaster To Close Outlets
The biggest complaint customers have about Ticketmaster, the national ticket  distribution company, is not about ticket surcharges, long lines at outlets or busy signals on the phone.
It is about ticket diversions.
These take place at some outlets where tickets for choice seats, rather than being sold to customers, are set aside for scalpers (with kickbacks to the outlets) or for friends of outlet employees.
Scalpers charge from $5 to $1,000 (for major concerts and sporting events) over the price of a ticket.
With no fanfare or publicity, Ticketmaster has recently closed 22 outlets and refused to renew the licenses of 11 around New York City in the last year.
Of those, said a ticketing-industry insider who spoke only on condition of anonymity, 19 were suspected of diverting or mishandling tickets.
This number amounts to more than one-tenth of Ticketmaster's 174 outlets in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey.
Most recently, Bondy's Records in lower Manhattan was banned from selling tickets after Ticketmaster said it discovered a discrepancy between the tickets the outlet was taking off the central computer and the tickets that were actually being sold to the public.
Bill Bondy, the owner of Bondy's, said he lost his contract with Ticketmaster in April for setting aside eight seats for his family members and employees for a Beastie Boys concert after first taking care of customers waiting in line for tickets.


Dominicans Deport Bloch for U.S. Trial
Sonny Bloch, the financial talk-show host accused of swindling thousands of listeners, was deported here today from the Dominican Republic to face charges of fraud.
Interpol officials in the Dominican Republic arrested Mr.
Bloch at the F.B.I.'s request.
His financial advice show has been carried by 170 stations in the United States, heard by at least 1.3 million people a day.
Since he left his home in Tampa, Fla., in March, he broadcast from the Dominican Republic.


Copper Price at Six-Week High After a Decline in Stockpiles
Copper rose to its highest price in six weeks yesterday on the Commodity Exchange after a drop in stockpiles indicated that demand from industry had not  faded as the economy slowed.
On other commodity markets, gasoline prices fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities gained 1.88 points, to 234.60.


Russia to Activate Role in NATO Partnership
After nearly six months of hesitation and mixed signals, Russia has agreed to activate its membership in the program NATO calls Partnership for Peace, but Russian officials warned that NATO expansion would put an end to Moscow's participation.
Russian Defense Ministry officials said President Boris N. Yeltsin remained strictly opposed to NATO expansion eastward to Russia's borders.
If and when such expansion occurs, the officials say -- a process that will take at least four or five years -- Russia will "immediately suspend" its participation in Partnership for Peace, a sort of associated status in NATO that can lead to full membership down the road.


Allies Seem Near Accord To Bolster Bosnia Force
The United States and its allies appeared today to be headed toward an agreement to reinforce and partly reposition the United Nations force in Bosnia, rather than withdrawing it in the face of increased pressure from the Bosnian Serbs.
But major details remained in doubt.
"The option that is strongly preferred," Secretary of State Warren Christopher told reporters in Madrid, using the acronym for United Nations Protection Force, "is that Unprofor should be strengthened, Unprofor should not  be withdrawn, and there should be consideration of redeployment if military officials think that it is desirable."


An Ally of Dole Quits C.F.T.C.
Sheila C. Bair, a member of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission since 1991, said today that she would resign on June 16 for a job at the New York Stock Exchange.
Ms.
Bair, a former top aide to Senator Bob Dole, was appointed by President George Bush and reappointed by President Clinton last year at the agency, which  is intended to police the nation's commodities markets.


With Fewer Than 12 Jurors, Trial Might Still Proceed
With eight jurors replaced, only four alternates left and perhaps more changes in the offing, membership on the O. J. Simpson jury is perilously close  to falling below the customary number of 12.
Under California law, the trial may continue with as few as six jurors, but only if both sides agree.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers, clearly pleased with the racial makeup of the current jury -- 8 of its 12 members are black -- have already stated their willingness to go forward, at least with 11 jurors.


Who Owns New York's History?
When Mario Cuomo left Albany after 12 years as Governor of New York State, he took with him a significant part of the state's historical and cultural memory.
True, Mr.
Cuomo left the state archives a slew of formal documents from his three terms, including press releases, gubernatorial proclamations, speeches, executive orders and bills that were either signed or vetoed.
But ignoring the pleas of state archivists, his office declined to provide internal memos and other material from his files, and from the files of his top aides.
Such material is critical for documenting and evaluating his record as Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo says he did not personally withhold the material but left it to his aides to handle requests from the state archivist.
They had great leeway because New York's antiquated law on gubernatorial records lets governors decide what material should be saved.
Governors can legally remove, or even destroy, material that might raise questions about their policies or appointments, perhaps casting them in an unflattering light.


Bergman's Vision Of Shakespeare
If you have any doubt about Ingmar Bergman's premier place in the international theater, you can't afford to miss his fine, quintessentially Bergman interpretation of "The Winter's Tale," one of the last and strangest of  Shakespeare's romantic comedies.
You haven't much time, though.
The production, which opened at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, is available for only two more performances, today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
It will be followed on Wednesday by the Bergman production of "Madame de Sade," also part of the current citywide Bergman tribute.


Long, Winding Road to Jacksonville
Nearly 25,000 lived in his hometown of Windsor, Conn., and Michael Huyghue quickly knew he was different.
There were only three or four black families in his neighborhood.
Most of his white peers could sleep over at his house but he could not at theirs.
After a sweaty afternoon of basketball, in most instances his white friends would go inside for orange juice but Huyghue (pronounced HEWG) had to wait outside on the back porch for his drink.
And in the Little League team photos, he was the single, smiling black face.


From Toxic Dump To Westchester Park
On the windswept top of a 113-acre hill, New York State, Westchester County and local officials today joined with Hudson River environmentalists in celebrating the transformation of a toxics-tainted landfill in Croton-on-Hudson  into a park.
The man-made hill of garbage, which could fill five World Trade Center towers, had been a dumping site for Westchester's trash from 1926 until 1986.
It sits on a peninsula that juts halfway across the Hudson 20 miles north of Manhattan.


California Governor Moves Quickly Against Affirmative Action
Gov.
Pete Wilson, who promised to eliminate the state's affirmative action policies, took the first steps today by dismantling some of the programs intended to help women and members of minorities.
The executive order fulfilled a promise that Mr.
Wilson made after his upset  victory for a second term last year and that he hopes could propel him to victory in Republican Presidential primaries next year.


Smaller, Better Schools
A quiet revolution is taking place in New York City public schools.
As described in recent articles in The Times, the creation of almost 50 small, experimental schools has quickly given many teachers, students and communities more of a stake in education, while slowly generating more innovation and reform.
Most of the city's high school students attend neighborhood schools with comprehensive programs.
Some schools, even with 4,000 or more students on the roster, function well.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks were trading higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225  issues was up 254.56 points, or 1.63 percent, at 15,849.13.
On Thursday, the Nikkei advanced 157.78 points.


Stanley Elkin, 65, Writer of Stylish Fiction
Stanley Elkin, a stylistic virtuoso whose novels, short stories and novellas  were at once lyrical, bleak and fantastic, died on Wednesday at Jewish Hospital  in St.
Louis.
He was 65 and lived in University City, Mo.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Molly.


Texas Killer Is Executed By Injection
Fletcher Thomas Mann, who killed two people and wounded one in Dallas in 1980, was put to death by lethal injection today.
Mr.
Mann expressed love for his family and gratitude to his lawyers before he was executed just after midnight.


Panama Envoy Nominated
Bill Hughes, a New Jersey Democrat who retired last year after 20 years in the House of Representatives, will be nominated by President Clinton as Ambassador to Panama, Senator Bill Bradley said today.
The United States has lacked an Ambassador in Panama since a career diplomat, Dean Hinton, left early in the Clinton Administration.


On Stage, and Off
You want to know my theory of Tony voters?" asked the Tony voter. "First, they vote for themselves.
Next, they vote against their enemies.
Then they vote for their friends.
Then, if there are any votes left over, they vote their conscience."
O.K., it's probably an overcynical view.
Actually, off-the-record interviews  with 31 Tony voters this week uncovered 3 who admitting voting against their own shows.
They'll die before I tell.


Corrections
The About New York column on May 20 about a writing class for the elderly misstated the surname of a participant and misidentified the sponsor of the course.
The participant is Dorothy Carter, not Dorothy Gordon.
The sponsor is the Morningside Retirement and Health Service, not Elders Share the Arts.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend


International Briefs;Kloeckner Profit Almost Doubled in '94
Kloeckner &amp; Company, the metals and chemicals unit of Viag A.G., said yesterday that its profit had almost doubled in 1994 to 18 million marks ($12.6  million) and that the company was contemplating a "big acquisition" that could double sales this year.
The buyout in a new business field, Kloeckner said, could raise sales this year to more than 20 billion marks from 10.333 billion in 1994.
The company's chief executive, Helmut Burmester, declined to elaborate on the acquisition.
Kloeckner was acquired by Viag three years ago after losing millions of marks in oil futures trading.
Last year it bought a controlling stake in Computer 2000, a German company that claims to be Europe's largest reseller of computer products and services.


Big County, Noteholders Near Accord
Despite vociferous objections from some big investors, Orange County may complete an agreement as early as Friday under which it would gain an extra year to repay $975 million in notes coming due this summer and thus avoid an outright default.
"In our view, there is an agreement in principle," said Robert Moore, a lawyer representing Orange County's creditors.
He added that the documents were  likely to be completed on Friday.


3 Men Accused of Running Chinatown Organized Crime
In what law enforcement officials described as the most complete accounting yet of how Chinese organized crime works in New York City, Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that the leaders of three Chinese fraternal and business organizations had carved up Chinatown into distinct criminal districts.
In a nine-count indictment that named two of the men and charged the third with racketeering and murder, prosecutors said the three leaders each had control of violent street gangs that directed lucrative gambling, extortion and  murder operations in their precisely designated sections of Chinatown.


Protest Leader's Son Is Arrested in Arson at Alabama School
The son of a black protest leader was charged today with burning down a high  school where a white principal's comments against mixed-race dating set off months of racial discord.
A Federal grand jury on Wednesday had indicted the man, Christopher Lynn Johnson, 25, of Ashland, Ala., on charges of burning the main building of Randolph County High School in Wedowee on Aug. 6, said United States Attorney Redding Pitt.


International Briefs;VW Chairman Predicts A Tough 1995-96
The Volkswagen chairman, Ferdinand Piech, braced stockholders yesterday to expect lackluster performance in new-car sales this year and next.
Mr.
Piech provided no profit forecast in his pessimistic report to 3,000 shareholders in Hamburg, Germany, but warned that for all of 1995 they can expect only "a slight increase in the number of cars sold and the number produced." He predicted a "somewhat better demand for autos in 1996."
Deliveries of new cars to customers in North America dropped in the first five months of this year, compared with the corresponding period in 1994, Mr.
Piech said.
The fall was attributed to Mexico's economic crisis and a slowdown in United States economic growth, he said.
New-car sales also declined in Germany and the rest of Western Europe.


The Sweet Strain of Victory


Red Wings Make It Quick in Overtime
It was Detroit's first overtime game of the playoffs and the Red Wings made it quick tonight.
Nicklas Lidstrom's overtime goal 1 minute 1 second into the extra period powered the Red Wings to a 2-1 victory in the opener of their Western Conference finals with the Chicago Blackhawks.


Jaguars Sign All Draft Picks
The Jacksonville Jaguars signed all 10 of their draft choices today, beginning with Tony Boselli, the 325-pound offensive tackle from Southern Cal who was the No. 2 pick in the National Football League draft.
The others were: the other first-round choice, running back James Stewart of Tennessee; offensive tackle Brian DeMarcoof of Michigan State, linebacker Bryan  Schwartz of Augustana (S.D.) College, safety Chris Hudson of Colorado, quarterback Rob Johnson from Southern Cal, defensive tackle Mike Thompson of Wisconsin, fullback Ryan Christopherson of Wyoming, offensive tackle Marcus Price of Louisiana State and wide receiver Curtis Marsh of Utah.


Art in Review
Christopher Brown Edward Thorp Gallery 103 Prince Street SoHo Through June 10


Crash Killed Texas Couple on Religious Mission
Edelmira and Joseph R. Wolfe had come here two decades ago to spread their ministry as Jehovah's Witnesses where they felt it was needed most.
And on Wednesday, their final day, the missionary couple were still busy, taking their message to the residents of a quiet apartment complex when they were killed by an Air Force jet crashing into the parking lot.


An Urban Escapee, Loose in the Headwaters
WHEN Lisa Lyons moved to these parts from Manhattan, her city friends acted as if it were the bravest, scariest thing a person could do.
A lot of New Yorkers hear banjo music when they go beyond Westchester County.
And here she was, jumping two whole hours northwest of midtown.
Largely for the fly fishing.
So now that she has survived an entire year in the wilderness, she's their hero, a true pioneer, the one that got away.
"It's hardly been an adjustment," she said, stopping in a dusty, very general store to check out the dry flies.


Beyond That Single, Famous Picture
Ruth Orkin could have easily suffered the artistic fate of achieving fame for a single work.
Her 1951 photograph of an American girl in Florence, assaulted by catcalls as she walks through a crowd of gesticulating men, is a photographic icon and by far her most famous image.
But as a retrospective at the International Center of Photography makes clear, Orkin produced a bevy of other memorable shots to accompany her one great chestnut.
This engaging survey, "Ruth Orkin: A Retrospective," includes a selection of the pictures Orkin made as a magazine photographer in the 1940's and 50's, as well as her later series on Central Park.


Actor Thrown From Horse Is Dependent on Respirator
The actor Christopher Reeve remains paralyzed, breathing only with the aid of a mechanical respirator at the University of Virginia Medical Center in Charlottesville, his doctor said yesterday.
Mr.
Reeve, 42, who starred as Superman in several movies and recently played  a wheelchair-bound detective in a cable television movie, is alert and can communicate "by mouthing words," but cannot make sounds because a breathing tube has been inserted into his windpipe, said Dr.
John A. Jane, who heads the hospital's neurosurgery department.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about pressures on Time Warner Inc. over its involvement in gangsta rap recordings misstated the company's revenues.
Overall revenue for 1994 was $15.91 billion, not $3.99 billion.
The corporation's Warner Music Group produced $3.99 billion in revenue  in 1994, or 25 percent of the corporate total.


Ex-Honda Executives Guilty in Bribe Case
Two former executives of the American Honda Motor Company were found guilty today of accepting more than $15 million in kickbacks from Honda dealers in a nationwide bribery scheme.
A Federal District Court jury here took seven days to reach a verdict.
Dennis Josleyn, 48, of Penn Valley, Calif., Honda's former West Coast sales manager, was found guilty of mail fraud, racketeering and conspiracy to commit mail fraud.
He faces up to 30 years in prison.
John Billmyer, 65, of Raleigh, N.C., a former senior vice president at Honda, was convicted of conspiracy and faces up  to five years in prison.
Sentencing is scheduled for August.


U.S. Cites Nichols Letter To the I.R.S.
Terry L. Nichols, one of two men charged with the Oklahoma City bombing, wrote to the Internal Revenue Service last year to tell the agency that he should not be subject to Federal withholding taxes, Justice Department lawyers disclosed today.
The prosecutors cited that letter -- and one to Michigan officials two years  earlier in which Mr.
Nichols declared himself no longer under the jurisdiction of state laws -- in the Government's effort to keep him in jail pending his prosecution on the bombing charges.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Monday about an earthquake in the Russian Far East mistranslated the name of Neftegorsk, the town devastated by the quake.
It means Oil Mountain, not Oil Town.


Oblique Take on Genet And the Palestinians
There is certainly no other memoir quite like "Prisoner of Love," Jean Genet's reflections on the time he spent with Palestinian freedom fighters beginning in the early 1970's.
It has now been brought to uncertain theatrical life by the director JoAnne Akalaitis in a performance piece at the New York Theater Workshop.
Describing what he perceived as a nation without a land, Genet, writing in the last years of his life, articulated his abiding attraction to socially marginal people in a state of revolution whose beauty was dependent on never being completed.
"Everything they did was in danger of becoming useless," he wrote of the Palestinians, "because they'd substituted the rehearsal for the performance."


Ajaccio Journal;France's Wild Isle: Killers for a Cause, or a Racket
A tough Corsican ritual was played out here the other night.
A sports car came sweeping past a Government building.
From the car, three masked figures sprayed the dark offices with gunfire.
As the fusillade echoed around the heavy stone walls of this medieval port, the patrons of the Napoleon Bar hit the floor like a well-drilled crowd.
And no  sooner had the sounds faded than the interpreters of Corsica's violent politics  got to work.


At the Bar;No matter the surface, they're recognized for what they are
Despite the fame, fortune and occasional notoriety that can come with being a successful lawyer, deep down, a lawyer is a lawyer is a lawyer, readily recognizable and hard to disguise, even with a client's overarching fame.
Even when lawyers whip off their suits and let down their hair, the fact that they are lawyers tells on them.


Bond Lawyer Admits Filing No Tax Forms
A bond lawyer who used to be a major fund-raiser for former Mayor David N. Dinkins pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to failing to file tax returns for three years, despite earning more than $600,000  in those years, Federal prosecutors said.
The lawyer, Joseph N. Barnes, 44, admitted in court that he never filed Federal tax returns for 1987, 1988 and 1991.
He faces a year in prison and $300,000 in fines.


Dallas Townsend, 76, CBS Radio News Anchor
Dallas S. Townsend Jr., who wrote and anchored the morning CBS radio news roundup for 25 years, died yesterday at Montclair Community Hospital in New Jersey.
A former resident of Montclair, he was 76 and lived in Sarasota, Fla., after retiring in 1985.
The cause was complications from injuries from a fall last week, a spokeswoman for the CBS Radio Division said.
Mr.
Townsend had gone to New Jersey on a family visit.


QUESTECH SHARES SOAR ON $300 MILLION ARMY CONTRACT
The stock of Questech Inc. soared 50 percent yesterday, one day after the company said it had received a $300 million contract from the Army for engineering services in Virginia.
Questech, the prime contractor, would manage a team of more than a dozen companies.
The agreement has a one-year base period and four one-year options.
Questech, based in Falls Church, Va., said the contract was the largest in the company's history.
In Nasdaq trading yesterday, shares of Questech closed up $3.25 at $9.75.


Another Wise, Gentle Patriarch
The wise, gentle patriarchs in Ang Lee's films have nothing on the director himself, who has shaped all three installments in his so-called Father Knows Best trilogy in such warmly knowing fashion.
"Pushing Hands," which was made before "The Wedding Banquet" and "Eat Drink Man Woman," is a smaller film than its successors, but it has much the same emphasis on everyday kindness and respect, along with discreetly traditional values.
It will be no great leap for Mr.
Lee when he moves on to direct a version of  Jane Austen's "Sense and Sensibility," since gentle comedy of manners is so clearly his forte.
Even in this occasionally stilted early film, the director's  bemused intelligence comes through.
Once again, the story describes a profound culture clash, this time involving a retired tai chi master, Mr.
Chu (Sihung Lung, who also starred in "The Wedding Banquet"), who moves from Beijing to America to live with his son.
The film first finds him in a sterile New York suburb, coexisting with a daughter-in-law who is not of Asian extraction and has absolutely no use for this lovely old man.


Judge Blocks Replacement Of Executors In Duke Case
A New York State appeals judge yesterday temporarily blocked a Manhattan surrogate's decision to remove United States Trust Company and a former butler to Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress, as executors of Miss Duke's $1.2 billion estate.
Nevertheless, the judge, Israel Rubin, ordered United States Trust to cooperate with the bank that the surrogate appointed co-executor, Morgan Guaranty Trust, in administering Miss Duke's assets while the Appellate Division of New York Supreme Court considers the matter.


Bill Cosby Leads Benefit For Jazz at Lincoln Center
One thing Lincoln Center's benefit for its jazz program at Avery Fisher Hall  on Wednesday night proved was that Bill Cosby, the night's M. C., wasn't to be challenged.
In a good-natured way, Mr.
Cosby ridiculed everybody: the pianist Emanuel Ax became Manny Axe; Mr.
Cosby poked fun at the young pianist Loston Harris, using his first name as a joke.
When Mr.
Harris pointed out that Loston was his first name, Mr.
Cosby replied, "That's even worse!"
But Mr.
Cosby kept things moving, and the benefit, which raised more than $500,000 for the jazz program, was a perfectly functional variety show.
In the general excellence of the music, drawn from the worlds of jazz, classical music  and gospel, the production pointed out how excellence and craft permeates the best products of American culture.


Glenn Burke, 42, A Major League Baseball Player
Glenn Burke, a former outfielder for the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Oakland  Athletics who was the first major league baseball player to publicly acknowledge his homosexuality, died Tuesday at Fairmont Hospital in San Leandro, Calif.
He was 42.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Pamela Pitts, the A's director of baseball administration.


WESTINGHOUSE IN TALKS ON REAL ESTATE UNIT SALE
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation is talking with potential buyers who may buy most of its luxury real estate development unit, raising more than $500  million for debt reduction, people familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
The company, which is based in Pittsburgh, put Westinghouse Communities Inc., a developer of planned communities in Arizona, California and  Florida, on the selling block in 1993.
The effort to sell Westinghouse Communities has heated up in recent weeks, with several potential buyers lining  up, according to recent reports in Florida newspapers and in The Wall Street Journal yesterday.
The reports identified the potential buyers as the Tampa developer Al Hoffman and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation in Chicago.


What Commercials On Public TV Mean
To the Editor:
Re your article on the prospects for more advertising on public television (Arts pages, May 30):


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return  it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


The State's Equine Tradition
Whereas the horse is New Jersey's state animal . . ."


CHIEF AUTO PARTS TO BUY HI-LO AUTOMOTIVE
Hi-Lo Automotive, a retailer of automotive replacement parts based in Houston, agreed yesterday to be acquired for $11 a share by the privately held Chief Auto Parts Inc., based in Dallas.
Chief is owned by the Trust Company of the West, which is owned by TCW Group Inc.
The companies said the deal was valued at about $121 million.
Hi-Lo's stock closed up 25 cents yesterday, at $9.125, before the deal was announced.
The stock's 52-week high of $14.625 was reached last July.
In a statement, Chief Auto Parts and Hi-Lo said both companies' boards had already approved the agreement.


No Headline
Look, half the time when I see the evening news, I wouldn't be for me, either."
PRESIDENT CLINTON. [A24:2.]


Mortgage Rates Drop
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.71 percent this week, down from 7.85 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the lowest since March 10, 1994,  when the average was 7.63 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.95 percent, down from 6.06 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 7.24 percent this week, down  from 7.40 percent a week earlier.


Abroad at Home;The Speech Not Given
My fellow Americans:
I want to speak to you this evening about a challenge facing our country and  our allies.
It is a painful challenge, one that none of us would seek.
But there comes a time for nations, as for individuals, when it is more dangerous to avoid trouble than it is to make a stand for what is right.
That time has come in Bosnia.


Art in Review
John La Farge Jordan-Volpe Gallery 958 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street Through June 9


Two Whose Art Wasn't Appreciated
The two men came all the way from Germany, where they were known for their graffiti talents.
Their latest canvas, the police said, was the Bronx, which is  a mecca for the world's spray-painting cognoscenti.
But instead of spending Wednesday night in a comfortable Manhattan hotel as other European tourists do, they spent it in a Bronx jail cell.
Police officials said they had been caught in the act by officers, who had little appreciation for their artistic skills.


Brodeur Shuts Out Tension to Shut Out the Opponent
Five pucks were lined up a few feet in front of Martin Brodeur's goal crease  after many of the New Jersey Devils had left the ice.
Just before the end of practice, Jacques Caron, the team's goaltending coach, was happily supervising a nightmare.
A teammate of Brodeur's would shoot a puck from in close, again and again.
Brodeur faced backhands, wrist shots and jabs at rebounds, separated only by the time required for the shooter to pivot, reach back for another puck, and start again.
The goaltender would drop to his knees or lean on his side, and when a puck would enter the net, a high-pitched shout would come from within his red, white and black mask.


Grizzlies Sign Their First Player
KEVIN PRITCHARD, the point guard on Kansas's National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament champions in 1988, yesterday became the first player to sign with the National Basketball Association's Vancouver Grizzlies.
Pritchard has had previous N.B.A. auditions at Golden State, Boston, Miami and Philadelphia as well as playing in Spain and Italy.
This season he was on the Miami Heat roster for 14 games and spent time with Quad City of the Continental  Basketball Association.
"This is probably the best opportunity I've had," Pritchard, 27, said.
"This  is a situation where I can come in and not so much be an impact player but a solid player, given a chance."


Livingston Leroy Wingate, 79, Judge and Harlem Civic Leader
Livingston Leroy Wingate, a Harlem civic leader, a former executive director  of the New York Urban League and a retired justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Justice Wingate, a resident  of Harlem since boyhood, was 79.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Elaborate Artifacts From the Gilded Age
It's not only pictures that can be worth thousands of words.
Tables, chairs and other objects of design can also be quite voluble.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art's exceptional survey of furniture by the 19th-century company of Herter Brothers of New York City shows just how articulate things can be.
These variously ostentatious and elegant objects, all impeccably made, speak  volumes about the overbearing esthetic tastes of the Gilded Age and the luxurious new houses of wealthy Americans, like J. Pierpont Morgan, Jay Gould, Mark Hopkins and William H. Vanderbilt, for which they were commissioned.


Many in Congress Reluctant To Widen U.S. Role in Bosnia
Sentiment in Congress today was decidedly against sending American ground troops to fight in Bosnia, although members of both parties said they might support allowing United States forces to help withdraw United Nations peacekeepers.
Even Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and a pointed critic of President Clinton, said  he would not object if the United States helped evacuate United Nations troops.
But of the involvement of American forces for any other purpose, such as helping to move the peacekeepers to more defensible positions, Mr.
Helms declared, "Not  on my watch."


World News Briefs;Havana Releases A Second Dissident
The Government today freed a second jailed Cuban dissident, Indamiro Restano, one of six political prisoners whose release was signaled by a human rights group last week.
Mr.
Restano, who left a jail here and arrived at his home in the capital shortly before midday, said he saw his release as a hopeful sign that a more tolerant era was opening.


In Japan Gas Attack, He's The Wrong Man
Few people perhaps have suffered so unjustly at the hands of journalists as Yoshiyuki Kono, but the only sign of his anger comes when he tries to smile.
His lips curl, but his eyes smolder.
Mr.
Kono is a forklift salesman who nearly everybody thought was also a mass  murderer.
But it now turns out that instead of creating the nerve gas that swirled through this city in central Japan a year ago, he was just another victim: when he got out of the hospital, he found find 100 reporters camped on his doorstep.


A Day After Intervention, Dollar Resumes Its Slide Against Mark
The dollar slipped against the mark yesterday, hurt by a decision to leave German interest rates unchanged and by a flurry of data that showed the United States economy was slowing faster than currency traders had anticipated.
The retreat followed Wednesday's broad intervention in foreign-exchange markets by the central banks of the United States and a dozen other nations, which bought billions of dollars in an effort to halt the currency's renewed slide.
The coordinated effort stopped the slump for a day, and the dollar bounced back against the mark and the Japanese yen.


Police Corruption and Stereotypes Who Step Out of the Mold
The comic-book panels that open "The Glass Shield" suggest how the film's hero acquired his shaky view of the world.
A young black police officer acts heroically in the line of duty and is complimented by a white colleague.
"You proved yourself," the older cop says in a cartoon balloon.
"Your shield is made  of gold." In the smart, compelling live action that follows, J. J. Johnson, the  only black man in a white sheriff's department in California, learns just how huge a fantasy his cartoon-idea of life is.
"The Glass Shield" was directed and written by Charles Burnett, one of the most creative and thoughtful film makers around, whose work ranges from the uncompromising realism of "Killer of Sheep" to the folkloric family drama "To Sleep With Anger." In his latest film, he takes the conventional genre of the cop movie and brings to it his nuanced approach.
"The Glass Shield" is neither a shoot-'em-up action film nor a political diatribe.
It is an explosive story about police corruption.
It is also a drama about what happens when members of stereotyped groups step out of their preappointed slots and smash into a brick wall.
J.
J. (Michael Boatman) and a Jewish female rookie called Fields (Lori Petty) discover that it's not so easy to be part of the old boys' club, and that maybe they don't want to belong anyway.


International Briefs;Boots of Britain Reports Higher Profits
The Boots Company P.L.C., a British retailer, said yesterday that a one-time  gain more than doubled its pretax profit, but it cautioned that it faced higher  taxes and problems at its home improvement businesses.
Pretax profit for the year that ended on March 31 rose to L849.7 million ($1.36 billion) from 416.3 million a year earlier.
The one-time gain of L324.1 million was mostly from selling businesses, including the prescription drugs and infant milk and food units.


In Los Angeles, Quandary for Hispanic Voters
David Tokofsky looked like a foreigner as he walked down the streets of East  Los Angeles the other day, the only person in sight with white skin and blue eyes in this largely Mexican section of the city.
Mr.
Tokofsky, a 34-year-old high school teacher, is campaigning to represent  the predominantly Hispanic Fifth District of the Los Angeles Board of Education  in an election next Tuesday.
And the color of his skin and eyes has become a central issue in the race as Hispanic voters here ask themselves whether they should use their growing political power specifically to put Hispanic officials  in public office, or whether a non-Hispanic official can represent them just as  well.


Former President of Paramount Seen in Pact With Sony Pictures
Stanley Jaffe, who was dismissed as president of Paramount Communications after it was acquired by Viacom Inc. last year, has struck a deal with Sony Pictures in which it would invest $75 million in his new independent production  company, people familiar with the discussions said yesterday.
In exchange, Sony would get theatrical and home video distribution rights.
Mr.
Jaffe was also trying to raise $225 million in a private placement to finance the independent film, television and new-media operation, these people said.


Recall of Contaminated Cigarettes Leaves Many Smokers Unfazed
Reports last weekend of the recall of contaminated Philip Morris filter cigarettes heaped more bad publicity on an industry that has had its share.
But  smokers, for the most part, seemed to have taken the news without panic as the company worked to retrieve the affected products.
The contamination, traced by the company to impurities in a chemical used in  the filters of 12 of its premium and discount brands, is said to cause dizziness and irritation of the eyes, nose and throat.


A Sip in Time


Intuit's Acquisition Expenses Are Cited in 3d-Quarter Deficit
Intuit Inc., the leading producer of personal finance software, today reported a loss for its third fiscal quarter, which it attributed to acquisition expenses.
But without these special charges and similar charges in the quarter a year earlier, Intuit said, its operating earnings nearly doubled.


Restaurants
Surrounded by the murmuring Italian waiters, it is easy to get lost in this elegantly spare room.
With my eyes on the muted yellow walls and my arms cooled  by the breeze, I imagine that Florence is just outside the long windows.
Then a  woman goes to the pay phone near the kitchen and ruins the illusion.
Her voice rises, becoming increasingly strident until the sound of her anger has invaded the serenity of Savore and booted me firmly into reality.
The woman at the next  table adjusts the silver bracelets on her wrist, looks at the menu and asks: "Wild boar? Have you ever eaten wild boar?"
The architect of this new restaurant in SoHo has eloquently captured the essence of an Italian trattoria.
And the chef is trying to capture the essence of Tuscan Renaissance cooking, offering exotic dishes rarely found on New York menus.
But here's the question: Is that possible?


Corrections
A report in the Business Travel column on Wednesday about a Michelin guide to larger European cities misstated the toll-free number for ordering copies.
It is (800) 223-0987.


Brazil's President Prevailing Despite Disruptive Oil Strike
At dawn, drivers start lining up here for scarce gasoline.
In shantytowns, residents boil coffee over backyard cooking fires.
At the gleaming new international airport, travelers pack into planes as airlines cut flights to cope with fuel shortages.
Brazil's longest oil strike in history is strangling South America's largest  city, so why is Brazil's new President smiling?


Marilyn, at 69, Lands a First-Class Role
When the Marilyn Monroe stamp was issued today, some people had a birthday party.
The stamp, the first in the Postal Service's "Legends of Hollywood" series, went on sale on what would have been Miss Monroe's 69th birthday.
And the day was observed not only with parties but also with a ceremony at Universal Studios in Los Angeles and fanfare at post offices and Planet Hollywood restaurants around the country.


Mr. Dole's Entertainment Guide
As campaigning for the Republican Presidential nomination intensifies, Bob Dole's efforts to attract conservative support are increasingly transparent.
His latest bit of pandering to the right was the harangue against the entertainment  industry for undermining American values with movies and music that glorify violence.
Violence in American society is a serious issue that calls for considered public debate, not the kind of blatant political jockeying practiced  by Mr.
Dole this week in Los Angeles.
Senator Dole seems determined to leave no volatile social issue untouched in  his drive to win the allegiance of cultural conservatives and religious activists who are likely to determine the outcome of next year's primaries and control next summer's Republican convention.
He has used the nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster as Surgeon General to polish his anti-abortion credentials and has  pushed for repeal of assault-weapons restrictions approved by Congress last year to show his mettle against gun control.
Now, following Dan Quayle's dubious example, he has bashed Hollywood with a visceral attack designed to score easy political points at the expense of his primary opponents.


The Dinosaurs Reappear In Top Form
SOME of the most beloved and wondrous New Yorkers are back on the job.
Like so many of us, they came to New York from somewhere else, not Paducah or Paris,  but places like Bone Cabin Quarry, Ghost Ranch, Hell Creek and several garden spots in the Gobi Desert.
They took up residence on Central Park West, and some  made a name for themselves in the city and throughout the land.
It was in their  nature to call attention to themselves.
Now these exhibitionists have returned from enforced seclusion, and are more  of an eyeful than ever.
There are more of them to inspire awe and fright.
Their  progeny, some seen with them for the first time, add enchantment.
Their posture  is corrected a little here and there (gone is the old tail-dragging look), as if they are newly proud of their genealogy (also corrected), relieved to have the workers out of their scales and happy with their superbly renovated and brightened premises, complete with a view of Central Park and deep into the past.


An Independent U.S.I.A.
Congress is pushing the Administration to fold the United States Information  Agency, the Agency for International Development and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency into the State Department.
Whatever the merits of merging the foreign assistance and disarmament agencies into traditional diplomacy, the fit  is all wrong for the Information Agency, which also operates the Voice of America.
Traditionally, diplomats value quiet diplomacy and prefer secrecy.
They are most comfortable talking government to government, compromising in private and communicating with the public as little as possible.
The U.S.I.A.'s independent  mandate, established by President Eisenhower in 1953, dictates almost the opposite.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Mexico's Garage Sale;In a Third Round of Privatization, Will a Nation Learn From Mistakes?
Under pressure from the United States and other creditors to cut spending and raise cash, Mexico is planning a garage sale.
The idea is to unload Government-owned enterprises, from airports and communications satellites to the entire Mexican railroad system, including a creaky line that chug-chugs from this city on the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific Coast at a seat-numbing speed of  12.5 miles an hour.
The sale will be Mexico's third big round of privatization since the mid-1980's.
It is being watched closely here and in the United States -- from which many buyers will presumably come -- to see if it will be managed better than the earlier ones that were nonetheless able to raise more than $22 billion.
In those sales the Government, in its zeal to get top dollar to meet its needs,  accepted bids that were not always the best deal for the businesses being sold or for their customers.
And it failed to adequately regulate the newly privatized businesses to protect those customers and promote competition.


Richard Vogt; Conductor, 65
Richard Vogt, the conductor and director of the Greenwich Choral Society, died on Saturday at his home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
He was 65.
The cause was a heart attack, said his brother, Howard S. Vogt of Bloomfield, N.J.


Bates Is Awarded A Molson Account
Molson Breweries U.S.A. in Reston, Va., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Miller Brewing Company, yesterday named Bates USA in New York to handle the introduction of a Puerto Rican beer brand, Medalla, in the United States.
The billings have not been determined.
Medalla, brewed by Cerveceria India in Mayaguez, P.R., will be imported through Molson Breweries; initially, it will be sold in American markets with concentrations of consumers of Puerto Rican ancestry or who speak Spanish.
The San Juan, P.R., office of the Leo Burnett Company continues to handle the brand's advertising in Puerto Rico; Burnett also handles brands like Miller Lite for Miller, which is owned by the Philip Morris Companies.


METRO DIGEST
SECRET TALKS HIDE PRISON POLICY DEBATE


Filmmakers Discount Criticism by Dole
A chorus of angry voices was Hollywood's reaction today to comments by Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader and leading Republican Presidential aspirant, who condemned entertainment executives for debasing the nation's culture.
Across Hollywood, the consensus was that Mr.
Dole's comments, which he delivered to about 600 business leaders and Republican stalwarts on Wednesday night, would have little effect.
"Hollywood is about entertaining large audiences," said Thomas P. Pollock, the chairman of the MCA Motion Picture Group.


Transactions
Baseball


Lyrics From the Gutter
For several months, we have been engaged in a public education effort about the sponsorship of music with vulgar and misogynistic lyrics that glorify violence and promote it among children.
Several political figures from both parties have voiced their support for these efforts -- including President Clinton and Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, who made a separate criticism of the entertainment industry on Wednesday in a speech in Los Angeles.


In the Trial of His Lifetime, Ito Finds Himself in the Dock
What is happening in Department 103 on the ninth floor of the Los Angeles County Superior Court Building downtown is not just the murder trial of O. J. Simpson.
It is also the education of Judge Lance A. Ito.
Almost five months into the Simpson trial, Judge Ito still wins high marks for his intelligence, his conscientiousness, his command of precedents and his familiarity with testimony.
Lawyers say he has done the legal system a favor by  keeping an extraordinary case from disintegrating into chaos or degenerating into farce.


Rowland Signs Budget With Tax Cut
Gov.
John G. Rowland today signed a two-year budget that cuts taxes by $200 million and features what he called the smallest increase in state spending in 30 years.
The budget represents a victory for Mr.
Rowland, the state's first Republican Governor in two decades, who campaigned last year on a pledge to phase out the state income tax and shrink state government.
While the tax and spending cuts fall short of his campaign oratory, Mr.
Rowland can point to them  as the best that could be expected when faced with the political reality of a Democrat-controlled State House of Representatives.


Clemens Returning
Roger Clemens makes his much-awaited return to the Red Sox rotation Friday night after recuperating from a right shoulder strain that kept him out for all  of spring training and the first five weeks of the season.
He will face Seattle, fresh off a three-game sweep of the Yankees, and the undefeated Chris Bosio (3-0).
"I'll be the first one glad to see him out there on the mound, that's where he belongs," Boston first baseman Mo Vaughn said today.
"He's going to help this whole staff with his presence."


Hospitalized Mantle Recovering
The son of the Hall of Famer MICKEY MANTLE says the former New York Yankees slugger has almost fully recovered from a stomach problem that forced him to be  hospitalized since Sunday.
Mantle, 63, was resting Wednesday night at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, hospital officials said.
DAVID MANTLE said his father could be headed home soon.
"He's doing a lot better," David Mantle said.
"I guess it was just one of those things, like a virus." Mantle needed treatment for "a little stomach disorder," said ROY TRUE, Mantle's business manager.
Mantle has had several health problems in recent years, and a highly publicized bout with alcoholism. (AP)


Timothy J. Mara, 59, Dies; Former Co-owner of Giants
Timothy J. Mara, a grandson of the football Giants' founder and a former co-owner whose outspoken criticism of the Giants led to a long family feud, died yesterday at the Jupiter Medical Center in Florida.
He was 59.
The cause of death was Hodgkins disease, a team spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
RONALD REAGAN and his wife, NANCY, have been named the recipients of a prize  from Harvard Medical School for their candor about the former President's fight  against Alzheimer's disease, Keren R. McGinity, a public information officer for the school, announced yesterday.
Mr. and Mrs.
Reagan are the first winners of the David Mahoney Prize, given by the Harvard Mahoney Neuroscience Institute.
The institute and the award were established by Mr.
Mahoney, who is the chairman and chief executive of the  Charles A. Dana Foundation and the Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives.
At the foundation, he has overseen more than $25 million in grants for research on the  brain.


Edberg Finds Days Dwindle Down
Stefan Edberg, at the relatively unadvanced age of 29, has reached that point in his career where the twilights have begun to overshadow the highlights.
And even if he could overlook it, his critics and chroniclers, and especially his opponents, won't let him.


GAMING EXECUTIVE BUYING RESORT AND LAND IN LAS VEGAS
The former gaming executive William Bennett has agreed to buy the Sahara Gaming Corporation's Sahara Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev., and 40 acres of prime real estate for $193 million in cash.
Mr.
Bennett, who retired as chairman of Circus Circus Enterprises last year, said he planned to rejuvenate the northern end of the Las Vegas Strip.
Mr.
Bennett said he would expand the Sahara to 3,000 rooms and build a destination resort of similar size on the vacant land west of the Sahara.
Mr.
Bennett said he planned to finance his return to gaming with the $230 million he made selling his Circus Circus shares.


Did Protesters Really Stop the Vietnam War?
To the Editor:
Re "When 'The System' Worked" (Op-Ed, May 30):


At Brooklyn College Graduation, First Lady Attacks 'Retreat on Education'
Saying that the nation's historic commitment to education is under attack, Hillary Rodham Clinton told Brooklyn College graduates yesterday that "there are those among us who would knock down the ladders of opportunity after they themselves have already reached the top rung."


Japan's Reserves Climb
Japan's external reserves, the largest in the world, climbed $604 million from a month earlier to a record $154.3 billion at the end of May, the Finance Ministry said today.
Japan's foreign reserves include convertible foreign currencies, gold and International Monetary Fund special drawing rights.
Economists said currency market intervention by the Bank of Japan to support the United States dollar helped push up the reserves in May.


Weak Consumer Spending Is Linked to Bigger Tax Bite
One of the major reasons for the weakness in consumer spending this spring was the sharp rise in payments among many homeowners and affluent taxpayers to cover their unexpectedly high 1994 income tax obligations, two separate reports  by Wall Street economists have found.
"Consumers got hit with a whopping tax bill in April," Joseph Liro, an economist at S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, wrote in a research report that was released yesterday.


Auto Club Defends Pace Car Driver
The Indianapolis 500 pace car driver did nothing wrong while controlling traffic during last Sunday's race, even though he played a central role in the outcome of the race, DICK KING, the president of the U.S.
Auto Club, said yesterday.
JACQUES VILLENEUVE received a two-lap penalty early in Sunday's race  for passing the pace car during the yellow.
Then SCOTT GOODYEAR, the leader with 10 laps to go, was penalized for a similar infraction, giving the victory to Villeneuve.
Several drivers later complained the pace car was going too slow, making the passes unavoidable.
"He did nothing wrong; I saw exactly what was going on," King said of the pace car driver, DON BAILEY, who has performed that task during the race for a dozen years.
King said the confusion race was the fault of the drivers themselves.
"The drivers are going to have to slow down; that's all there is to  it," he said. (AP)


Irish Horse Set for Belmont
Here comes the horse from Ireland: Belmont Park was notified yesterday afternoon that the colt Off'N'Away would be flown from Ireland to the United States to try to duplicate the feat of his full brother, Go and Go, who shipped  in from Europe to win the 1990 Belmont Stakes.
Dermot Weld, the trainer of both horses, said that he might be occupied on Belmont day, June 10, saddling Humbel in the English Derby.
If not, he said, he  would accompany his horse to New York with his regular rider, Michael Kinane.


Did Protesters Really Stop the Vietnam War?;Not at All Alike
To the Editor:
Carol Muske Dukes errs in her assumption that historians believe there "are striking ideological similarities between the magnum-carrying, camouflage-wearing right-wingers of the 90's and the beaded, bearded, draft-card burning protesters of 30 years ago" (Op-Ed, May 30).


UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM TO BUY OILFIELD STAKE
Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it would buy a 15.5 percent stake in a North Sea oilfield block for about $270 million.
The Houston-based oil and gas concern said its Union Texas Petroleum Ltd. unit in London would buy the working interest in the block, situated about 130 miles northeast of Aberdeen, Scotland, from the Oryx Energy Company in Dallas.
Oryx said it would record a one-time net gain from the sale of about $90 million, using it to cut debt.


Independent Counsel Replaced in HUD Inquiry
The independent prosecutor who has spent five years investigating influence buying at the Department of Housing and Urban Development during Ronald Reagan's Presidency said today that he was stepping down.
The prosecutor, Arlin M. Adams, is leaving on July 3 and will be replaced by  Larry D. Thompson, a former United States Attorney in Atlanta who has periodically worked as an associate of Mr.
Adams since the start of the inquiry  at HUD.
Mr.
Thompson's appointment was announced by a special panel of three appellate judges that selects independent prosecutors.


Abortion Protesters Guilty of Trespassing
Thirteen abortion opponents who helped blockade a Planned Parenthood clinic here in January have been found guilty of disorderly conduct, trespass and criminal conspiracy.
The verdict was rendered on Tuesday by Judge Michael J. Conroy of Municipal Court, who heard the misdemeanor charges without a jury.
He  sentenced the 13 to one year probation and fined them $300 each.
Judge Conroy dismissed charges of resisting arrest, failure to disperse and vandalism against the defendants in the blockade on Jan. 27.
But he ordered three protesters to pay $83 each in restitution for cracks in the glass of the clinic's door.


E.D.S. AWARDED CONTRACT FROM BRITISH SOCIAL SECURITY
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation said yesterday that it had received a 10-year contract to provide data center and information technology services to Britain's Department of Social Security.
While the terms of the deal were not disclosed, an E.D.S. spokesman said the contract would be the company's second largest in Britain, approaching the size of its $1.5 billion contract with Inland Revenue, the tax agency.
E.D.S. said as many as 1,500 Department of Social Security employees would transfer to the company, a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, this fall.


Some Lessons in Capitalism From Those Who Practice It
The so-called Socratic dialogue format introduced to public television by Fred W. Friendly is brought to bear tonight on the objectives and methods of American business.
Criticisms are heard on "Profits and Promises," but the assembled executives play their parts, with assurances that their objectives are farsighted, their methods aboveboard and above reproach.
In the first hour, "New Markets, New Challenges," Charles J. Ogletree of Harvard Law School and other provocateurs press the panelists from business on how they would deal with the opportunity to invest in a third-world country -- call it Xanadu -- better known for corruption than for human rights.
Andrew McGill, the director of the Michigan Global Business Partnership, makes a distinction between a bribe and "something that can amount to a legitimate joint venture where the venturing partner brings some true value to the partnership."  Oh.


International Briefs;ING Earnings Jumped 10.6% in First Quarter
Internationale Nederlanden Groep N. V. said yesterday that its first-quarter  earnings had jumped 10.6 percent from last year, mostly because of growth in its insurance operations.
The Dutch banking and insurance combine, which recently took over the failed British merchant bank Barings, recorded net profit of 520 million guilders, or $325.2 million, up from 470 million guilders a year ago.
The 1994 first-quarter figure was revised down from 501 million guilders because of changes in the way ING calculated sales results from the investment portfolio at its banking units.
Profit from life insurance activities rose 26.3 percent, to 245 million guilders, while profit from nonlife insurance activities rose about 17 percent,  to 75 million guilders.


Mullen Is Awarded Two Assignments
Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., was awarded two assignments yesterday with combined billings estimated at $13 million.


CHRONICLE
DANIEL R. PORTERFIELD has written or helped prepare 650 speeches and 200 articles since becoming the chief speech writer for DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in January 1993.
He has also written one doctoral dissertation, and yesterday Ms.
Shalala was on hand to place the navy and gold academic hood on his shoulders at Town Hall during commencement ceremonies for the Graduate School and University Center of the City University  of New York.
She also delivered the commencement address, on the topic of "The New Radicals." For once, Mr.
Porterfield, whose specialty is English literature, had nothing to do with her words.


Austria Agrees To Compensate Nazis' Victims
The Parliament voted today to to pay compensation to an estimated 30,000 victims persecuted during Nazi rule, seeking to resolve an issue that has divided the nation since the end of World War II.
Lawmakers across the political spectrum, including the far-right party, supported a Government bill to establish a $50 million fund to compensate those  who were sent to concentration camps because they were Jews, Communists or homosexuals, and for those who fled into exile.


U.S. Signs Azores Pact
Secretary of State Warren Christopher signed an agreement here today that extends a 44-year-old accord with Portugal allowing the United States to use the Lajes air base on the Azores Islands, 800 miles west of Lisbon.
The agreement, which American officials say is part of an effort to improve trans-Atlantic ties, also promises to broaden military, scientific and commercial cooperation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Stocks Continue Rally; Some Indexes Set Records


Health Rider Picks Messner Vetere
Health Rider Inc., a marketer of home exercise equipment, has named Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York to handle the creative portion of its account, with billings estimated at $40 million to $50 million.
Those duties had been handled by Stilson &amp; Stilson in Salt Lake City for the last two years.


Max Ratner, 87, Philanthropist and Developer
Max Ratner, a businessman, philanthropist and the founder of the America-Israel Chamber of Commerce, died on Wednesday at his home in Cleveland.
He was 87.
Mr.
Ratner, who was born in Bialystok, Poland, emigrated to the United States in 1920 and received a law degree from Cleveland Marshall Law School.
He began his career at the Buckeye Material Company, a Cleveland lumber concern, which later became Forest City Enterprises.


Dro E. Proudian, 38, Director Of Petrossian's U.S. Operations
Dro E. Proudian, who brought an aptitude for elegance and a taste for caviar  to his job as director of American operations for Petrossian, the French specialty foods company, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 38 and lived in Manhattan..
His companion, James Walden, said the cause of death was complications from AIDS.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
DAVID SAUNDERS, Grace Borgenicht Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street (through tomorrow).
Mr.
Saunders paints the time-honored props of the studio still life -- bottles, glasses, flowers in a vase, brushes in a can -- in luminous grays and tans.
The gimmick here is that certain elements of the image  -- a newspaper, a tablecloth, a cheesecake nude on a sketchpad -- are rendered by blank lines incised into the paint.
Sometimes the incisions are used to layer different images, in the manner of David Salle or Picabia.
It works better than you'd think (Pepe Karmel).


Harold Wilson Legacy
To the Editor:
The death of Harold Wilson (obituary, May 25) came as a sad blow to many like myself who were 1960's working-class high school students who were given a chance to compete with the elite of the English school system to achieve our goals.


U.S. BIAS CASE IS SETTLED BY NORTHERN TRUST
The Northern Trust Corporation reached a settlement yesterday with the Government under which it will set aside $700,000 to compensate people who may have been denied home mortgage loans on the basis of race.
The Justice Department contended that in 1992 and 1993 four of Northern's Chicago-area banks engaged in a pattern of discrimination based on race and national origin resulting in "significant differences" between the treatment of minority and white applicants.
Deval Patrick, Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, said that once the investigation began, Northern took corrective action and the  department was pleased with its progress.
David Fox, Northern's chairman and chief executive, said the consent decree noted that the Government "found no evidence of racial animosity or hostility at Northern." Under the settlement Northern will pay $566,500 in damages to more than 60 black and Hispanic applicants who were reportedly unfairly rejected for home mortgage loans.
The banks will also place at least $133,500 in a fund to compensate any additional individuals who may be identified after further review of bank records.


Market Place;Houston Industries hopes to win the race in utilities by going slow.
IF Houston Industries were part of the fable of the turtle and the hare, it would be the turtle.
While some major utilities are quickly preparing for deregulation by cutting  dividends to provide more of a cash cushion and by seeking merger partners, Houston Industries has decided to maintain a slow but steady pace.


CHRONICLE
The actress LYNN REDGRAVE delivered the commencement address for an unlikely  audience, the business students graduating yesterday from Baruch College.
She did not try to give advice on succeeding in the business world, but rather focused on her own education, or lack thereof.


Where's The Crime?
The German constitutional court's decision that East German agents who spied  on West Germany cannot be prosecuted was welcome.
Reversing one injustice among  many in the trials of former East German officials, the ruling means that hundreds of pending espionage cases will probably be dropped and that many convicted East Germans are likely to receive amnesties.
The ruling also carries important lessons for other new democracies that are seeking to deal with crimes of past regimes.
The decision wipes out the six-year sentence given in 1993 to Markus Wolf, the head of East Germany's foreign intelligence service, for spying on West Germany.
The most important charge he faced, treason, was absurd: treason has to be committed against one's own country, and West Germany was certainly not Mr.
Wolf's.


Foreman to Get I.B.F. Orders Tomorrow
GEORGE FOREMAN will learn tomorrow whether he will keep his dignity and his title and his good-guy image, and probably pick up another $20 million or so.
Several sources at the International Boxing Federation convention in Atlanta said yesterday that they expected the group to order the 46-year-old Foreman to  defend his heavyweight crown against AXEL SCHULZ, the German who lost a majority decision to him on April 22.
The group put off a vote until tomorrow, but is very likely to declare Schulz the mandatory challenger.
That would be all right with Foreman, who risked losing his title by refusing to face the No. 1-ranked challenger, FRANS BOTHA of South Africa.
According to BOB ARUM, Foreman's promoter, the champion is so popular in Germany, where the rematch would be held Nov. 4, that he would earn more than $10 million in European endorsements.


Art in Review
Uli Art 'Master Works, Recent Works' Skoto Gallery 25 Prince Street SoHo Through June 5


Officer Indicted in Crime Ring Eluded Detection With a Little Help
A police officer accused last year of taking bribes from reputed organized crime figures in Chinatown escaped detection for about a year with the help of a source deep inside the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau, law enforcement officials said.
The officials said they know the identify of the Internal Affairs officer who they believe provided inside information to Detective Michael Lee, one of the defendants in a sweeping Federal indictment returned yesterday.
They said the officer, whom they would not name, could soon be suspended and arrested.
Investigators believe the Internal Affairs investigator passed on the information as a favor to a friend.
There is no evidence, the investigators said, that anything but friendship was involved.


A $500,000 Question: Can Cigar Win Again?
Cigar will visit Suffolk Downs in Boston tomorrow as the 2-5 favorite to win  the Massachusetts Handicap, earn a $500,000 bonus and cement an early claim to the title Horse of the Year.
Cigar, a grandson of Seattle Slew who succeeded Holy Bull as the dominant horse in America by winning his last seven races, will shoot for No. 8 against a field of eight other horses at a mile and an eighth at Suffolk Downs.
If he wins, he will go home with a bag of money: first prize of $150,000 from the purse of $250,000 plus the bonus of $500,000 for also winning the Gulfstream Park Handicap on March 4, the Oaklawn Handicap on April 15 and the Pimlico Special on May 13.


School Guard Arrested
A school security guard was arrested last night for reportedly interfering with officers who arrested his brother for jumping a turnstile at the Parkside subway station in Flatbush, Brooklyn, the police said.
The guard, Kevin Hayslett, 32, of Brooklyn, faces charges of disorderly conduct and obstructing governmental administration.
The police could not say in which school he works.


Rogers's Scoreless Streak Ends at 39
Rangers 6, Twins 3


George Washington Created Purple Heart
To the Editor:
Re "Debts of Honor" (Op-Ed, May 29): Douglas E. Kneeland, in his moving tribute to Master Sgt.
Gary Gordon, states that the Medal of Honor, established  in 1862, "is our nation's highest military honor as well as the first to be given."


BANK OF NEW YORK BUYS A NATIONSBANK BUSINESS
The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to purchase the corporate trust business of the Nationsbank Corporation.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
The acquisition involves the transfer to Bank of New York of about 11,500 bond trustee and agency accounts representing over $167 billion in outstanding securities, the bank said.
Bank of New York said it expects the transaction to be completed by Dec. 31.
In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, shares of Bank of New York closed down 37.5 cents at $40.375.
Nationsbank closed up 12.5 cents at $56.75.


A Park's Parking Problems
Van Saun County Park, home to the Bergen County Zoo, a miniature train ride and a huge playground, is a local treasure.
County residents know that.
Inconveniently for them, so does the rest of the world.
Starting June 15, the parks department is setting aside two of the park's nine parking lots, or about 200 spaces, for county residents only.
Rangers will  conduct spot checks to enforce the policy.
This year, according to the parks director, Wolfgang Albrecht, out-of-town visitors will simply be asked to park in other lots.
Next year, however, violators may start getting tickets.


G.M. to Sell Right-Drive Saturn at Japan Outlets
Saturn, General Motors' small-car subsidiary, plans to start selling right-hand-drive versions of its sedans, coupes and station wagons through exclusive dealerships in Japan as soon as 1997, Saturn officials said today.
The cars, which will be called Saturns there as well, will be priced to compete against Japanese-made small cars, rather than against other imports, which tend to be more expensive, the officials said.
The cars will be produced at Saturn's complex here on the same assembly line as other Saturns.


Burnett to Handle McDonald's in China
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Leo Burnett Ltd./Greater China in Hong Kong to handle its account in Hong Kong and China, previously handled by DDB Needham Hong Kong.
The billings were estimated at $9 million.
Burnett/Greater China, a unit of the Leo Burnett Company, was awarded the account after a four-month review that also included the incumbent, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
Burnett now handles McDonald's business in 18 markets including Britain, Japan and the United States.


Home Video
'Jurassic Park'


Wrong Inmate Walks Free
A convicted killer being held on a drug charge walked out of jail on Wednesday using another inmate's identification.
Embarrassed officials said they considered the man, Ernest Landry, 32, very dangerous.


Steven R. Fenster, 52, an Expert In Corporate Restructuring, Dies
Steven R. Fenster, a longtime investment banker and a visiting professor at the Harvard Business School, died yesterday at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute  in Boston.
He was 52 and had lived in Cambridge, Mass., since 1991.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his wife, Kerin, said.


Arts Advocates Say Budget Cuts Are Too Deep


Greek Vote on Aegean Keeps Turkey Worried
Parliament ratified the international Law of the Sea treaty today, a move that immediately drew protests from Turkey because the treaty would allow Greece to extend its territorial waters.
Turkey, which began scheduled military maneuvers in the area, said Greece's ratification was not yet a reason to go to war.
But it warned that the dispute would become deeply serious if Greece actually claimed new waters.


Aeromexico-Delta Pact
Aeromexico said today that it had signed an agreement with Delta Air Lines for flying passengers to Europe under a code-sharing arrangement.
Passengers would travel aboard the Mexican carrier to Atlanta or New York and continue to Madrid or Paris, respectively, on Delta flights.
The airlines would share flight numbers for the service.
The pact is subject to government approval.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., an automotive and aerospace components maker, signed a contract with the German state of Thuringia to purchase Polymer  und Filament Rudolstadt, a producer of nylon plastics and fibers, for undisclosed terms.


A Fantasy That Merges With Reality
The Mystery of Rampo" is a film of such extravagant visual beauty that watching it is like visiting one of the world's fanciest hotels and wallowing in luxury that carries a strong whiff of decadence. Whole sequences of the movie, which opens today at the Village East, imagine 1930's Japan as an elegant Hollywood dream shot through with an ominous Gothic ambiance.
The shots are framed and lighted like luminescent paintings in which the actors pose like figures in a George Hurrell photo.
Dream sequences enhanced with computer-animated images add a surreal, psychedelic gloss.
And Akira Senju's symphonic score, performed by the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra, washes through the film with a feverish romantic urgency that recalls Bernard Herrmann's music for "Vertigo."


In Newark Corruption Inquiry, the Mayor's Aides Are Tight-Lipped
Ever since the first of scores of subpoenas arrived at City Hall last summer, Mayor Sharpe James has repeatedly vowed that he and his staff would comply fully with the Federal investigation into his financial dealings.
But it now appears that the inquiry may be running into obstacles because members of Mr.
James's administration are not talking.
Several top aides and police officers who served as the Mayor's bodyguards have refused to tell a grand jury what happened to tens of thousands of dollars  in cash that the bodyguards withdrew from the bank account of a charity that Mr.
James founded, according to court papers and people with knowledge of the investigation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;A tongue-in-cheek campaign for Martha Stewart Living pokes fun at the magazine's guiding spirit.
HOW do you promote a magazine meant to embody the life style of a woman who has been called everything from "the diva of domesticity" to "a control-freakish middlebrow taste maker" and has been parodied by everyone from stand-up comedians to credit-card marketers?
Carefully, of course.
And with a tongue-in-cheek tack that uses self-deprecating humor to try to co-opt the critics.


Seizure Drug Is Approved
The Food and Drug Administration today approved a seizure medicine to treat the manic episodes of bipolar disorder, or manic depression.
It is the first drug in 25 years to be officially cleared to tame manic episodes.
The drug, Depakote, is made by Abbott Laboratories, which announced the action.
It has been on the market in the United States since 1983.


House Schedules Hearings on Assault Against Branch Davidians
After months of discussions, the House has set July 12 for the beginning of extensive hearings on the 1993 Federal assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
The hearings, to be held jointly by subcommittees of the Judiciary Committee  and the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, were planned long before the bombing in Oklahoma City.
But the explosion resurrected long-simmering questions about the way the Federal Government had planned and executed various  parts of the raid on the Branch Davidian compound, adding urgency to the push for hearings.


Survey Points to a Cause of Union Decline
Once workers organized unions in defiance of management, but now many are often too cowed by management opposition to vote in favor of a union at their workplace, even though they want one, according to a new survey released yesterday.


After More Testimony on DNA, Simpson Case Nears New Phase
The technical phase of O. J. Simpson's trial reached an intermission today as prosecutors switched gears and prepared to show jurors grisly autopsy photographs.
The Los Angeles County Coroner is to testify on Friday.
He is to be followed  by the deputy medical examiner who performed the autopsies on the two people Mr.
Simpson is accused of killing, his wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.


Liquor Ads for Britain
Britain ended an effective 40-year ban on television advertising of liquor today, and whisky, vodka and gin marketing could be back on the small screen by  the late summer.
The Independent Television Commission's decision to lift the ban removes an anomaly that allowed television advertising for beers, wines and  even liqueurs but banned whisky, gin, vodka and brandy commercials.


Fresh Data Help Treasuries; Short-Term Issues Strongest
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, though the 30-year bond underperformed most other Government issues.
Fresh data raised expectations that the economy was slowing and that inflation remained subdued.
Some participants are trading on the belief that a cut in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve could come as soon as July.


Regulators Back Plan to Freeze Nynex Rates
New York State's top utility regulators approved a sweeping plan yesterday that would freeze the telephone rates of 7.4 million New Yorkers for up to seven years and substantially deregulate the Nynex Corporation.
Nynex has until July 19 to accept or reject the Public Service Commission's plan, which would allow the company to earn unregulated profits in return for a slight reduction and subsequent freeze in local phone rates.
Nynex would also  have to improve its poor reputation for customer service to avoid onerous financial penalties.


U.C.L.A. Has a 1-2 Finish In the Women's Shot-Put
U.C.L.A., on the way back as a track power, showed its muscle for the second  night in a row as Valeyta Althouse won the women's shot-put and set a meet record at the National Collegiate Athletic Association track and field championships today.
Althouse, 5-foot-7 1/2-inch, 260-pound junior from Blue Water, Mo., led off with the first throw of the first round.
By the time the 8-pound 13-ounce ball landed -- 59 feet 11 3/4 inches away -- the competition was all but over.
Her 20 opponents tried, but only Dawn Dumble, Althouse's senior teammate, could come anywhere near challenging her.
That was fine with Althouse.


Secret Albany Budget Talks Hide a Major Policy Debate
Shortly after being elected, Gov.
George E. Pataki derided New York's annual  budget-writing process as "three men and a budget" and vowed to make the negotiations more open.
But in recent days, the Governor has been closed up in a room with the leaders of the State Senate and Assembly, completing work on the most significant changes to state criminal sentencing laws in at least two decades -- all without a single public hearing or any other form of public debate.


On My Mind;Bill Clinton's War
President Clinton is not leading the United States to war in Bosnia.
He has already done that.
The question now is whether Congress and the public will stop him before he sends American troops into the land of their approaching death.
Until now, Americans did not much care or little note that they were at war.
Only foreign lives were involved, not the real stuff.
Congress and the press cheered, crying bombs away to Mr.
Clinton and his sorrowful little team.


2 Groups Say Many Drink Unsafe Water
More than 1 in 5 Americans unknowingly drink tap water polluted with feces, lead, radiation or other contaminants, two environmental groups said today.
The studies used Environmental Protection Agency statistics for 1993-94 to conclude that 53 million Americans drank water that violated E.P.A. safety standards under the Clean Water Act.
That was an increase of 7.6 million over 1991-92.


Eureka! Anti-Graffiti Gunk;An Inventor, the Wizard of Brooklyn Tech, Strikes Again
Sitting on his back porch in New Rochelle, N.Y., sipping Chivas Regal and fuming about graffiti, Bob Black had an epiphany.
"Spray paint is made up of three things: a solvent that evaporates, a pigment and a glue that holds it on," he said, waving his hands and grinning at the memory.
"And looking at my drink, I realized the alcohol in it would really mess up the glue."


Inside Art
Paine Webber Collection on Tour


International Briefs;In Brief
*
Shareholders of S. G. Warburg Group P.L.C. approved the sale of its investment banking business to the Swiss Bank Corporation for L860 million ($1.36 billion)  yesterday.


25 and Under
The menu at Baluchi's, the new Upper East Side branch of the stylish Indian restaurant in SoHo, offers aloo tikiyas ($3.95), which it describes as "the best potato cakes you ever tasted." It was an irresistible challenge, especially to one whose mother's latkes are, by definition, the best potato cakes you ever tasted.
With a great personal sense of relief, I can report that Baluchi's potato cakes are not the best I have ever eaten.
But I can say without reservation that these potato cakes, crisp outside, creamy and spicy within, and served on a yin-yang design of sweet tamarind chutney and spicy green chili chutney, are among the best I have eaten.
They are typical of the meticulously prepared, forcefully flavored dishes that set Baluchi's apart from the typical neighborhood Indian restaurant.


International Briefs;Conoco-Maraven Deal
Conoco Inc. has agreed to take part in two Venezuelan oil projects valued at  about $2 billion.
Conoco, which is based in Houston, and Maraven, a subsidiary of Petroleos de Venezuela S. A., will be equal partners in a $1.7 billion, 35-year project to make heavy oil and convert it to synthetic crude oil for processing in Conoco's United States refineries and elsewhere.
Conoco is a unit  of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.


Dow Up 7.61 A Day After Huge Rally
A day after one of the biggest rallies in its history, the stock market closed up only slightly yesterday, a relief to traders who feared the market might reach a plateau or drop.
Markets often decline the day after a big surge, as potential buyers become more hesitant with higher stock prices.
"But today wasn't bad by any stretch of  the imagination," said Todd Clark, managing director for equity trading at Rodman &amp; Renshaw.


Mexico's Indians Face New Conquistador: Drugs
There are basically two ways to get to this town in northern Mexico -- by small plane or a trek over horrible roads.
Twenty-five years ago the place hardly existed.
Then the drug trade invaded the heart of the western Sierra Madre and transformed the lives of some of the most traditional of Mexico's Indian people.
Now Baborigame (pronounced bah-bore-ee-GAH-may) is one of the biggest towns in the mountains, and probably the most dangerous.
How it got that way is a story of violence, temptation and tragedy.


World News Briefs;North Korea Shifts Thousands, Reports Say
South Korean newspapers indicated today that North Korea had begun moving hundreds of thousands of people out of its capital, Pyongyang, because it was worried about overcrowding.
The newspapers, quoting a high-ranking Government official, said the relocation program could force as many as a million citizens to move back to the much poorer countryside.


Clinton Tries To Recapture '92 Campaign
When Bill Clinton sat down today to talk turkey with farmers at cedar picnic  tables flanked by picturesque hay bales, he was a far piece from the 1992 campaign in which he made such settings famous.
At the 7,000-acre wheat ranch of Les Auer, where President Clinton paused outside this central Montana city for a noontime chat and a lunch of "pitchfork  fondue" and Rocky Mountain oysters with local politicians, farmers and cattlemen, his motorcade froze the narrow road solid and a security helicopter swept across the Big Sky overhead.


Yearning to Connect, With a Killer Lurking
Behind the grandiose, tongue-in-cheek titles of Denys Arcand's best-known films, "The Decline of the American Empire" and "Jesus of Montreal," is the work of a precise, surprisingly unpretentious director.
A typical Arcand film meanders purposefully through shrewd, mordant conversations among friends.
In "Love and Human Remains," those friends are all wildly confused or dysfunctional about love.
They also live in an unnamed Canadian city where women are being stalked by a serial killer.
It's as if "Fatal Attraction" had bumped into the hit television series "Friends," a collision that works far better than you might imagine.
Mr.
Arcand's film (based on Brad Fraser's Off-Broadway play "Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love") is an eerie tale of unfulfilled, suspicious young people who have not lost their dark sense of humor.
At the center is David, a homosexual whose fear of success has sent him scurrying from a promising acting career to a job as a waiter.
He lives with his former lover, Candy, a woman so hopelessly befuddled that she thinks she can make a living as a freelance book reviewer.
David's busboy at the restaurant, Kane, is a 17-year-old who doesn't want to be gay but probably is; Candy thinks  romance would be easier if she were a lesbian, but she probably isn't.


School Safety Sparks Fight Between Giuliani and Cortines
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, just back from a California vacation, lashed out at Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday, saying the Mayor demands total conformity and does not tolerate ideas differing from his own.
His remarks came in response to the Mayor's call for a Police Department takeover of the 3,200-officer school safety force, especially after three officers were arrested in the last week on charges of sexual abuse of students and the rape of a woman who was four months pregnant.
On Wednesday, the Mayor's  criticism turned personal when he said the Chancellor was exercising poor leadership for opposing the idea.


Clerk is Wounded In Queens Robbery
A store clerk was shot and wounded after a robbery in Queens yesterday, a police spokesman said.
At about the same time, the police were arresting a pair  of suspects in connection with Sunday's shooting death of a Brooklyn convenience-store cashier.
Yesterday's shooting of an unidentified male Hispanic store clerk occurred at about 12:45 P.M. near the corner of 80th Street and 90th Avenue in Woodhaven, said Sgt.
Edward Orski, a police spokesman.
The victim apparently chased his assailant after the robbery and was shot once in the chest, Sergeant Orski said.


Finding Dining Bargains Near Dinosaurs
JUST as outdated depictions of dinosaur skeletons have been changed to account for new evidence, the prevailing wisdom about restaurants on the Upper West Side must also adjust to new facts.
The neighborhood from 70th Street to 90th Street could once accurately be called a restaurant wasteland.
Columbus Avenue restaurants were known more for their aggressive bar scenes than for their food, and Amsterdam Avenue storefronts were more likely to be boarded up than have menus posted.
But now the Upper West Side is alive with attractive spots offering inexpensive and good food.
These days, it's hard to find a block, on Amsterdam or Broadway in particular, where a good restaurant hasn't recently opened.


An Alert on Drinking Water
Fourteen New Jersey communities have polluted drinking water, according to a  group of environmentalists who have compiled a list of offending municipalities.
Residents of those communities are among 53 million Americans whose water is  contaminated by feces, lead, radiation, parasites and pesticides, according to the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Environmental Working Group.
The study, released here yesterday, was based on violations reported to the Federal  Environmental Protection Agency.


Women Ran for Congress Before Getting Vote
To the Editor:
Prof.
John B. Anderson (letter, May 29) errs when he disputes "Right Call on  Term Limits" (editorial, May 24), on the states' role in setting qualifications  for service in Congress, which states, "qualifications for the Federal legislature were determined by the Constitution alone."


Sizzling Rounds at the Soggy Memorial
Another year, another rainstorm, another delay.
Throughout its 20-year existence, the Memorial Tournament has been interrupted by foul weather so many times that this year's event was moved back from May to June in an effort to dodge the clouds.


Post in Panama Offered
Former Representative William J. Hughes will be nominated by President Clinton to be ambassador to Panama, Senator Bill Bradley said yesterday.
Mr.
Hughes, a Democrat from Ocean City, retired last year after 20 years in the House.


Rockets Do Homework And Return To Finals
The Houston Rockets made themselves at home tonight -- finally.
And they also made it back to the N.B.A. finals.
Continuing their quest to win back-to-back titles, the Rockets repeated as Western Conference champions by beating the San Antonio Spurs, 100-95, before a  jubilant capacity crowd in the Summit.
The Rockets will play the winner of the Orlando Magic-Indiana Pacers series for the National Basketball Association championship in a four-of-seven-game series beginning Wednesday in either Orlando, Fla., or Indianapolis.


3 in Love, With Nightmares
Edward S. Barkin's film "Rift" aspires to be a "Jules and Jim" for 1990's Manhattan, but its three main characters are far too drab for their romantic triangle to generate much emotional heat.
And the director's attempt to pump up  the dramatic juice with a recurrent nightmare sequence in which one character dreams he is murdered by his best friend seems less illuminating than pretentious.
The movie, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, is narrated by Tom (William  Sage), a shy young songwriter who secretly pines for the wife of his closest friend, Bill (Timothy Cavanaugh), a boorish stockbroker.
Lisa (Jennifer Bransford), the woman whom both men love, works for a fashion magazine.
When Tom begins having terrifying nightmares that he refuses to describe, Lisa sends him  to her psychiatrist, Dr.
Myron Messers (Alan Davidson).
Therapy only worsens Tom's paranoia, and he begins hallucinating the doctor's face on his television  screen.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING Princeton Edges Harvard


Flawed Gene Is Linked to Some Colon Cancers
Researchers have identified a flawed gene that is linked to about 20 percent  of colon cancers, a finding that could make it possible to develop a blood test  for the disease.
Dr.
Sanford Markowitz, a cancer researcher at University Hospitals of Cleveland and Case Western Reserve University, said today that the flawed gene caused cancer in the right part of the colon among some patients with an unstable genetic pattern that does not correct itself.


Service Adds Another Portal To the Internet
America Online Inc., the country's fastest-growing consumer on-line information service, said yesterday that it would create a separate business to  offer Internet access to computer users.
To get the new Internet business off to a quick start, the company agreed to  pay $11 million for Global Network Navigator, one of the most popular information sites on the Internet's World Wide Web.


Allstate Sees Texas Loss
The Allstate Corporation said today that it expected losses of $200 million from the hail storms that hit Dallas and Irving, Texas, this spring.
The insurance company, based in Northbrook, Ill., said it expected about 75,000 total claims resulting from the two storms on April 29 and May 5.
Allstate said  it expected the after-tax second-quarter impact of the storms will be $130 million, based on this estimate.
For the second quarter that ended on June 30, 1994, Allstate reported earnings of $402 million, or 89 cents a share.
Catastrophe losses were $179 million before taxes for the second quarter a year  ago.


Hill of Flowers Sprouts Above Toxic Landfill
On the windswept top of a 113-acre hill speckled with white daisies and blue  bachelor's-buttons, state, county and local officials today joined with Hudson River environmentalists in celebrating the transformation of a toxics-tainted landfill into a park.
Beneath their feet lay enough garbage to fill nearly five World Trade Center  towers.
The man-made hill of garbage, which had been a dumping site for Westchester's trash from 1926 until 1986, sits on what was once a marshy cove tucked on the south side of Croton Point, a peninsula that juts halfway across the Hudson River 20 miles north of Manhattan.


In Russia, Search for Quake Victims Continues
The task of digging out the dead from the crushed buildings of this town on remote Sakhalin Island after Sunday's earthquake goes on around the clock, broken only rarely now by the discovery of survivors.
Six survivors were found today by rescue workers, including a healthy three-month-old baby.
But workers using dogs and periscopes also pulled out another 30 corpses.


2 School Employees Arrested in a Drive Against Sex With Students
New York City school authorities campaigning to stop employees from seducing  students made two more arrests yesterday, accusing a female clerical aide in the Bronx of taking a 14-year-old boy to bed and a Queens business teacher of having an affair with a 15-year-old girl in his Future Business Leaders of America club.
Officials said the investigations leading to the two arrests began long before last month's highly publicized case of Glenn Harris, the East Harlem junior high teacher who took a 15-year-old student on a cross-country jaunt through cheap motels and now faces a kidnapping charge.


Sports of The Times;Big Clock Ticks Away On Rodman
WE twist and turn late at night, watching large men performing impromptu athletic miracles, while a gloomier drama takes place in front of our eyes.
We have been witnessing a human being teetering on the edge.
Dennis Rodman is taunting everybody with whether he will show up for practice or keep his sneakers on during a game or treat his work with minimal respect.


Accounts
*
Rapid Park Industries, New York, to Porte Advertising, New York, as the first  agency to handle the parking lot company's account.
The billings were estimated  at more than $1 million.


For Children
'A Clever Little Girl Like Lotta' Walter Reade Theater 165 West 65th Street Manhattan (212) 875-5600 Recommended ages: 5 to 10 Tomorrow and Sunday


Art Directors Club Honors Wells Rich
Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York was the top medal winner last night at the annual Art Directors Club national and international awards ceremony in New York.


Magical Realism From 2 Cultures
OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS By Gabriel Garcia Marquez 147 pages.
Alfred A. KnopfAdvance Publications+. $21.


Stopping the Airport Rail Plan Is a 'Big Mistake,' Giuliani Says
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the Port Authority of New York  and New Jersey had made "a big mistake" in deciding to shelve a plan to build a  22-mile rail link from Manhattan to Kennedy International and La Guardia airports in Queens.
The authority's new executive director, George J. Marlin, said on Wednesday that the full project, which would have connected the airports to a terminal on East 59th Street, "is dead" because it had become too costly, with estimates  rising in recent months to between $4 billion and $5 billion.
The agency's planners, however, said they would explore constructing one segment of the railway that would connect Manhattan and La Guardia.


Government Loses Appeal on Drug Prosecution
A Federal appeals court has turned down the Clinton Administration's request  to review a ruling that bars prosecution of drug defendants whose property has been seized by the Government.
A divided United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit said on Tuesday that the request had failed to gain a majority of its 24 active judges,  which is needed to grant review.


Research on Aging Will Pay for Itself
To the Editor:
The reality of shrinking funds for biomedical research described in your May  30 front-page article is not only unsettling to researchers and their associated institutions.
It is a threat to the long-term efficiency, efficacy and quality of the health care system in this country.


Suit Filed Over Lodi Explosion
Kathy Christiano says she has been seeing doctors since the explosion of a Lodi chemical plant on April 21 because she inhaled fumes emitted by the blast.
On Wednesday, she filed suit against the plant's operator, Napp Technologies, in Superior Court here.
A Napp spokesman said company officials had no comment on the suit, which seeks to represent everyone who suffered injuries or property damage in the explosion.


HEALTHSOURCE BUYS MEDICAL SERVICES UNIT
Healthsource Inc. completed its purchase of the Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company of America's medical services business for $231 million, a price $79 million less than originally bid, Provident said yesterday.
Healthsource agreed in December to buy Provident's medical business for $310 million.
The companies lowered the final price to reflect lower profits and higher expenses than originally expected.
Provident Life, of Chattanooga, Tenn., received $131 million in cash and $100 million in Healthsource preferred  stock.


INSIDE
Mexico's 'Garage Sale'


Purchasing Survey Indicates Sharper Economic Slowdown
A closely watched industry survey showed greater weakness in manufacturing than had been expected today, suggesting that the economic slowdown has been sharper than previously suspected.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said its monthly index of manufacturing activity fell to 46.1 last month from 52.0 in April -- the first time in 21 months it dropped under the critical level of 50 that marks the dividing point between growth and contraction.


Now Weigh Real Risks Of Asbestos Removal
To the Editor:
"Asbestos Accountability" (editorial, May 25), wherein you chastise the New York City Transit Authority for not being tough enough on two of its senior officials in supervising asbestos removal, adds to the hysteria without shedding any light on the purported danger.


Yanks Say Feud With Johnson Isn't Over
They went sightseeing to fourth place, further exceeded their medical deductible and saw their catcher hit by a fastball.
The Yankees kissed the West  Coast goodbye Wednesday night, wished they were never here and returned home with more dirty laundry than normal.
Their popular catcher Jim Leyritz boarded their charter flight with a golf ball of a left cheekbone and was furious until he realized that Seattle pitcher  Randy Johnson could have killed him.
It is one matter to go 1-8 on a road trip -- New York's worst nine-game travel result since 1991 -- and drop six and a half games behind the division leader, but it is cruel and unusual to have a face literally rubbed in it.


What Commercials On Public TV Mean;BBC World Service
To the Editor:
Re your May 30 news article on the BBC World Service: New York City-area readers may be interested to know that each night at midnight, WNYC radio, 820 AM, airs a half-hour World Service newscast that gives excellent coverage of the day's world news.


New Rule May Limit Cowboys' Wardrobe
Those double-star jerseys the Dallas Cowboys unveiled last season may be forced to go the way of leather helmets.
That may be the decision the Cowboys' owner, Jerry Jones, must make to comply with a league policy limiting the number of clothing changes teams can make in 1995.
"The policy for this year is teams will wear only two uniforms," said Greg Aiello, a National Football League spokesman.


A Loud Salute for a Silent Ali
His hands and body and head shake from time to time.
He labors to sign an autograph.
There sometimes is a sad glaze in eyes that once sparkled so brightly.
The once brash young man from Louisville, Ky., who 30 years ago set the world on fire with his hands and legs and mouth, did not utter one word last night.
Not one word.


Art in Review
'Nature Observed, Nature Interpreted' National Academy Museum 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street Through June 13


Why Managed Care Isn't Pro-Patient
To the Editor:
"An Anti-Patient Act" (editorial, May 31) must be the position of someone not forced to join a managed-care plan from which his own doctors have been barred.
To a patient with a life-threatening illness, quality medical care matters more  than the bottom line.


UPJOHN BUYS A WARNER-LAMBERT VETERINARY BUSINESS
The Upjohn Company said yesterday that it had bought the Warner-Lambert Company's Parke-Davis veterinary business for an undisclosed sum.
The business includes about 50 products sold in Germany, Britain, Ireland, Austria and Switzerland.
Under the agreement, Warner-Lambert will continue to make the products, which Upjohn will sell.
The purchase would bolster Upjohn's worldwide  veterinary business, which in 1994 had sales of about $350 million, by broadening the range of products sold in Europe.
About 10 percent of Upjohn's overall revenue comes from animal-health products.
The division makes and sells  a range of pharmaceutical products for livestock and pets.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Some Stars of the New Halls
Stegosaurus


Clinton's Offer of Troops Pleases Europe
President Clinton's offer to consider using United States troops to help reposition United Nations peacekeepers in Bosnia was welcomed today in Britain and France.
It was seen as a sign that Washington might finally be willing to engage in the three-year conflict that turned suddenly into crisis.
Britain's Defense Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, said the President's statement, made on Wednesday, was "certainly a significant development."


Man Returns as a Dog. Woof!
Fluke" is the story of a dog who was Matthew Modine in a previous life. That may sound like a cute idea, but this is the kind of pompous movie in which Fluke learns some life lessons and Mr. Modine says in a high-serious voice-over: "I didn't know how to live as a man, and I didn't know how to live as a dog.
Now I  understand life is to be cherished."
The film was directed by Carlo Carlei, whose first film was "Flight of the Innocent," a competent, unexciting movie about a small boy in Italy on the run from the Mafia.
When the puppy Fluke escapes from the pound, it becomes apparent that this film is "Flight of the Innocent" with a dog, right down to the overwrought music by Carlo Siliotto.


CRITIC'S CHOICE/Film;On Mandating Sexuality
Among the 157 movies and videos being shown in the seventh annual New York Lesbian and Gay Film Festival, none cut to the heart of the current political climate more incisively than Heather MacDonald's unsettling documentary "Ballot  Measure 9." The film, which will be screened tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a cool-headed chronicle of the Oregon Citizen Alliance's 1992 anti-gay initiative and the grass-roots organizing that helped to defeat it.
Had it been approved, Measure 9, which declared homosexuality to be "abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse," would have mandated that schools and  the government teach it to be such.
The film also makes it clear that for Lou Mabon, the chairman of the alliance, and his followers, the anti-gay campaign was only the opening salvo in a holy war that is not about to end with one electoral defeat.
Indeed, the alliance called the 57-to-43 percent vote against  the initiative a victory.


Love Comes Driving Up the Road, and in Middle Age, Too
Before we get to the picturesque Iowa landmarks immortalized by Robert James  Waller's unstoppable book, let's talk about another bridge.
It stretches between Brooklyn and Manhattan, and I'll sell it to anyone who thinks "The Bridges of Madison County" has the sincerity, sex appeal, literary merit or entertainment value to justify its incredible popularity over the last three years.
Arguably the world's longest greeting card, "The Bridges of Madison County" sentimentalizes the four-day affair between an Italian-born, middle-aged farm wife whose passionate nature has long been dormant and a ridiculously romantic drifter.
As a public service none of Mr.
Waller's prose will be quoted here, but his fans may well have committed it to memory.
For anyone else, it curdles milk.


Bosnia's U.N. Envoy Will Succeed the Slain Foreign Minister


Two Rabbis Are Charged In Sexual Abuse on a Plane
The chief rabbi of a Hungarian Hasidic congregation in Borough Park, Brooklyn, and his assistant rabbi were charged in Los Angeles yesterday with sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl on a flight from Melbourne, Australia, where the men had been on a lecture tour.
The rabbis denied the allegations.
The suspects, Rabbi Israel Grunwald, 44, the head of Congregation Tuldos Yakov Yosef, and his assistant, Rabbi Yehudah Friedlander, 44, were arrested as they stepped off a plane at Los Angeles International Airport on Wednesday on the basis of a complaint made during the flight by a sobbing girl and radioed ahead, Federal officials said.


Despite Defeats, an Indian Leader's Heroic Persistence
TNT's ambitious and laudable American Indian film series has included "Geronimo," which had the highest viewership of any made-for-cable movie in 1993, and last year's "Lakota Woman: Siege at Wounded Knee." On Sunday night, "Tecumseh: The Last Warrior" will begin its cable run.
Tecumseh was born in 1768 near what is now Springfield, Ohio, and became the  Shawnee leader whose efforts to unite scattered Indian tribes against white encroachments and broken treaties posed a threat to the governor of the Northwest Territories.
That governor was William Henry Harrison, who went on to  be President of the United States in 1840.
No need to say who won in a bloody 1813 showdown.


Leaders Agree on Budget But Provide Few Specifics
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced this afternoon that he had reached an agreement in principle with legislative leaders on all outstanding issues in their budget negotiations, raising the possibility that a state budget could be  enacted by this weekend.
"There's no longer, as I understand it, any policy disagreements that require leadership decisions," Mr.
Pataki told reporters before leaving for a Republican State Committee fund-raiser in Manhattan.
"It's a matter of the staffs actually  achieving in language what we have agreed to in principle."


50th Season for a Racetrack
In its glory days, Atlantic City Race Course attracted such famous stockholders as Frank Sinatra and Bob Hope.
Yesterday, the track opened for its  50th season, hoping it can continue to attract enough bettors -- and horses -- to survive competition from casinos, the lottery and other forms of wagering.
Bettors responded to an experiment last year with Arabian horse racing, so that will be a regular feature this season.
The highlight of the 57-day meet is  the $500,000 Caesars International Handicap, on June 25.


Youth Curfew Is Proposed
Mayor Frank Jordan has proposed a citywide curfew that would make it illegal  for people age 17 or under to be on the streets late at night.
The step, proposed on Wednesday, is aimed at stemming rising crime by and against young people.
"Kids preying upon other kids as a way of life in our community is unacceptable," Mayor Jordan said in a statement.
The curfew would be in force from 11 P.M. to 5 A.M. on weekdays and midnight to 5 A.M. on weekends.
It would not apply to youth who have legitimate reasons for being out  during those hours.


Budget Deal at Hand
Gov.
George E. Pataki said yesterday that he had reached an agreement in principle with legislative leaders on a budget for New York, but gave no details.
Article, page B5.


FIGHTING IN BOSNIA FLARES OVER POSTS ABANDONED BY U.N.
Heavy fighting erupted today in the eastern enclave of Gorazde as Bosnian Government forces and separatist Serbs battled over posts that had been abandoned by besieged United Nations troops.
The fighting left 400 peacekeepers  marooned in the town, which the United Nations has declared a "safe area" but has been unable to protect.
At the same time, the situation became more critical for the almost 300,000 people in Sarajevo, with water and electricity cut, bakeries running out of flour, and the main streets deserted because of intermittent sniping.
The Bosnian Serbs' noose around the city tightened to the point where no international aid is getting in.


Authority Should Lift Veil of Secrecy
In New York City, anyone can get a copy of the Yankees' and Mets' leases.
Just go to the Parks Department, the city agency that is landlord to the city-owned Yankee and Shea Stadiums.
But New Jersey will spurn you if you ask for the Meadowlands Sports Complex's leases with the Devils, Nets, Giants and Jets.
New Jersey's stone wall is not newly erected, but it is newly notable.
Amid the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority's talks to keep the Devils from bolting from East Rutherford to Nashville, it has rejected news media requests to disclose the lease.


Butler's Return to Dodger Park Will Mix Bitter With the Sweet
Brett Butler will not hug Dallas Green this evening on the field at Dodger Stadium.
When Butler returned to San Francisco after signing with the Dodgers for the 1991 season, he was greeted by chants of "traitor" and loud boos by Giants fans.
His response was to hug Tommy Lasorda, the Dodgers' manager, in full view of the crowd, prompting an uproar.
"I don't think that will work with Dallas," said Butler, pointing out Green's rather large frame.
"I'll have to do something else."


Pretty Ugly Guys to Be So Salable
DINOSAURS have no business being popular.
They tend to be reptiles, for one thing, a serious shortcoming.
They have off-putting scales, horns and claws.
They lived in revolting swamps.
Science has nothing to say on this point, but they probably had atrocious breath.
Yet dinosaurs have more crowd appeal than any animal since Lassie.
They walked the earth then -- they walk the earth now,  bigger and better than ever.
The people at the American Museum of Natural History know a good thing when they see it, hence the Dinostore, the museum's new gift store devoted exclusively to the always fabulous megastars of the Mesozoic Era.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11


U.S. Soccer Boom Is Still Mostly a Murmur
The World Cup opened on June 17, 1994, the same day that O. J. Simpson took his infamous ride in a white Bronco.
A year later, while Simpson's trial continues its journey, soccer in the United States has veered off an exit ramp and largely vanished from the sporting landscape.
"It seems like soccer has disappeared again," the American midfielder Tab Ramos said yesterday.


Diner's Journal
Lunches for $19.95


Pacers-Magic: Focus Is Name of the Game
Indiana guard Mark Jackson believes some things are meant to be.
"We're going to win this thing," he said.
"I'm not worried."
Shaquille O'Neal, meanwhile, is testing Newton's law and how it applies to backboard supports.


Draft Throws a Curve; Outfielder Is No. 1 Pick
One pitcher who made his name with the Cuban National team and another who made his name on the playing field at Seton Hall had been given good chances of  being selected first in baseball's annual free-agent amateur draft.
But Ariel Prieto and Matt Morris watched yesterday as some teams punted, literally and figuratively.
Darin Erstad, an outfielder once drafted by the Mets but who went on to Nebraska and served as the punter for the college football champion Cornhuskers, was the No. 1 pick in the country.
Erstad, who hit .410 in 57 games for the Huskers' baseball team this season, was chosen by the California Angels.


More Time for New Mothers
Critics call it the "OB Express," the growing practice in which insurers pay  for only 24 hours of hospitalization after a woman gives birth.
The Senate health panel moved to put on the brakes yesterday, approving a bill that would require insurers to pay for 48 hours of care following vaginal births, and four  days following Caesarean sections.
The Assembly passed a similar measure last week.


World News Briefs;Fighting Erupts Anew Between Hutu and Tutsi
Sporadic fighting between ethnic Hutu and the mostly Tutsi army resumed today in a Hutu bastion in Burundi's capital.
The toll from the fighting in the Kamenge district was unknown, but residents told reporters they had seen the bodies of children who may have been killed in  crossfire.


International Briefs;Big Gain for Siebe
Britain's biggest engineering company, Siebe P.L.C., reported yesterday that  it had a rise in profits of nearly 27 percent for the year that ended April 1.
The company, whose products are used to control complex factories and temperature appliances for industry as well as the home, had taxable earnings of L275.1 million ($435.6 million), up from L217.2 million a year earlier.


AIDS On Rise In Rural Areas And Suburbs
Federal health officials today reported a sharp rise in AIDS among gay men who are black or of Hispanic descent or who do not live in cities, like New York and San Francisco, with large gay populations.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the largest increase in cases of homosexually transmitted AIDS occurred among Southern blacks, whose rate more than doubled from 1989 to 1994.


Big U.S. Retailers Say May Was a 'Pretty Good Month'
The nation's big retailers reported yesterday that they had encouraging sales gains in May, helped by milder weather and shoppers with bigger tax refunds in their pockets than they had a year ago.
But most retail executives and analysts agreed that despite some signs of strength, the monthly figures did not point to a genuine recovery in consumer spending.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart yesterday listing the projected costs of closing the Air Force laboratory in Rome, N.Y., misstated the Oct. 13, 1994, estimate of how much space would be needed for a new location for the lab.
It is 328,000 square feet, not 0.328.


Poland Wins Rating For New Bond Issue
Poland won its first credit rating from top international agencies yesterday, paving the way for its return to world capital markets after decades of being in default.
Two Wall Street bond-rating agencies differed on just how safe Poland's bonds were as an investment, with the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation rating them as the equivalent of junk bonds while Moody's Investor Services Inc. was more positive.


China's First Family Comes Under Growing Scrutiny
In a country where the line between personal power and the rule of law sometimes seems indistinguishable, the participation by a member of the ruling family in one's business deal can seem like a blessed event.
With the words "I can make things happen for you," a niece of the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, last year informed a group of Hong Kong investors in a large real estate company here that she had become their new partner.


No Headline
In a free society, anybody can say anything.
The fact that it's not true doesn't mean much." -- ROSS PEROT. [8:5.]


A Man and His Lists
Kwok Fu Lai, who was indicted on murder and racketeering charges this week, had two personal phone books.
Among the listings, Federal prosecutors say, were  the executive office number for Mario M. Cuomo when he was Governor.
But he also had listings of criminals.
Article, page 23.


A Trance Ceremony
Hassan Hakmoun and Family are to present the first public performance of a Moroccan Gnawi trance ceremony in the United States at 7 P.M. tomorrow at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street.
Mr.
Hakmoun, a vocalist and sintir (lute) player, is to lead a group of eight musicians and dancers; his mother, Fatima Hakmoun, is to be the trance medium.
The performance will be a shortened  version of a derdeba, or trance ceremony, including songs, ritual drumming, ecstatic dances and the ceremony of the seven spirits, in which the medium enters a trance state.
The performance is a benefit for the World Music Institute; tickets are $50 (including a reception at 5 P.M.) and $25.
Information: (212) 545-7536 or 864-5400.


DANCE
The Matters of Daily Life, Touching Rituals of the Heart Maximum Dance Clark Center


Court-Martial Begins in 'Friendly Fire' Deaths in Iraq
The Air Force today began the court-martial of the only officer to be prosecuted in the downing of two American helicopters in northern Iraq last year, an incident of "friendly fire" that took the lives of 26 people and caused a rift within the Air Force.
The officer, Capt.
Jim Wang, 29, is charged with three counts of dereliction  of duty, which together carry a maximum penalty of nine months' imprisonment, dismissal from the Air Force and loss of veterans benefits.


Defiant Board Rules Out Sale For Younkers
A split board of Younkers Inc. refused today to put the department-store chain up for sale, defying shareholder votes solicited by Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company, a hostile suitor.
It also expanded the board's membership to reseat W. Thomas Gould, the Younkers chairman, who had been defeated by a Carson-backed candidate for director in an election last month, as were two other Younkers directors.


INSIDE
Emerging Multimedia Mecca


CHRONICLE
JOSIE NATORI is of two minds about being the topic of a documentary, to be shown tomorrow at 11 P.M. on the Lifetime cable network and four more times this month.
The program, "Intimate Portrait: Josie Natori," traces her life from a sheltered childhood in the Philippines to success, first as a Wall Street investment banker and then as the founder and president of the lingerie, shoe and fragrance business that bears her name.
"It felt very strange to see the program going through my whole life," Ms.
Natori, 48, said the other day.
"They went into such detail with everyone in my  family -- brothers, sisters, uncles, professors, with the person who introduced  my husband and me. These people now know me so intimately."


Lovesick Woodpeckers Poke Hole in a Shuttle's Schedule
Riddled with holes drilled by woodpeckers, the space shuttle Discovery will have to retreat to the hangar for repairs to its fuel-tank insulation, forcing an indefinite postponement of the launching that had been scheduled for next week, the space agency said yesterday.
Officials of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Fla., said the shuttle would be rolled back from the launching pad next week and might not be rescheduled to fly again until August.


'Not a Hired Gun,' Says Tanya Harding
So what, asks TANYA HARDING, if she stayed at U.C.L.A. only long enough to help win a record-setting eighth N.C.A.A. women's softball championship?
"I was  not a hired gun," she said yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
Harding finished her 10-week stay in the United States with a 17-1 record and was named the tournament's most valuable player.


Execution Warrant Is Signed for a Prison Celebrity
Gov.
Tom Ridge has signed a warrant for the execution of a former radio reporter who was convicted of killing a Philadelphia police officer and whose prison writings have gained him celebrity on death row.
Governor Ridge set the execution of the inmate, Mumia Abu-Jamal, for 10 P.M.  on Aug. 17.


Parking Rules
Because of the first and second days of Shabuoth, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City tomorrow and Monday.


Investors in Withdrawal From Stock Funds
Investors pulled money out of equity funds in the week ended Wednesday as stocks hit record highs, AMG Data Services said yesterday.
It was the first weekly net withdrawal of assets from these funds in four months.
Equity funds lost a net $107 million for the week.


Pataki and State Legislators Say They Have Agreed on a Budget
Sixty-three days after the start of the fiscal year, Gov.
George E. Pataki and the state's legislative leaders concluded their tortuous negotiations today, declaring a final agreement on a state budget that by at least one critical measure will reduce state spending for the first time in a generation.
The budget, on which both houses of the Legislature began to vote this afternoon, will also cut income and business taxes and impose modest new restrictions on welfare recipients.


Thomas F. Gould, Classicist, 67
Thomas Fauss Gould, a scholar of Greek literature and philosophy who was a professor emeritus of classics at Yale University, died on May 13 at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
He was 67 and had lived for many years in New Haven.


Norwegian Runner Wins N.C.A.A. Steeplechase
Jim Svenoy of Norway, competing for Texas-El Paso, took the lead midway through the race and went on to win his second straight 3,000-meter steeplechase title tonight at the National Collegiate Athletic Association track and field championships.
Svenoy's time, 8 minutes 21.48 seconds, was the sixth fastest by a collegian and established a Norwegian national record.


CHRONICLE
A dinner-dance on Thursday to benefit the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington was billed as "a great feast of language." It was dedicated "to a dying art, the art of conversation," said LETITIA BALDRIGE, the chairwoman of the event.
With wordsmiths like RITA DOVE, the former national poet laureate, and the writer CHRISTOPHER BUCKLEY on hand in that setting, one might have expected nonstop lofty conversation.
But guests seemed reluctant to talk about talking itself.


Vallone Urges Raising Taxes on Homes
With New York City receiving less financial help than expected from Albany, City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone called yesterday for the first tax increase in four years, proposing to raise property taxes for owners of one- to  three-family houses used solely as rental properties.
Mr.
Vallone, Democrat of Queens, said the increase would raise $80 million a year.
That money, he said, could avert some of what he called the most "destructive consequences" of the budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and, possibly, lower property taxes for owners of cooperatives and condominiums.


Christopher Backs Free Trade With Europe
Secretary of State Warren Christopher praised the idea of establishing a trans-Atlantic free trade area today as he called for closer economic and political ties between Europe and the United States to prevent them from drifting apart now that they no longer face a common cold war enemy.
Responding to European proposals to set up a free trade area linking North America and Europe, Mr.
Christopher said the United States would seriously study the proposal, which he said has "considerable potential" to bolster prosperity on both sides of the Atlantic.


Glaxo Wins U.S. Ruling on Migraine Drug
Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C. said today that the Food and Drug Administration in the United States had decided that the company could begin selling a tablet version  of its prescription migraine treatment Imitrex.
The decision, which Glaxo requested more than four years ago, is expected to bolster sales of what is one of Glaxo's fastest-growing products, but one that has been dogged by safety concerns.


Bloch, in Custody, Denies Fraud
After fleeing the country and broadcasting in "exile" for two months from the Dominican Republic, the syndicated radio financial adviser Irwin H. (Sonny) Bloch was back in the United States yesterday, in custody.
He told reporters he had not illegally obtained listeners' savings in what the Government calls a  $21 million investment fraud scheme.
"I'm sorry they lost their money," said Mr.
Bloch, who was transferred from Federal Court here to Union County Jail to await arraignment Monday.
JOE SHARKEY


Business Digest
Economy Hits the Brakes As Payrolls Drop Sharply Stark evidence of a rapidly slowing economy came in a report that employers dropped 101,000 workers from their payrolls in May, the worst decline since the  spring of 1991 -- the end of the latest recession.
The grim icing: the Government's leading indicators posted their third straight decline, which is often taken as a sign that recession lurks in six to nine months.
But most private forecasters -- and the Clinton Administration -- aren't buying it; they  insist the slowdown is likely to stop short of actual contraction.
The Labor Department report did show that the unemployment rate inched down to 5.7 percent from 5.8, but that was seen as largely a statistical quirk as millions of students and teachers surged out of classrooms but had not started looking for summer work.
One thing seems increasingly likely, though: that the Fed will loosen the screws a bit, perhaps by July 6. [Page 1.]


Valentin Blasts 3 in Clemens's Return
Red Sox 6, Mariners 5


Corrections
An article yesterday about consultations on Bosnia policy between the United  States and its allies misstated the responsibilities of Gen.
Bernard Janvier of  France.
He is commander of all United Nations forces in Bosnia, Croatia and Macedonia, not merely of the French contingent in Bosnia.


A Duo on Primary Ballot
Eight technicians are working overtime this weekend to open up each of the 345 voting machines in the 25th District and insert a sticker on every ballot showing a bracket that links the names of two State Assembly candidates who say they want voters to regard them as a "team" in the Republican primary on Tuesday.
The candidates, Chris Christie and Rick Merkt, who are seeking nominations to the two Assembly seats in the district, prevailed this week in Superior Court, where a judge ruled that the ballots should carry the bracket connecting their names.
Officials estimated that altering the ballots would cost $8,000 to $10,000.


Corrections
An obituary of the actor and comedian Severn Darden last Saturday misidentified his role in the film "The President's Analyst." He was a Russian spy, not the White House psychiatrist.


Michael Ugo Stille, Newspaper Editor And Writer, 75
Michael Ugo Stille, a New York correspondent for the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera for 40 years who moved to Milan to become its chief editor in 1987, died yesterday in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


On the Road With a Loaded Car
Destination Easy Street?
The police still don't know where a 1995 Oldsmobile  with more than $1.8 million stashed in four suitcases in the trunk was headed when they pulled it over on the Turnpike for speeding.
The driver said he was taking his passenger to Florida.
The passenger said they were going to Virginia.
Instead, Roberto Diaz and Rafael Cintron ended up in jail, charged with money laundering and drug possession, based on traces of cocaine and marijuana detected in the luggage.


Corrections
A music review in Weekend yesterday about Lincoln Center's benefit for its jazz program misspelled the given name of the bass player in the performance of  "Blue Monk." He is David Grossman, not Davis.


CELGENE STOCK GAINS ON AIDS TREATMENT REPORT
Shares of the Celgene Corporation rose sharply yesterday after it was reported that the company was seeking to sell the drug thalidomide as a commercial AIDS treatment.
According to the report in The Wall Street Journal yesterday, Celgene, a Warren, N.J., pharmaceutical company, is now manufacturing the drug for clinical testing, which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
Thalidomide has re-emerged after it was seemingly banished from the United States more than 30 years ago.
The drug was prescribed as a sedative and morning-sickness treatment during the 1950's and 1960's, but caused a rash of birth defects.


Drop in Jobs Shifts Outlook For Economy
Bad luck for many Americans turned into good luck for others yesterday as Wall Street learned that the number of people with jobs plunged last month, and  reacted by pushing interest rates down sharply.
That was good news for consumers, who will face smaller interest payments on their mortgages and car loans, analysts said.
But it is a mixed blessing for companies, which may gain from lower interest rates but lose as a slowing economy hurts sales and earnings.
Indeed, the stock market kept changing its mind about the news, falling, soaring, and falling again and ending generally down. [Page 35.]


COMCAST ACTS TO BAR BELL WIRELESS CABLE MOVE
Comcast Cable Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had asked the Federal Communications Commission to deny a wireless cable license to Atlantic Microsystems Inc., a subsidiary of a company in which Bell Atlantic is acquiring a stake.
Comcast said the proposed acquisition would put Bell Atlantic in violation of Federal rules barring a single company from owning an interest in both wire line and wireless cable systems serving the same community.
Bell Atlantic contested the accusations.
In March, Bell Atlantic agreed to make a $15 million loan to CAI Wireless Systems Inc., a wireless cable operator, and obtained the right to buy up to 45 percent of CAI through the exercise of warrants.


International Briefs;In Brief
*
Volkswagen is negotiating with an Israeli company to produce magnesium for lightweight cars in what could be one of the largest German investments in Israel, a VW spokesman said yesterday.
The news magazine Der Spiegel said Volkswagen's chairman, Ferdinand Piech, planned to sign an agreement next Wednesday with the Dead Sea Works of Israel to produce magnesium material that would be used in the low-gas-consumption cars.
A VW spokesman confirmed that it  was negotiating with an Israeli company but declined to give details. *
Advance Bank Australia Ltd. said yesterday that it would buy the Bank of South Australia from the South Australian state government for $730 million (Australian), or about $525 million (United States).
The deal was a surprise because recent news reports had indicated that the Westpac Banking Corporation,  one of Australia's four major banks, would be the buyer.
The merger will create  the largest regional bank in Australia, with total assets of more than $19 billion (Australian).


Orange County Noteholders' Anger Grows
Orange County filed a proposal today with the bankruptcy court to give it an  extra year to repay $975 million in notes coming due soon, but bitter objections by some holders of the notes muddied the prospects for the deal's enactment.
The completion of the negotiations and the filing of the proposal is an important, but interim, step in bringing Orange County out of bankruptcy.


Absentee-Owner Tax Proposed by Vallone
With New York City receiving less financial help than expected from Albany, City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone called yesterday for the first tax increase in four years, proposing to raise property taxes on one- to three-family houses used solely as rental properties.


Plan Will Leave Mark On Every Resident
Because it does not pick up the garbage or put out fires, the state government often seems a distant and passive bureaucracy.
This year's budget may cure that misimpression once and for all.
By delivering tax cuts, some of the deepest spending reductions in recent history and new directions in welfare and criminal justice policy, the budget agreement just completed by Gov.
George E. Pataki and the Legislature should leave its mark on virtually every resident of the state.


Sports of The Times;Baseball's New Satire: 'Cardtoons'
BASEBALL cards have always been the stuff of dreams or cash.
Collect them.
Trade them.
Flip them.
Buy them.
Sell them.
The rarest card, a Honus Wagner of nearly a century ago, brought $450,000 the last time it was auctioned.
But whatever the price, baseball cards always glorified the game and its players.


Malone, Ex-Knick Aide, to Coach Raptors
BRENDAN MALONE, an assistant coach in the National Basketball Association since 1986, became coach of the expansion Toronto Raptors yesterday.
Malone, a 50-year-old New York native, had been with the Detroit Pistons until he was dismissed last month and for two years before that, was an assistant coach with  the Knicks.
Malone played for Iona College and began his coaching career at Power Memorial Academy.
"The more we analyzed all of the variables, the more it became clear that Brendan is the ideal person to get us started toward achieving our goal of being a championship contender," the Raptors' vice president, ISIAH THOMAS, said in a  statement.


A New Tack at the Fed: Chin Up! Think Positive!
Even as figures indicating possible economic trouble ahead have piled up in recent weeks, Federal Reserve policy makers have shed their usual gloom and Clinton Administration officials have been steadfastly optimistic.
Their motivation is clear: The difference in the months ahead between a "soft landing" and a recession may well lie in preventing a sudden drop of business and consumer confidence.


U.S. Halts Inquiry Into Insurer Moves on Bank Annuities
The Justice Department said yesterday that its antitrust division had dropped an investigation into efforts by the insurance industry to prevent banks from issuing annuities, a popular form of retirement savings.


Rochelle Pittman, 57, Advocate For H.I.V.-Infected in Canada
Rochelle Pittman, whose legal battle in a tainted blood scandal led to a continuing national inquiry into the state of Canada's blood supplies, died Wednesday at her home in Toronto.
She was 57.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said her son Tom Pittman.


The Air We Don't Pollute Won't Need Cleaning
To the Editor:
Your May 28 news article on the "simple, profound observation" by a salesman  of the Engelhard Corporation that led to developing a radiator catalyst that can cleanse the air of ozone highlights a disturbing approach to cleaning up our nation's smoggy air.
Rather than transforming the way we approach air pollution, it follows the traditional path of emitting pollution first, and then figuring out how to clean it up.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


JAZZ
With New Techniques And a New Record Abbey Lincoln Blue Note


Elimination Stings More This Time For Rivers
For Doc Rivers, the season ended bitterly in Houston again.
And this time, the pain was even deeper.
Rivers was with the Knicks last year when they lost Game 7 of the National Basketball Association finals in Houston.
All those sad memories came rushing back Thursday night, when the San Antonio Spurs were eliminated by the Rockets,  100-95, in Game 6 of the Western Conference finals.
The determined Rockets, the  defending N.B.A. champions led by the extraordinary play of Hakeem Olajuwon, are back in the finals.
Rivers is dejected.
And as a free agent, his career is in limbo.
He joined the Spurs in December after the Knicks released him.
But after  major knee surgery in 1993 and 12 seasons in the N.B.A., Rivers said he may retire before he turns 34 years old in October.


DANCE
Through a Screen Darkly, Bird Cries of One Imprisoned Mabel Dai Chee Chang Mulberry Street Theater 70 Mulberry Street


Alarm Raised Over Oil Spill in Russian Quake
Serafima Varlamova stared at the empty bulldozer parked on the side of the sandy road cutting through the birch and pine forest of northern Sakhalin Island and cursed the missing driver.
"Drunk," she said, scowling as she pushed back her camouflage hat.
"We are looking at an ecological disaster in the wake of this human tragedy, and all anyone can think about is drinking vodka."


Martinez Sharpens Focus For French Open Success
I don't think her mind is on tennis anymore.
The way things are going, I see her ranked eight or nine after Wimbledon."
It was February; the speaker was Eric Van Harpen.
The subject was Conchita Martinez, his former pupil.


CHRONICLE
Usually, JAMES NADEAUX, the dresser for GLENN CLOSE in "Sunset Boulevard," is more concerned with getting the actress in and out of her costumes than with creating costumes himself.
"The fastest change from head to toe that we have to  do is 15 seconds, and the slowest is 30 seconds," he said.
But tomorrow night, when Ms.
Close takes to the stage as a host of the Tony Awards, she will be wearing a design by Mr.
Nadeaux.


Joseph Del Ponte, Public Relations Executive, 39
Joseph Del Ponte, a public relations executive who was an advocate for people with AIDS, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 39 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS-related, said a friend, Paul Donaher.


Treasury Prices Jump on U.S. Labor Data
Prices of Treasury securities leaped higher yesterday, as a Government labor  report stunned economists, showing a loss of 101,000 jobs in May in contrast to  an expected gain of 166,000.
Doug Burtnick, senior analyst with Technical Data in Boston, said, "The data cleared out any thoughts that the economy really isn't slowing down," and consequently traders priced the slowdown into the bond market, which, hating inflation, tends to rise as the economy slows.


Fox Conscious for First Time Since Crash
STAN FOX, who suffered a brain injury in a first-turn crash at the Indianapolis 500, has regained consciousness, Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis said yesterday.
He had been unconscious since his car slammed almost head-on into the Indianapolis Motor Speedway's concrete wall just after the start of Sunday's race and exploded in a violent shower of debris. (AP)


L.I.R.R. Union Vows to Obey Court Order
Long Island Rail Road engineers, who staged a wildcat walkout last week, will abide by a Federal court order that bars further job actions, a lawyer for the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers has assured a Federal judge.
In a meeting Thursday night, the lawyer, Vincent F. O'Hara, said the union would be giving engineers letters encouraging them to comply with the court order.


METRO DIGEST
AGREEMENT REACHED ON A STATE BUDGET Sixty-three days after the start of the fiscal year, Governor Pataki and the state's legislative leaders concluded their tortuous negotiations and declared a final agreement on a state budget that, by at least one key measure, will reduce state spending for the first time in a generation.
The budget will also cut income and business taxes and impose modest new restrictions on welfare recipients.
The finished product reflects a drastic reversal of New York's fiscal traditions. [Page 1.] The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, called for the first tax increase in four years, proposing to raise property taxes on some houses used as rental properties. [25.]


Learning About Living in Joy, and Giving Back
IT was Wednesday morning and Judith Share was celebrating her 66th birthday.
She was on the terrace of her 15th-floor apartment on Palisades Avenue in Riverdale, the same terrace where her great friend, Stan Getz, the late saxophonist, sometimes would play for himself as the sun dropped behind the cliffs of New Jersey.
Ms.
Share drinks New Orleans-style coffee with chicory and marvels at the view of Spuyten Duyvil, where the Harlem enters the Hudson.
She did not look 66.
Her dark hair was pulled back in a pony tail and she was wearing an Indian vest over a white tee shirt.
She showed off her apartment  as she shows off her life.
A Japanese ceremonial cloak, spread out like a gargantuan butterfly, hangs on one wall, while on another there is a huge Brazilian tapestry she bought in Recife.
In a corner enlaced with flowers, a photographic portrait stands prominently.


Stocks Mixed as Jobs Data Lead to Volatile Trading
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, reacting with ambivalence to economic news that pointed to an increased probability of a recession this year.
"We have a very split market, where some traders pull back and others keep on throwing money at stocks," said Harrison Roth, senior options strategist at Cowen &amp; Company.


Broadway Attendance Rises by 12%
Broadway attendance rose to its highest level in 12 years this season, even though the season was among the slimmest ever for new shows.
Attendance for the 1994-95 season was 9 million, an increase of 12 percent over the 8.1 million of 1993-1994, according to statistics released yesterday by the League of American Theaters and Producers, the trade association for the commercial theater industry.
The record, 11 million, was set in the 1980-81 season.


Balkan Update
The Bosnian Serbs shot down an American F-16 fighter plane flying a NATO mission in northern BOSNIA near the town of MRKONJIC GRAD, about 40 miles south  of BANJA LUKA.
NATO officials said the pilot ejected but his fate was unknown.
In WASHINGTON, the White House said the attack would not affect President Clinton's offer of American troops to help relocate besieged peacekeepers.


Perot Calls Meeting For '96 Contenders To Address Issues
Ross Perot has invited President Clinton and the Republican Presidential candidates to a conference to discuss the issues, a move that suggests he is positioning himself as a power broker in the Presidential campaign next year.
While Mr.
Perot is still being coy about whether he will run for President again, he made it clear in a telephone interview today that he planned to press  the candidates on issues that he emphasized in his independent bid for the White House in 1992.
The conference is set for August in Dallas.


At Sentencing, Solarz's Wife Gets Probation for Bad Checks
Nina K. Solarz, the wife of former Brooklyn Representative Stephen J. Solarz, was sentenced today to one year of probation and 50 hours of community service for improperly taking money from a charitable group she ran and for intentionally writing a bad check on the House of Representatives bank.
Mrs.
Solarz had pleaded guilty in April to two criminal charges.
In handing  down her sentence, Federal District Judge Stanley Harris also imposed a fine of  $5,325 and probation costs of $2,180, and ordered Mrs.
Solarz not to take any positions at any charitable organization that would give her access to its finances.


Remarks on Airport Link by Port Authority Head Surprise Albany
The nomination of George J. Marlin to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey nearly failed earlier this year because he lacked government experience and had a reputation as being combative and outspoken.
Three months on the job, Mr.
Marlin is running into that same criticism, only this time from  an unlikely source: the Pataki administration, which sponsored his appointment.
Senior aides to Gov.
George E. Pataki said yesterday that the Governor and his top transportation advisers, including Charles A. Gargano and Louis Tomson,  were surprised and angered by Mr.
Marlin's comments on Wednesday that the Port Authority had abandoned a plan to build a 22-mile railway between Manhattan and  its airports in Queens.


A Mamet Scorcher In a One-Act Series
It has reached the point that listening to new dialogue by David Mamet is like hearing the latest song by Andrew Lloyd Webber.
The words may be unfamiliar, but there's always something about the rhythms that makes you feel you should be humming, or perhaps shouting, along.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER CONTINUES HOLVIS OFFER
The International Paper Company announced two acquisitions yesterday but said they would not affect its hostile takeover bid for the Swiss textiles and paper  group Holvis Holzstoff A.G..
International Paper, based in Purchase, N.Y., said  it was acquiring the Micarta specialty materials division of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation and the ink and adhesive resins business of the Dutch chemical maker DSM N.V.
Terms of the two deals were not disclosed.


A Court in U.S. Clears the Way For $1.68 Billion Bid for Labatt
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the Onex Corporation did not have to include the American shareholders of John Labatt Ltd. in its $1.68 billion hostile bid for Labatt.
The decision by Judge Milton Pollack of the Federal District Court in Manhattan allows Onex, a Toronto buyout firm, and Quilmes Industrial S.A., an Argentine brewer, to proceed with their joint offer for Labatt, Canada's second-largest brewer after Molson Companies Ltd..


What Holds True for Some Alcoholics Doesn't Apply to All
To the Editor:
Your May 27 news article on the debate over the proper method for treating heavy drinkers contains a dangerous misconception, compounded by one of those interviewed.
You say alcohol tolerance (the need for more and more alcohol to achieve the same effect) or alcohol withdrawal (the physiological sequel to cessation of alcohol use) are "the two major criteria for alcoholism."


A Litterer No More
To the Editor:
I am a smoker.
I read Assemblyman Alexander B. Grannis's May 31 letter, pointing out that cigarette smokers, willy-nilly, toss their used butts and filters on the streets and sidewalks.
That's what I do, always have.
Never gave  it a thought until recently.


UConn Women Finally Meet Clinton
Last winter, when the Connecticut women's basketball team was playing Georgetown in Washington, Coach GENO AURIEMMA arranged a White House tour for his players.
Something went wrong, and players and coaches were literally left standing outside in the cold.
Yesterday was different.
The UConn women and the U.C.L.A. men, both winners of this year's National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments, were honored at a White House ceremony.
PRESIDENT CLINTON recalled UConn's previous visit.
"Somebody messed it up," he said, "and they didn't get in even the back door. Today, they came in the front door with full honors."


Latest War for Golan: Capturing Public Opinion
A few hundred yards from Jerusalem's main shopping mall, with its modern cinema-one-too-many complex, a tiny movie theater recently opened to screen the  same short film over and over.
This theater makes no pretense of competing with "Rob Roy" or "Forrest Gump," the current fare at the mall.
Run by Jewish settlers from the Golan Heights, the untitled film is the latest weapon in a domestic propaganda war that is becoming ever-more emotionally charged as the time approaches when Israelis may have to decide whether to say goodbye to the Golan in the name of peace with neighboring Syria.


Arthur M. Young Dies at 89; Early Helicopter Developer
Arthur M. Young, who built a helicopter that was the first to be certified for commercial use and the first in which the cockpit was enclosed in a plexiglass bubble, died on Tuesday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, said Andrea Loomis, a friend of the family.


International Briefs;Rate Rise in Spain
Trying to stop an acceleration of consumer prices, the Bank of Spain raised its benchmark interest rate yesterday.
The move bolstered the country's bond market.
The increase to 9.25 percent from 8.5 percent in the bank's marginal rate on securities repurchase certificates, the banking system's benchmark, was  the third this year.
The central bank, which gained autonomy from Government control on Jan. 1, has pledged to use interest rates to control consumer prices.
They rose an annual 5.2 percent through April, higher than the Government's prediction of 3.5 percent this year.


Manhattan Emerging Hub Of Multimedia
The Prodigy Services Company, one of the country's leading on-line computer services, is relocating its corporate headquarters from White Plains to the emerging multimedia mecca of lower Manhattan, its president and chief executive, Edward A. Bennett, said today.
Prodigy's move says much about the way business is conducted in the age of cyberspace.
For all the efficiency of communicating by E-mail, modem and fax, even high-tech companies still put a premium on old-fashioned, face-to-face contact.


No Headline
ALABAMA NATIONAL BANCORP, Shoal Creek, Ala., a bank and savings and loan holding company, said it would merge with the National Commerce Corporation, the parent  company of the National Bank of Commerce of Birmingham, in a stock transaction worth about $39.6 million.
National Commerce shareholders will receive a total of 3.1 million Alabama National common shares.


International Briefs;Sega Plans to Move Production From Japan
Sega Enterprises Ltd., the computer game maker, is planning to move production of all of its home computer game systems overseas from Japan.
The company, which already makes 59 percent of its home game machines outside Japan, will contract with factories in other Asian countries and plans to move production there by the end of next year, a Sega spokeswoman, Misao Hibi, said on Thursday.
She said the Japanese yen's rise of about 15 percent against many other currencies this year had made production in Japan more expensive relative to other countries.
Last month, Sega introduced its newest machine, the Saturn, in  the United States.
Sega, Japan's largest maker of arcade games and its second-largest home computer game maker behind the Nintendo Company, said it also planned to try to move production of arcade games overseas.


MESA AIR REJECTS CONTINENTAL AIRLINES PROPOSAL
The Mesa Air Group Inc. said yesterday that it had rejected a proposal from Continental Airlines to sell its Continental Express commuter airline to Mesa for stock that would give Continental a 32 percent stake in Mesa.
"After a thorough review of the Continental proposal, our board concluded the terms of the proposal were unreasonable, both as to the price to be paid for the acquisition and the management changes proposed by Continental," Larry Risley, the company chairman, said.


Appliances That Cost Too Much
Lawrence Spritzer, who overcharged Federal agencies in selling them ovens, refrigerators and freezers, is going to prison.
Mr.
Spritzer, 52, of Livingston, was sentenced yesterday in Federal Court to 12 months and fined $142,000 for defrauding 15 government offices of $300,000.
Prosecutors said his company, NJCT Corp. of West Caldwell, gave sales personnel incentives that encouraged overcharging on goods sold to the Justice and Defense departments, the Navy and  the Marine Corps.


Observer;The Yugo Episode
A friend once tried to sell me his Yugo.
I am reminded of it by the heavy concentration of armchair generals explaining how to bring order to the Balkans.
The Yugo, you see, was made in the Balkans.
It was the Balkan version of the  Chevrolet, only smaller.


HILLS STORES REJECTS SWEETENED TAKEOVER BID
The Hills Stores Company said yesterday that it had rejected the sweetened $250.5 million takeover offer by Dickstein Partners Inc. as not in the best interest of its shareholders.
Hills, a discount store chain based in Canton, Mass., rejected the $27-a-share, cash-and-debt offer in proxy materials filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Last month, New York-based Dickstein, one of Hills's largest shareholders, revised the package after the retailer spurned its previous cash bid of $231.8 million.
The new offer calls for $22 a share in cash and $5 of a new debt security payable in five years.
The previous offer was for $25 a share.


When Stumping Is Not Allowed
It's tough to be elected to anything here without the vote from Galaxy Towers, three high-rise condominiums that house more than 30 percent of the town's voters.
It's especially tough for candidates who don't live in the complex, since the condo association allows only Galaxy residents to conduct political activity on the premises.
A group of school board candidates argued in court this week for overturning the ban, saying it gives residents an unfair political advantage.
A state appellate ruling is expected in a few months.


Corrections
A picture on Monday with an obituary of Claudio G. Segre, a writer, historian and authority on Italian fascism who died on May 25, was published in error.
It  was mislabeled in The Times's files, and the identity of the man shown has not been determined.


Dole Asks for Cooperation on Terrorism Bill
With the Senate set to resume consideration of anti-terrorism legislation on  Monday, Senator Bob Dole has urged President Clinton to discourage Democrats from bogging down the bill with amendments and chided him for trying to take all the credit for the bill.
In a letter released today, Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader and the leading contender for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996, asked Mr.
Clinton to encourage Democratic senators to drop some of their 67 proposed amendments to the $1.8 billion bill.


Custody of Deaf Girl Given To Sign-Language Speaker
A state judge on Thursday awarded custody of a deaf teen-ager to her sign-language interpreter, saying the girl's parents had neglected her.
The judge, Shelly Holt of New Hanover County District Court, said her decision was based primarily on the refusal of both parents, who are divorced, to learn sign language to communicate with their daughter.


All Net, All Even; The Pacers Bury Magic
INDIANAPOLIS, June 2 -- He sank the last one from about 24 feet away on the right wing.
The ball had not even begun its descent toward the bottom of the net, but Market Square Arena was already coiling, about to unleash one of the most ungodly roars of these National Basketball Association playoffs.
All net. All even.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about lessons that the Government could learn from business about reducing medical spending misstated part of a proposal for the Medicare program by Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon.
He has proposed that the program could save $90 billion over seven years by increasing the premium for coverage of physician services and other nonhospital  care for everyone who is covered, not just for wealthy retirees who continue with traditional Medicare coverage.
The premiums will finance 31 percent of this coverage in 1995.
Mr.
Packwood has suggested an increase big enough to finance 35 percent.


Everyone Is Just Putting Along
There are as many theories about putting as there are different putters on the market.
Pick a pro, he'll tell you which way to go.
Cross-handed.
Left-handed.
One-handed.
Longer putter.
Shorter putter.
Long stroke.
Short stroke.
Some might even suggest the conventional reverse overlap grip on a standard-length putter.


Burma Unlikely to Free Dissident When Detention Term Ends
Hopes for the imminent release of this country's leading opposition figure were dashed today when the head of Burmese military intelligence said she could  not be freed until "there is the guarantee of peace and tranquillity in our country," a time that he suggested was still far in the future.
The opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been held under house arrest in Myanmar, formerly Burma, for nearly six years, was supposed to be released next month, when her formal detention order expires.


Detour on Journey to Democracy;Survivor of Beijing Massacre Arms Himself With Economics
Wearing a dark suit and sitting in front of a computer screen in a windowless cubicle with financial data stacked on a desk beside him, Li Lu, 29, appeared to be exactly what he is: an ambitious graduate student in business and law at Columbia University working as a summer intern at Allen &amp; Company, a midtown investment firm.
He'd finished "doing diligence," checking the figures on the sale of Premiere magazine.
And now, on Thursday morning, he was awaiting word from his boss about his analysis of a paging company's proposal to raise venture capital.


Deficit Threatens America's Treasures
To the Editor:
Re "Other Countries Thrive on Unbalanced Budgets" (letter, May 29) by Walter  J. Moore:


Rules for Lawn Equipment
New lawn mowers, garden tractors, chain saws and other small spark-ignition equipment will have to produce much cleaner emissions starting with the 1997 model year, the Environmental Protection Agency ruled today.
The agency said manufacturers will be able to meet the strict new standards  by improving the air and fuel mixtures for better fuel combustion in lawn and garden equipment.


International Briefs;Japan Considering Help for Banks
Japan's Finance Minister said yesterday that the Government was compiling a plan to deal with the huge bad debts hobbling the nation's banks.
The comments by the official, Masayoshi Takemura, provided the clearest indication yet that the Government might consider using public funds to help the banks, analysts and investors said.
Japan's top 21 banks have reported that they carry 12.544 trillion yen, or $149 billion, in loans they cannot collect.
Asked when the Government planned to release the measures, Mr.
Takemura declined to give a clear answer, saying the proposals were "not simple" and the  authorities needed time.
The idea of bailing out financially troubled banks drew attention in December, when the Bank of Japan and the Finance Ministry said they would use public money to save two Tokyo credit unions from going bankrupt.
The  authorities said that letting the two credit unions go bankrupt could have caused runs on other weak financial institutions.


World Housing Crisis Gives Rise to Squatters
To the Editor:
The May 30 eviction and arrest of squatters on East 13th Street (front page,  May 31) illustrate the inability of government and landlords to deal constructively with the increasingly urgent United States housing crisis faced by the homeless, tenants and mortgagors.


2 'Rosary Ladies' Avoid Contempt Charges
A judge has dismissed charges of contempt of court against two women banned from two Roman Catholic churches for praying their rosaries so loudly that they  drowned out the priest and the choir.
With the approval of officials in the Diocese of Greensburg, Judge Bernard F. Scherer signed an order last week dropping the charges.
He did so because the women had not disrupted any services during the past six weeks, the diocese attorney, Vincent J. Morocco, said on Thursday.


International Briefs;Mazda Narrows Loss
The Mazda Motor Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed its losses in the fiscal year that ended March 31, largely with cost reductions and layoffs.
Mazda said it lost 41.16 billion yen, or $485.1 million, for the year, compared  with a loss of 48.99 billion yen in the previous year.
Sales rose to 2.204 trillion yen, or $25.98 billion, from 2.188 trillion yen.


TESORO DISSIDENT SHAREHOLDERS CITE LATE VOTES
Dissident shareholders seeking to elect a new board at the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation said yesterday that more than 11 million votes claimed by the company for the present board were cast at least a week after the polls were closed at the company's annual meeting on May 4.
Kevin Flannery, leader of the dissident board slate, said that without the challenged votes, six of Tesoro's eight incumbent directors were not re-elected.
Meanwhile, Tesoro, an oil and gas exploration company based in San Antonio, said reports were incorrect that six of the eight directors had been replaced.
It said that the re-election of the incumbent directors had been challenged, but that it believed the preliminary results would be upheld.


NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE SET TO COMBINE OPERATIONS
The New York Life Insurance Company will combine its various health insurance operations into a new subsidiary, headed by Sy Sternberg, vice chairman.
The company said yesterday that it would combine most of the operations of its group life and health insurance unit with its Sanus Corporation Health Systems unit, which provides managed health care plans like health maintenance organizations.
The new health benefits subsidiary, named NYLCare, is expected to have revenue of about $2.5 billion.


Brooklyn Rabbi Is Freed on Bail In Sex Case, but Assistant Is Held
A Brooklyn rabbi charged in Los Angeles with touching the breast of a 15-year-old girl on a flight from Australia returned home yesterday, but his assistant, facing a more serious sex-abuse charge, was ordered held pending an inquiry into his involvement in a 1991 sexual-abuse case in upstate New York.
The two rabbis were returning on a United Air Lines flight to Los Angeles on Wednesday when an American girl traveling alone ran sobbing to the crew and accused the men of molesting her.
The rabbis were arrested on arrival in Los Angeles.


For Gingrich, to Run or . . . But What Is the Answer?
Was Newt Gingrich just playing for laughs, or was he encouraging a Draft-Newt-for-President movement?
In an interview in the June 12 issue of Business Week, the Speaker says that  he has "no compulsive urge to run" for President but might if "seven million people" beg him.


World Housing Crisis Gives Rise to Squatters;No Danger of Collapse
To the Editor:
It is important for New Yorkers to understand that the May 30 blitzkrieg-style police raid upon the East 13th Street homesteaders' buildings was based on a demonstrably false pretext.


If Experience Counts, Devils Have an Edge
The Devils are the only team among hockey's final four to make a return trip  to the Stanley Cup semifinals this year, and they want to use last season's crushing loss to the Rangers as a motivational tool against the Philadelphia Flyers.


Car Inspections Every 2 Years
Automobiles will be inspected once every two years, rather than annually, under a bill signed into law yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, but the exhaust-emissions test will be much tougher.
The new system, which is designed to help New Jersey meet Federal clean-air standards, should be in full operation within 18 months, officials said.
A still-to-be-named private firm will take over the state inspection stations.
The state has the second-worst air pollution problem in the country, and without the new system it would have faced sanctions costly to industry.


In America;Mr. Dole's Call to Arms
However cynical his motives, Bob Dole has clambered aboard a legitimate issue.


COMSAT OUTLINES ICE HOCKEY FRANCHISE FINANCING
The Comsat Corporation may finance its acquisition of the Quebec Nordiques ice hockey franchise through the sale of $200 million of preferred securities.
The communications and entertainment company, based in Bethesda, Md., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday to sell the securities through  a pair of special finance subsidiaries.
Comsat said in the S.E.C. filing that it would use some of the proceeds to reduce about $115 million of commercial paper, and the remaining funds might be used to meet general corporate requirements and pay down debt incurred to purchase the Nordiques.
Comsat already owns the Denver Nuggets NBA basketball franchise.


Scholar Who Says Jung Lied Is at War With Descendants
A Harvard researcher is being denied access to papers in the Library of Congress that he says will prove that C. G. Jung falsified the experiences of a  mental patient to advance a basis of the theory of the collective unconscious, a seminal principle of Jungian psychoanalysis.
The papers, copies of notes made by a Jung assistant, J. J. Honegger, are controlled by the Jung family in Switzerland and a Jung associate, who have also blocked the publication of a book on Jung edited by and with an introduction by the same scholar, Richard Noll.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL Oklahoma Is Defeated


DANCE
Sufficiently Exuberant, Without Satyrs and Maidens New York City Ballet New York State Theater


Milosevic Stiffens in Talks With U.S. Envoy
The President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, insisted today on new concessions before he will sign an accord committing him to step up pressure on  the Bosnian Serbs.
An American envoy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Frasure, met again today with President Milosevic to offer a deal to lift the crippling United Nations sanctions on Serb-dominated Yugoslavia.
In exchange, Mr.
Milosevic would have to recognize the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, condemn the hostage-taking by the Bosnian Serbs, and take further steps to seal the border across which the Bosnian Serbs are smuggling supplies.


Corn Prices Thrive in the Rain; Cotton and Natural Gas Decline
Corn prices rose sharply yesterday as rain and cold weather add further delays to an already late planting schedule.
On other markets, natural gas and cotton prices fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities dropped 0.64 point, to 233.96.


Judge Denies Terry Nichols His Freedom On Bail
Terry L. Nichols, one of the two men charged with the Oklahoma City bombing,  was denied bail today by a Federal judge who ruled that the defendant posed a risk to public safety and might flee the country.
The judge, David L. Russell, acted at a hearing in a visitors-center-turned-courtroom at a Federal prison near here, where Mr.
Nichols is confined and where, Judge Russell ruled, he must remain until the outcome of his trial.


Sentencing Reform, in Secret
After he took office, Gov.
George Pataki seemed determined to reform New York State's drug laws that have clogged prisons with nonviolent, low-level drug offenders.
His goal was to free more space for violent criminals and thus save the state the enormous cost of building ever more prisons to accommodate a rapidly growing inmate population.
But now, in secret deals hurriedly patched together to end the budget impasse, Mr.
Pataki and the leaders of the State Legislature have agreed on changes to the sentencing laws that fall far short of the original vision and may actually make prison crowding worse.
The second-felony-offender law, enacted in 1973, mandates stiff sentences for anyone convicted of two felonies within 10 years.
It has contributed to a fivefold increase in the state prison population, as hordes of young, low-level  drug users and dealers have been incarcerated after being caught twice.


JAZZ
No Casual Pleasantness, But Without Artifice Mal Waldron and Steve Lacy Village Vanguard


At Last, 1,300 Pages of Fine Print
After more than two months of silence and secrecy, the first real evidence of a state budget was plopped down on legislators' desks this afternoon: it took the form of several fat rubber-band-bound packages of print that, in the Senate, were three and three-quarters inches thick and more than 1,300 pages long.
This afternoon, the 209 lawmakers who had not been behind closed doors negotiating with Governor George E. Pataki might have been expected to hurry through all the teeny print and every "heretofore" and "whereas" to make an intelligent vote.
But as the voting started, few even looked at the packages.


Rockland District Attorney To De-emphasize Politics
Michael E. Bongiorno was a complete unknown to the local power brokers here.
So he had to get his new job as district attorney of scandal-plagued Rockland County the old-fashioned way: he applied for it.
After reading of the Federal investigation into his predecessor, Kenneth Gribetz, and the possibility of a resignation, the slender, earnest Mr.
Bongiorno wondered whether he should bother making a bid for the job, given his  abstinence from the intoxications of politics.
His wife, Deanne, urged him to try.


U.S. and Japan Set Dates for Trade Talks
The United States and Japan compromised today on the dates for the next set of talks aimed at ending their dispute over access to the Japanese auto market.
Japan had wanted the talks to be held in Geneva on May 29, but the United States had rejected that date and, instead, proposed a meeting in Washington on  June 20 and 21.


Barings Is Joined to ING's Securities Unit
Internationale Nederlanden Groep N.V. of the Netherlands named a new management team today to run its Barings businesses and combined them with its own securities group to form Baring Investment Bank.
ING said Hessel Lindenbergh, who now oversees the three Barings businesses ING bought in March, will become chairman and chief executive of the new unit.
Lane Grinjs will become deputy chairman.
The merger will effectively base all of ING's investment banking activities  in London.
ING employs about 500 people in investment banking.
Barings employs 2,500.


Paralyzed Actor Regains Some Feeling in His Upper Chest
Christopher Reeve, the actor who became quadriplegic when he was thrown headfirst from a horse last Saturday, has regained some feeling in his upper chest but there is no change in the paralysis extending from his neck down, his  doctor said yesterday.
The return of some sensation is an encouraging sign that Mr.
Reeve did not sever his spinal cord and might regain an undetermined amount of function.
Nevertheless, the injury remains devastating, said Dr.
John A. Jane, Mr.
Reeve's neurosurgeon.


Hospital Technician Charged in Sex Case
An X-ray technician at Metropolitan Hospital Center was accused of luring a woman patient to a closed laboratory, getting her to disrobe, touching her breasts and videotaping her while she was naked.
Joseph Garcia, 37, was freed on $2,500 bail yesterday after his arraignment  on charges of sexual abuse, criminal impersonation and unauthorized practice of  a profession.
He was told to return to court July 6 for a hearing.


'Ivan the Terrible': Film vs. the Sound
Give me something that sounds like a corkscrew scraping on glass," the director Sergei Eisenstein once asked of Prokofiev. He wanted film scores that precisely evoked what was happening on screen. The composer often obliged. In fact, during their greatest collaboration, in "Alexander Nevsky," the music can  seem to be an audible image, and the image a silent sound.
"Ivan the Terrible," as a deeply flawed presentation by the New York Philharmonic showed on Thursday night, is another story.
About 90 minutes of excerpts from this three-hour film about the 16th-century czar were shown as the orchestra and the Pro Arte Chorale performed the score, meticulously transcribed from the soundtrack by William David Brohn.
The producer, John Goberman, had a triumph a few years ago when he and Mr.
Brohn restored the "Nevsky" movie to life (the Boston Symphony Orchestra providing the accompaniment), but here the effort seemed misguided and poorly executed despite the robust, sometimes thrilling conducting by Yuri Temirkanov.


Jobless Rate Declines in New York, but Little Growth Is Seen
Despite a decline in the state's unemployment rate last month, the economic outlook for New York remains gloomy, Labor Department officials said yesterday.
The unemployment rate in New York declined to 6.3 percent in May, from 6.8 percent in April and 6.5 percent a year earlier, still laggging behind the national rate, which dipped to 5.7 percent in May from 5.8 percent in April.


Spinoff Is Seen For Grace Unit
Some large institutional shareholders of W. R. Grace &amp; Company said today that the company planned to spin off, rather than sell, its health care unit to  avoid capital gains taxes.
Such a move would mean that the board had rejected a $3.5 billion buyout offer from Constantine L. Hampers, the founder of the unit, National Medical Care Inc.


Park Operas Change Place
The Metropolitan Opera concert performances of "Rigoletto" and "La Traviata," scheduled for the Great Lawn in Central Park on June 13 and June 20, respectively, are to take place instead at the North Meadow (entry at Fifth Avenue and 102d Street).
The premiere of the Disney film "Pocahontas," scheduled for June 10 on the Great Lawn, requires a major technical installation, and it was thought that if the film was postponed because of rain, the Met would not be able to install its own equipment on the Great Lawn in time for rehearsals.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Contrasts and Passions in a Premiere
There was a time when distinguished or soon-to-be-distinguished 20th-century  composers had their major scores first played in public with ballet companies.
Even Igor Stravinsky was in the soon-to-be-distinguished category when Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes gave his "Firebird," not to speak of his "Sacre du Printemps," a first hearing before World War I.
George Balanchine, a Diaghilev alumnus, and Lincoln Kirstein, a Diaghilev enthusiast, continued this tradition when they founded the New York City Ballet, as their commissions from Stravinsky, Paul Hindemith and lesser lights showed over the decades.


U.S. JET ON MISSION FOR NATO IS SHOT DOWN OVER BOSNIA; SERBS FREE SOME U.N. TROOPS -- White House Denounces Serbs; Aides Voice Fear for Pilot's Fate
The White House upbraided the Bosnian Serbs today for shooting down an American F-16 jet fighter, calling them "outcasts and international pariahs." Officials said they feared the pilot had been killed or captured.
Only a few hours later, on a day of shifting emotions and confusing developments, the White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, applauded the reported release of more than 120 United Nations peacekeepers whom the Bosnian Serbs had been holding as hostages.
But he demanded that the rest of the hostages, who numbered more than 200, be freed at once.


Circling Warily: A Carousel Up for Bids
Perhaps fittingly, they have been going around in circles for months: the Parks Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the concessionaire who runs the park's landmark carousel, whose charging wooden steeds have been chasing one another around the wheezing band organ for decades.
The concessionaire, Salvatore Napolitano, fears that for the first time in his longtime association with the carousel, it may go round without him.
Today, in fact, he plans to mark his 25th anniversary with a family party at the attraction, in the park off the 65th Street transverse.


Officer Dies in Roadway Scuffle
A 42-year-old police officer, Eugene Miglio, died yesterday after having been kicked in the head by a woman during a predawn traffic stop, authorities said.
Officer Miglio went into cardiac arrest and died after responding to a call for backup.
Janet Hicks, 35, of Middle Township, was charged with manslaughter,  two counts of aggravated assault, obstructing justice and possession of marijuana.
The driver, Alan Miscavage, 31, was charged with hindering apprehension, tampering with evidence, possession of marijuana and speeding.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about contract talks between the Hotel Association of  New York and the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council referred incorrectly in some editions to the restaurant at the Howard Johnson's Plaza, which was at the  center of a temporary breakdown in the talks.
It is Salma's Grill, not Salmi's.


Bench With a View


Citadel Relents on Shaving Head Of the First Woman in Its Corps
After considering the matter for a year, The Citadel has decided that if Shannon Faulkner becomes the first woman in its corps of cadets, she will not have to shave her head.
But in a plan filed on Thursday in Federal court here, lawyers for the state  military college said that if Ms.
Faulkner was admitted, she should live alone in the infirmary.


Beliefs
The church used to perform gay marriages? Where did you hear such garbage?"
"It's in a new book by this Yale professor. His research turned up liturgies  for same-sex ceremonies that included communion, holy invocations and kissing to signify union. They were just like heterosexual ceremonies."


The Hair Goes, and So Does Offense, for Slumping Yanks
The Yankees may be better groomed, but their baseball still has plenty of nubs.
And the question now becomes: What will the owner, George Steinbrenner, do next to try to shake up his slumping club?
A 3-2 loss to the California Angels last night before 16,959 at Yankee Stadium was a frustrating beginning to a 10-game homestand the Yankees were hoping would at least offset a miserable 1-8 West Coast trip.


White Sox Dismiss Lamont
Fewer than two years after he was voted American League manager of the year,  Gene Lamont was dismissed by the Chicago White Sox today with his team off to an 11-20 start.
Going into tonight's game with Detroit, the White Sox, with the fifth-highest payroll in the majors, had the third-worst record in baseball, after being swept four straight by Cleveland and falling 11 games behind the Indians, their biggest rival in the A.L.
Central.


MEDAPHIS TO PURCHASE 2 HEALTH CARE COMPANIES
The Medaphis Corporation, a health care management services company, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy two companies in the health care field for about $185 million in stock.
Medaphis, which is based in Atlanta and provides business management services to physicians and hospitals, said it had signed a definitive agreement to buy Healthcare Recoveries Inc. for about $79 million in  stock.
Healthcare Recoveries collects claims for health insurance companies and other groups.
Medaphis also said it expected to buy Medical Consultants Inc. for nearly $107 million in stock.


In Japan's Showrooms, Barely;U.S. Big 3 Find That Dealers Are Hard to Find
Yutaka Kobayashi's auto showroom in the Tokyo suburb of Chiba switched in November from selling Toyotas to Fords.
In the six months since, he has sold 45  vehicles -- what a Toyota dealer typically sells in a month.
The difficulties that American makers have in selling cars in Japan have been a focus of the bitter trade dispute that prompted the United States to decide it would impose 100 percent import tariffs on 13 models of Japanese luxury cars unless an accord with Japan could be reached by June 28.


SCOTT PAPER TO SELL STAKE IN GEORGIA TIMBERLAND
The Scott Paper Company said yesterday that it was selling its 50 percent interest in 54,000 acres of land in southeast Georgia for about $30 million as it continues to divest itself of global pulp and timber operations.
Scott, which is based in Philadelphia, said it was selling 38,000 acres of timberland, 14,000 acres of marshland, and 2,000 acres of land for development, as well as a hunting lodge and conference center.
The company said the property was owned by a partnership between Scott and the Mead Timber Company.


Keith R. Garrity, 63; Led Metals Producer
Keith R. Garrity, chairman and chief executive of Fansteel Inc., a specialty  metals producer in North Chicago, died on Thursday at Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.
He was 63 and lived in Libertyville, Ill.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for the company, which produces specialty metals used in aircraft, aerospace and weapon system components.


International Briefs;Brazil Oil Strike Ending
Faced with a Government threat of mass dismissals, most of Brazil's oil workers voted yesterday to end a 31-day strike of the state oil monopoly, Petrobras.
Most of the 21 worker assemblies voted to follow the recommendation of the Oil Workers Federation to drop all of their demands and return to work.
In the states of Rio de Janeiro, Bahia, Minas Gerais, Ceara, Amazonas and Rio Grande do Norte, workers voted to end the strike and return to refineries and offshore platforms.
The longest strike in the 32-year history of Petrobras began to unravel on Thursday when the Government toughened its position and threatened the strikers with dismissals.


David Breslow, 78, Plastics Researcher
David S. Breslow, an industrial chemist whose research advanced the development of plastics, died on May 26 at Christiana Hospital in Newark, Del.
He was 78 and lived in Wilmington, Del.
Dr.
Breslow began experimenting with polymers, the long-chain molecules that  are the building blocks for thousands of materials, just after World War II.
His work helped to develop catalysts that produced the chemical reactions from which polyethylene and polypropylene resulted.
The research also focused on how to stabilize the materials so they could be used in the mass production of a vast array of consumer products.


International Briefs;Fiat Bounced Back To Profit in 1994
Italy's largest private company, Fiat S.p.A., reported 1994 net profit of 1.251 trillion lire $764 million, as brisk sales of its new Punto car and more robust car sales in general pulled the group out of the red.
Fiat lost 1.783 trillion lire in 1993.
The 1994 results were in line with expectations.
Analysts have attributed Fiat's success in bouncing back from the company's only annual loss since the 1970's to Europe's recovering car and truck market as well as the lira's decline against other European currencies.
First-quarter sales for 1995 increased 28 percent, to 18.6 trillion lire; Fiat said this would bolster earnings for the year beyond corporate targets, which it did not specify.
For the first three months of 1995, Fiat said operating profit was 4.4 percent of sales, or 818 billion lire.


Tolerance, Not Hate, Marks the Northwest
To the Editor:
In "Home on the Range" (Op-Ed, May 26), Tom Reiss critiques racist paramilitary organizations in the Pacific Northwest.
Unfortunately, he paints the entire region with one brush.


Clinton Renews Trade Privileges For China Despite Rights Record
Acting on the recommendation of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, President Clinton renewed trade privileges for China today despite objections to its human rights record.
The decision to renew the trade privileges, known as most-favored-nation status, had been disclosed last week by the President's national security adviser, Anthony Lake.


Let's Talk to Vietnam
To the Editor:
The renewed tension with China and Japan over issues relating to Taiwan and trade demonstrates the fallacy of our foreign policy toward Vietnam.
Vietnam's history of fierce independence from China and Japan, coupled with its 70 million-plus people, make it a natural ally in the region.


Corrections
A report in the Pop Life column on Thursday about the Macintosh New York Music Festival in Manhattan misstated its dates.
The festival is scheduled for July 17-22, not June 17-22.


Trafalgar Proposal Is Rejected by Northern
Northern Electric P.L.C. said today that shareholders at a special meeting had rejected a proposal to reconsider a hostile takeover by Trafalgar House P.L.C.
The defeat, which was expected, came after investors holding more than 39.5  million shares voted against the proposal and those holding more than 22.5 million shares voted for it, a Northern spokesman, Ian Clarkin, said.
The one-share-one-vote tally represents more than half of the utility's 111 million  shares outstanding.


An Arena-Size Show At the 'Tiny' Roseland
White Zombie couldn't help gloating at Roseland on Thursday night.
"This place is so tiny!" said Rob Zombie, the band's lead singer.
He said the engagement had been booked before White Zombie's current album, "Astro-Creep: 2000" (Geffen), was released; it zoomed into the Top 10 and has stayed there for six weeks.
Like its predecessor, "La Sexorcisto: Devil Music Vol. 1," it has sold a million copies, propelling White Zombie's growling hard rock to the arena circuit after 10 years of club shows.
Prosperity has given White Zombie the arena spectacle it was born to inhabit.
At Roseland, White Zombie arrived with a set that looked like a carnival haunted house, complete with a sign that flashed the band's name in red polka dots.
Over the drummer's head was a screen that showed film clips from old B movies: cardboard space ships, doughy monsters, topless dancers, a blond girl chained to a wall.
Smoke billowed over the stage; strobe lights flickered; flashpots and fireworks blazed.
And the four members of White Zombie, in dreadlocks and tatters that made them look like post-Armageddon hillbilly bikers, romped through it all while Roseland's dance floor became a wild mosh pit.


Nigeria Frees Politician
The Nigerian police released an 86-year-old opposition leader today, but they continued to hold 39 other opposition politicians who were arrested with him on  Thursday, an aide to the freed leader said.
The freed opposition leader, Michael Ajasin, and the 39 others, including former cabinet ministers and members of Parliament, were arrested and driven away to undisclosed locations.
Opponents of the military Government said the arrests were part of a crackdown in advance of the second anniversary of a presidential election, on June 12, that was annulled by the military.


Nomo Gives His Fans A Reason To Cheer
Hideo Nomo, the Dodgers' Japanese pitching sensation, gets applause when he warms up in the bullpen.
He gets applause for every strikeout he records, for every inning he completes.
He gets wild applause each time he steps to the plate.
Until tonight, though, Nomo's fans -- many of them Asian-Americans who come to Dodger Stadium specifically to see him pitch -- were unable to cheer Nomo's first victory.
The slumping Mets took care of that.


Private Phone Lists Cited In Case of Chinatown Boss
Kwok Fu Lai had two personal phone books -- small black leather volumes that  make up a strangely disparate directory for one of Chinatown's most prominent figures.
Among the listings, Federal prosecutors say, were the executive office number for Mario M. Cuomo when he was Governor and the New York City address of  Mr.
Cuomo's daughter Madeline.
There were numbers for a handful of state judges, and an entry appearing to be the private number for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
There were notations of birthdays for the wives of other public figures.


Simpson Judge Is Said to Study Juror Conduct
As the 19th week of the O. J. Simpson murder trial ended today, there were renewed concerns about the durability of the jury, with at least one and possibly three panel members facing dismissal, a lawyer involved in the case said.


Masur to Step Down As Leipzig Conductor
Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic since 1991, said  yesterday that he would relinquish his other major podium, that of the Gewandhaus Orchestra of Leipzig, in 1998.
Mr.
Masur, 67, had been director of the German orchestra since 1970 and has been credited with transforming what had become a provincial orchestra in the postwar years into an ensemble of international caliber.
Deborah Borda, the executive director of the New York Philharmonic, said yesterday that changes in Mr.
Masur's relationship with the Gewandhaus Orchestra would have no immediate effect on his relationship with the New York Philharmonic.
Although Mr.
Masur's original contract with the Philharmonic ran through 1997, Ms.
Borda said that it is now an evergreen contract, that is, one  that is automatically renewable.


Dismissal Frees Parreira to Coach U.S.
CARLOS ALBERTO PARREIRA, who coached Brazil to the World Cup title last summer, was fired yesterday by Valencia of the Spanish first division and immediately became the favorite to take over the United States team.
"Obviously, he's a name we have given consideration to," ALAN ROTHENBERG, the United States  Soccer Federation president, said in Arlington, Va.
"I think we'd be derelict in our responsibilities if we didn't talk to him." (AP)


Rig Count Drops by 13
The weekly count of rigs drilling for oil and natural gas fell 13, to 677, in the week that ended today, Baker Hughes Inc. reported.
The number of rigs drilling for natural gas fell 5, to 343.
Rigs drilling for oil dropped 8, to 325, and the number of rigs drilling for either commodity was unchanged at 17.


U.S. JET ON MISSION FOR NATO IS SHOT DOWN OVER BOSNIA; SERBS FREE SOME U.N. TROOPS -- SEARCH FOR PILOT
The Bosnian Serbs shot down an American F-16 fighter plane flying a NATO mission over northern Bosnia today, drawing the United States more directly into the Bosnian conflict.
Lieut.
Comdr.
Mike Consadine, a NATO spokesman, said the American pilot ejected from his plane and his fate was unknown.
A search-and-rescue operation,  almost certainly involving NATO aircraft, has been mounted near Banja Luka, a Serb stronghold in the north.


Robert Stokstad, 82, Biochemical Nutritionist
Robert Stokstad, a biochemical nutritionist who won renown for his research on folic acid and his work isolating vitamin K, died on Tuesday at Kaiser Permanente Hospital in Walnut Creek, Calif.
He was 82 and lived in Lafayette, Calif.
The cause was pneumonia, his son Robert said.


Bridge
The high point of the New York bridge calendar is the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship, which began on Tuesday with 24 teams.
At the mid-point of quarterfinal play last night at the Beverly Club in Manhattan, two matches were  in the balance.
The teams' scores, by captain, were: Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan led George Tornay of Manhattan by 2 imps; Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens, led Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., by 38; Gerald Sosler of Purchase, N.Y., led Al  Rahmey of Brooklyn by 9, and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn led by 32 against Paul Morris of Brooklyn.


Istanbul Journal;A Sect of Muslims Feels Fundamentalist Threat
Room by room, Alawite Muslims in the Gazi Mahallesi district here are building their own community center -- a cross between a house of prayer, a social club, a funeral parlor and a neighborhood dining room that can serve 1,000 meals at a time.
But a cemevi, as the place is called, is more than a building.
It reflects a  newly awakened Alawite consciousness that is forcing its way through the cracks  in Turkey's secular state and that burst onto the streets in March in several days of violent demonstrations.


James Shapiro, 85, Innovator In the Home Sewing Industry
James J. Shapiro, who helped revolutionize the home sewing industry as a founder and president of the Simplicity Pattern Company, died yesterday at his home at the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan.
He was 85.
The cause of death was cancer, said his younger brother, Robert M. Shapiro.


PAYROLLS TRIMMED BY 101,000 IN MAY, THE MOST SINCE '91
In the most sobering evidence so far of the economy's abrupt slowdown, employers lopped 101,000 workers from payrolls in May, the biggest monthly decline since the end of the last recession in the spring of 1991, the Labor Department reported today.
At the same time, the Government index intended to forecast the economy posted in April its third straight decline, a development often interpreted as pointing to a recession six to nine months ahead.


Keep the Train to the Plane Alive
There is still hope for a train to the plane connecting New York City's airports to mid-Manhattan.
There is certainly still a critical need.
As Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has said, New York's ability to maintain itself as a "great international city" depends on having "airports that are connected in modern ways."
The new head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, George Marlin, may have overstated the situation when he pronounced the project dead this week.
For now, a direct link into Manhattan is in doubt, but the authority's planners are examining other possibilities.
It is vital that they not let the opportunity slip away.


JAZZ
Father of Wynton, Branford et al., And of a Genre's Renaissance Ellis Marsalis Iridium


Bosnia: Not America's War
As the Clinton Administration drops hints about the possible involvement of United States ground troops in Bosnia, the White House and some Republicans have started resorting to cold-war shorthand about NATO solidarity and the need for American leadership in Europe.
War is too important to be driven by such sloganeering, as the downing of an  American F-16 fighter plane over Bosnia yesterday makes clear.
The real issue in Bosnia is not one of the United States living up to its NATO responsibilities nor of continued American engagement in European security.
Neither of those is in any doubt.
The relevant question is whether the United States has a strong enough interest in the outcome of the Bosnian conflict to risk its troops in ground combat.
In the view of this page, it does not.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Baroque to Blues With Stars and Children Fiddlefest II Alice Tully Hall


Questions Over Mission in Bosnia: Peacekeeper Nations Rethink Aims
The release of some of the hostages in Bosnia has not ended the crisis there.
And the decision to rush reinforcements to Bosnia and create a new rapid response force has driven Britain, France and other countries to re-examine the  soul-searching question of what they are doing there in the first place.
Are the troops on a relief mission to escort food convoys?
Are they there to  prevent "ethnic cleansing" and other morally unacceptable horrors by protecting  the largely Muslim populations in the "safe areas"?
Or are they there to damp down the three-year-old conflict and prevent it from spreading to an all-out war in the Balkans?


Dollar Is Steadier With Traders Wary of Further Interventions
The dollar was steady yesterday against most leading currencies, rebounding from early losses as currency traders became concerned that central banks might  again intervene to support the value of the dollar.
A surprise round of dollar-buying by the Federal Reserve and a dozen other central banks sent the dollar sharply higher on Wednesday, punishing investors who had bet against the dollar by selling it for other currencies.


Big Losses, Late Checks, No Reports. What to Do?
THE BEEF: John S. Tonetti and his wife, Janet, had a laundry list of gripes about their brokerage firm, from the absence of monthly statements to constant delays in getting their monthly disbursements from more than $500,000 in investments.
One complaint involved a stock that went bad immediately after they bought, giving them a loss of more than $50,000 when they sold.
The stock, S.L.M.
International, was being pushed hard by the brokerage firm when the Tonettis bit in early 1994 -- too hard, say several former brokers of the firm who added that brokers expressed concerns at the time that the stock's price was too high.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
I was struck by the picture captioned "A medic treats a 17th Airborne Division paratrooper, in Wesel, Germany, March 1945." My brother, a paratrooper  in the 513th Parachute Regiment of the 17th Airborne Division, was killed on March 24, 1945, in Wesel.
In the absence of details about his death, I cannot but imagine him now in that picture.
Thank you for the issue.
HARRY F. BOOTH Carlisle, Pa.


UNNECESSARY OBJECTS: Virtual Baby
For consumers who are devoted to family values but can't seem to find the time to start a family, Quality Video of Minneapolis has produced "Video Baby."
This 30-minute tape shows two stunt infants doing what babies tend to do, like crawl around the house, play with a rattle, take a bubble bath and turn lunch into a complete mess.
There's no narrator (and no cleanup), so once the tape is in the VCR there's nothing to come between the viewer and the baby but the off button.


Word for Word / By the Rule Book;To Drumbeats (Boom!) They Race (Boom!) in Dragon Boats (Boom!)
DRAGON boat racing is the latest tack in corporate America's ever-widening search for team-player, network-building, community-friendly competition.
Imported from Hong Kong in 1991 to promote its cultural and financial ties to New York City, the race dates from 400 B.C., when fishermen tried vainly to rescue the revered but suicidal former court minister Qu Yuan from the carnivorous jaws of the deep.
The winning team from last year's national competition, a Philadelphia group that has won three years straight, will compete Saturday in Hong Kong for the international championship.


Corrections
A guide to the primary elections on page 9 of the New Jersey section today omits a contest for the State Assembly in one legislative district.
For the two  Democratic nominations in the 22d District (parts of Middlesex, Morris, Somerset and Union Counties), John L. Kucek of North Plainfield is the only candidate on  Tuesday's ballot; he is opposed by Geri Samuel of Scotch Plains and John A. Salerno of Westfield, write-in candidates who have the endorsement of the state  and county Democratic committees.


Balanchine, Ever The Showman, Comes to Video
IN THEIR ACCUSTOMED ROLE AS specialty items for a limited audience, dance videos rarely make splashy debuts.
On Tuesday, however, with the release of "The Balanchine Library" on the Nonesuch label, balletomanes were treated to a grand  entrance that could ignite fresh enthusiasm for dance on the home screen.
The five cassettes, a compilation of works by and about George Balanchine, widely considered the foremost ballet choreographer of the 20th century, are major additions to a video niche that has been showing renewed signs of life in  recent months.
Museum shops and catalogues are stocked with supplies of videos by a variety of troupes, from the Kirov and the Bolshoi to Merce Cunningham.
Prominent distributors of arts videos like Kultur and Home Vision are announcing new releases (for example, "Cage/Cunningham," Elliot Caplan's acclaimed 1991 documentary about the collaboration between the avant-garde composer John Cage and Mr. Cunningham, will be issued by Kultur on July 25).


Eliminating Rose Pests
The aphids are on the rose bushes and the particularly succulent perennials,  so scout about the garden and give them a hard spray with the hose every morning.
That might save you the trouble of insecticidal soap, which the plants  don't like much either.
If you don't have too many aphids, you could try my favorite method: run your fingers along the tender stems and buds and just squish the little devils.
Very satisfying.
Fertilize the roses, if you haven't yet, and start checking for blackspot.
Pick off any diseased leaves and put them in the garbage or burn them.
Do not throw in the compost!
To battle blackspot, mix one tablespoon of baking soda and a few drops of horticultural oil to one gallon of water and spray thoroughly in  the morning.
Repeat every four days for bad cases, just once a week for slighter problems.
Keep the rose beds free of dead stems and fallen leaves.


Words and Images, the Works of 15 Connecticut Artists
DURING Dorothy Mayhall's 12-year tenure as director of art at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center, it had several hit shows including solos by Reuben Nakian, Cletus Johnson and Nicholas Kruschenik.
Still, memories of such high points were pushed aside by Ms.
Mayhall's death on May 4 as well as by the museum's current exhibition, "Art and Text."
The production is billed as a joint effort with a guest curator, Ellen Hackl  Fagan.
Though it turns out that Ms.
Fagan did most of the choosing, the very existence of the anthology suggests Ms.
Mayhall's character sufficiently to make it seem like a swan song.
As Ms.
Fagan explained recently, the project began when Ms.
Mayhall -- in her keynote speech for last year's New England conference of the Women's Caucus -- invited would-be curators to contact her with their ideas for shows.


Hand Me My Air Guitar. I'm Still a Jethro Tull Freak.
I RECENTLY ARRIVED AT THE delicate point in my latest relationship where it came time to confess my most intimate secret.
One night, judging my girlfriend to be in a receptive, champagne-induced mood, I took her into the bedroom, retrieved a black suitcase from under the bed and showed her my shameful treasure: a stack of tattered, infinitely handled records by that incomparable rock band, Jethro Tull.
For a moment, she was speechless.
So I whisked her into the living room, where, after making her comfortable on the couch, I placed on my ancient turntable what is perhaps the most notorious item in my collection.
My anxiety didn't distract me from my usual care and preparation.
I cleaned the record with my Diskwasher and fluid.
I set down the needle with the cueing arm.
And then, from my old KHL speakers, the opening bars of "Aqualung" resounded through the room:


Corrections
The nonfiction best-seller list on page 26 of The Times Book Review today omits a book.
"Spontaneous Healing," by Andrew Weil (Knopf, $23), a book by a physician explaining the ways in which the body heals itself, should appear as No. 3.
"Sisters" should be No. 4, and each further book should appear one position lower.


Giants' Williams Fractures Right Foot
Giants 3, Phillies 1


Performers Return To Summer Festivals
TWO of the brightest stars in the summer music sky return next weekend: the Connecticut Early Music Festival, beginning its 13th year of "lively concerts featuring great music from the 17th and 18th centuries," and Music Mountain, devoting its 66th season to "some of the world's best string quartets and soloists, the nation's most exciting jazz ensembles, and two of the most outstanding baroque musicians of any era."
Two of the artists at the Mountain, John Solum, flutist, and Igor Kipnis, harpsichordist, are the founding directors of the Early Music Festival.


Proposed Hospital Merger Would Not Be State's First
To the Editor:
The May 14 article "3 Big Hospitals Want to Merge, and That's Just for Openers" referred to the proposed consolidation of Morristown Memorial, Overlook and Mountainside hospitals as the "first real merger" of hospitals in the state.
In fact, Northwest Covenant Medical Center is an already completed merger of four hospitals, and it is a true integration of all assets and facilities in one corporate entity.


Work Moves to Keep The Leaning Tower Up
The long-running battle to keep the Leaning Tower of Pisa from toppling over  has entered a new phase.
Last month workmen poured liquid nitrogen into 178 holes around the 12th-century tower to freeze the ground, helping to prevent vibrations as they begin removing the meter-deep layer of cement and mortar under its base.
This layer, part of an early effort to stabilize the 800-year-old tower, was originally placed around the tower in two phases, in the 19th century and again  in 1935, but was found only last fall by the 13-member committee that has been working on the tower for the last four years.
Given the delicate nature of the operation, the cement mixture will only be removed in small pieces.


The Nation: Cosmetic Surgery;When Health Care Cuts Cost More
REPUBLICANS have boiled down their Medicare proposals to a number and a sound bite: They can wring more than $250 billion from the national health insurance program for the elderly over the next seven years, they say, even while "preserving, protecting and improving" it.
No big, comprehensive, Clintonesque health care overhaul for them.
Just smart, targeted, money-saving reforms of outmoded government programs.
After all, the Clinton Administration discovered the danger of over-reaching, right?


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Devils Stare Doom in the Face Without Blinking
Martin Brodeur did not shut out the Philadelphia Flyers tonight.
He did manage to get on their nerves.
With Brodeur's New Jersey teammates frustrating the Flyers by limiting their  opportunities, the Devils won the opener of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals, 4-1, at the Spectrum.


Baseball Cards as Art
All those adults who lament that their mothers threw away their baseball-card collections now have something else to be upset about: those were also rectangular scraps of artistic inspiration that went into the trash.
From June 17 to Sept. 4, the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge, Mass., will present "The Artist and the Baseball Card," an exhibition of works by more than 150 contemporary artists and illustrators.
The exhibition pays homage to the baseball card, but from a different perspective.
The artists reinterpret baseball cards, in styles from photo-realism to abstract, from painting to computer graphics.
The museum is open daily; admission is $8, $2 for ages 6 through 18.
Call (413) 298-4100.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
LIFE ESTATES By Shelby Hearon.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Sarah, the narrator, and her friend Harriet are well-off women with everything in common -- including widowhood.
But it is this most recent condition that finally reveals the profound differences between them.
" 'Life Estates' is a quietly told novel of compassion and great charm," Lee Smith said in the Book Review last year.
BEYOND CATEGORY: The Life and Genius of Duke Ellington By John Edward Hasse.
Da Capo, $15.95.
For those whose familiarity with this jazz master doesn't extend much beyond a few bars of "Take the A Train," this biography will offer a detailed introduction.
Written by the curator of American music at the Smithsonian Institution, it provides an overview of Ellington's career, highlighting both his music and his personal relationships.
In 1993 our reviewer, Peter Keepnews,  called it a "respectful and carefully researched book." He added that it traces  Ellington's growth as a composer "in terms that anyone can understand." Also reissued is THE PORTABLE HARLEM RENAISSANCE READER, edited by David Levering Lewis (Penguin, $14.95), an anthology of work by writers like W. E. B. Du Bois,  Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston, who were shaping literary culture in the 1920's and 30's as much as Ellington was influencing music.
Last year one critic called it "rich," with material "seldom found in the usual guidebooks."


Tara L. Roberts, Ned Sullivan
Tara Lee Roberts, a Democratic member of the Ulster County legislature from Woodstock, N.Y., is to be married today to Edward O. Sullivan, the commissioner  of Maine's Department of Environmental Protection in Augusta.
The Rev.
John Eusden, a Congregational minister, is to perform the ceremony in the Ketcham Family Chapel at the Frost Valley Y.M.C.A. in Claryville, N.Y.
The bride, 40, is also a media coordinator for the New York State Assembly's  environmental commissions.
She graduated from the State University Agricultural and Technical College at Delhi.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Game 7 Pressure Is Back, but So Is the Pacers' Swagger
Reggie Miller was at home the other night, his eyes transfixed on Game 6 of the Western Conference finals.
As Hakeem Olajuwon sank another unbelievable fallaway jump shot, he telephoned Mark Jackson's room.
"We watch the same shows and we think the same way about a lot of things," Miller said.
"We were watching Houston celebrate. We were thinking the same thing."


No Jackal Required
FOR NEW YORKERS FOLLOWING the recent trans-Atlantic scandal involving Martin  Amis, there has been one especially troubling point.
We could grasp the basics of the story: Amis, evincing an unliterary desire to get rich from his new novel, "The Information," appalled the London publishing world by dumping his longtime British agent and summoning the brash Andrew Wylie from New York to negotiate a deal worth nearly $800,000.
What puzzled us was not the disloyalty or the money (this is New York after all), but the description of Wylie in the London papers.
They persisted in referring to him as a New York literary agent "who is known as the Jackal."
Since when?
Wylie has been called a lot of names, including some from the animal kingdom, but who settled on this one?
The only precedent I've found is a  solitary mention in the British press back in 1987, when The Sunday Times of London reported that Salman Rushdie and Bruce Chatwin had been snatched from their British agent by "Andrew Wylie, who is known as the Jackal by American publishers." But I haven't found anyone in the New York publishing world (including Wylie) who ever heard that name in the past.
It was apparently only this year, after the scandal broke in Britain, that New Yorkers discovered the nickname that they had supposedly invented.
The cycle of cultural transfer was formally completed last month, when, without any attribution, The New York Observer's article about Amis's book party here referred to "Andrew Wylie, who is known as 'the Jackal.' "


Ms. Windhager, Mr. Swanson
Evelyn Anne Windhager, the director of special projects at the Environmental  Defense Fund in New York, is to be married today to Bart Killen Swanson, a founding partner in the Thursley Group in New York, which operates a catalogue shopping service, the Voyager's Collection.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz is to  perform the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride, 36, graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree  in economics from Oxford University.
She and the bridegroom also received master's degrees in international studies and M.B.A.'s from the University of Pennsylvania.


Sports of The Times;A Move to Nashville? Devils' Lemaire Is Not So Sure He Would Go
IN all the talk about the Devils deserting New Jersey for Nashville next season, the coach would presumably pile into the moving van along with the players, the sticks, the skates and the office furniture.
But when Jacques Lemaire was asked if he would go to Nashville, he didn't sound so sure.
"I would have to think about that," the Devils' coach said.


The Nation;America's Opportunity Gap
AMERICA'S Jeffersonian ideals of equality and its reputation as a land of opportunity have been battered recently by evidence of a widening gulf between the rich and the poor.
And now a growing body of research is showing that, at the same time, it is becoming more difficult to move into the economic elite.
Social mobility has not risen, the latest studies show -- notwithstanding conservatives' assertions that modern Horatio Algers still abound.
Indeed, social mobility has diminished for many, particularly the poor.
Most troubling of all, the trends toward widening income inequality and reduced opportunity appear to be more pronounced among young people today, suggesting that the country is headed toward a more stratified society.


Politics, the Old Way: When the Bosses Were King
For decades, the power to pick Democratic candidates for important offices in New Jersey rested with a handful of county leaders.
Frank Hague, the Hudson County boss of the 1930's and 40's, may be the most famous of them all, but the  machine tradition was continued by John V. Kenny, his successor in Hudson, and Dennis F. Carey in Essex, who met behind closed doors while reporters gathered in the hallway as if awaiting the selection of a Pope.
While Mr.
Hague was a stern authority figure who ruled rather than led his political organization, Mr.
Kenny's and Mr.
Carey's success lay in their ability to mediate factional disputes, or at least to keep the factions coming to them for advice.


Penya L. Sandor, Eric S. Taub
Penya Lauren Sandor, a daughter of Richard and Ellen Sandor of Chicago, was married there last evening to Eric S. Taub, a son of Melvin and Cheryl Taub of New York.
Rabbi Mordecai Rosen performed the ceremony at the Art Institute of Chicago.
Ms.
Sandor, 24, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of New York University and is studying for a master's degree in creative writing at Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Centre Financial Products, a risk-management company in New York.
He is also a distinguished adjunct professor of finance at Columbia University.


Two Classes Of Students: Ithaca High Joins Debate
The Ithaca school system is such a peculiar hybrid of cultures that it seems  to have been put together to test the ingenuity of educational policy makers.
The schools have children of professors at Cornell University and Ithaca College, who would not be rattled by a dinner-table chat about quantum physics.
They also have students from Ithaca's poorer streets and from the hardscrabble farms and mobile homes in the villages that surround this Finger Lakes city.


Program Allows Elderly To Occupy Apartments
CONNIE PERGOLA opened the front door and welcomed a visitor to her immaculate apartment.
She proudly held a quick tour: the modern kitchen, a tastefully furnished living-dining room, a full bathroom, a bedroom and an extra storage closet big enough for pantry items, luggage and boxes full of memories.
From the large fourth-floor windows, trees lining Maple Place and the red brick outlines of the First Presbyterian Church can be seen.


In Sri Lanka, Both Sides Have Bloody Hands
To the Editor:
"Asia's Latest Master of Terror" (Week in Review, May 28) equates the Tamil Tigers and their leader, Vellupillai Prabhakaran, with Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge.
As someone involved in medical relief work both in Cambodia and Sri Lanka, I find this pronouncement offensive and ill informed.


Police Frenzy: Guests at Hotel Offer Accounts
Three weeks after the New York Police Department's drunken rampage through Washington, one of the most embarrassing episodes in the department's recent history, police investigators offer little indication of what headway they have  made in finding out what went wrong and who was responsible.
The police acknowledge that they have still not interviewed even one guest at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, where the most serious incidents occurred.
Although they said they had talked to 375 of the 800 New York police officers who made the trip, as well as employees and guests at other hotels, they have been waiting for the Hyatt to deliver a guest list, which they said arrived only late Thursday.


Lynn M. Bowlby, Pack A. Knowles
Lynn Michelle Bowlby, a daughter of Rita L. Bowlby of Farmington, Conn., and  Samuel W. Bowlby of Hamden, Conn., was married yesterday to Pack Alexander Knowles, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Knowles Jr. of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Shephard S. Johnson, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at Battell Chapel of Yale University, in New Haven.
Mrs.
Knowles, 30, is the director of special gifts, a fund-raising position,  at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a senior partner in Tyler, Cooper &amp; Alcorn, a  New Haven law firm.
Her mother is the vice president of corporate affairs for United Illuminating, the electric utility in New Haven.


Journal;Dole's True Lies
Give Bob Dole credit for guts.
He's the first Republican to hold radio talk-show hosts accountable for the bombing in Oklahoma City.
Sly old fox that he is, Mr.
Dole didn't say this directly in last week's speech excoriating popular culture for undermining the nation.
But surely that was his drift.
You can't argue that gangsta rap and violent movies poison impressionable children without also making the case that G. Gordon Liddy inflamed the childlike rage of Timothy McVeigh.


A Distorted View Of the Payroll Ladder
To the Editor:
"For Many, a Slower Climb Up the Payroll Pecking Order" (Earning It, May 14)  reveals that the median weekly salary for physicians is $996.
This works out to  an annual salary of $51,792.


Airline Security
To the Editor: I returned from a trip to Korea and Hong Kong on April 7 from  Kai Tak airport in Hong Kong.
I would like people who will be leaving through that airport to be aware that the security people there are rude and offensive.
After I went through two X-ray machines and a metal detector, and then a hand-held metal detector, my carry-on luggage was gone through.
A young woman took my shampoo, make-up, make-up remover, hair spray, a bottle of Scotch, contact lens solution and a prescription medication.
I explained that I needed the medicine and the lens solution, but they would not give them back.


Chalk Up Another Masterpiece


A Window With a View
Nadine Wener, whose thrift store, Nadine's Shop, is at 120 East Seventh Street, conceded that her street-level window, a mere 4 feet by 3 feet, could use more elbow room.
"People say, 'Don't you want a bigger shop?' " she said, waving her arms across the expanse of hand-picked linen, books and records.
"I say no, I just want a bigger window."


Russian Wise Guys
COMRADE CRIMINAL Russia's New Mafiya.
By Stephen Handelman. 398 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $27.50.





Impressions of Connecticut
A new brochure shows how to look at Connecticut the way American Impressionists did.
The Connecticut Impressionist Art Trail brochure is a guide  to museums that display the artists' works as well as the sites and countryside  that influenced them.
Besides the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, the Bruce Museum in Greenwich and Yale University Art Museum in New Haven, the Art Trail guide lists such places as Weir Farm in Wilton, a national historic site that was one of the earliest centers of American Impressionist painting.


The Belmont Puzzle: Take Two Turns and Four Keys
When Thunder Gulch, the Kentucky Derby winner, and Timber Country, the Preakness winner, go to the post next Saturday for 127th Belmont Stakes, they will be looking down the barrel of the longest of the Triple Crown races.
At a mile and a half, the Belmont requires a savvy rider as well as a finely tuned horse.
Both athletes are tested, but it is up to the rider to get the most out of the horse.
Here are the four key moments that occur in any Belmont, with comments by four winning riders.


New York Philharmonic? Not to Worry, Says Caramoor
WHEN the news broke that the New York Philharmonic might make its summer home in the fields of Purchase College, the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts here was preparing to celebrate its own milestone: 50 years of summer music making in the county.
Howard Herring, Caramoor's executive director, said he did not fear the competition the Philharmonic might pose.
To the contrary, he said: "Their presence would define us even more vividly as an intimate music festival that relies only on the acoustic properties of its theaters and is on a human scale." He added: "If they choose to come to Westchester, we would welcome them to the region."


CHATTER: Covering the News;  Superficial Coverage
I don't care for the news media's coverage of New Jersey.
There is an inflated importance given to events in Manhattan.
Coverage of New Jersey is superficial at best.
Many people don't like New York City and resent the New York bias.
I am one of them.
PETER LAMB Washington


For Speakers And Schools, The Dickering
HIGHER education is a business, and business is fueled by quid pro quos.
These truths are as valid for commencement speeches as for any other school activity.


Fiddling On the Roof
BEEN fiddling on the roof lately?
Noticed any fishmouthing?
Or some alligatoring?
How about some well-defined turtlebacking?


CHATTER: Covering the News;Television Improvements
New Jersey's proximity to New York City means very little local news coverage.
The three network television news broadcasts have been getting better  about it, though, by designating New Jersey field reporters, and it seems that at least one local news story is broadcast from the Garden State.


Avoid Trouble: Renew Your Passport
To the Editor:
I appreciated your article on European travel "A Traveler's Guidebook to Europe on a Slumping Dollar" (Spending It, May 7).


Caroline Elias, Nicholas Turben
Caroline Mary Elias, an administrator in New York for the PR Newswire, a public relations service, was married yesterday to Nicholas Amory Turben, an account executive at the First Institutional Securities Corporation, an investment bank in Clifton, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul Benes performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Old Dutch Church in Kingston, N.Y.
Mrs.
Turben, 26, and her husband, 27, graduated from Hartwick College.
She is the daughter of Alyne and Christopher Elias of Lincoln Park, N.J.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a writer.
Her mother is an associate manager in the  customer relations department at AT&amp;T in Basking Ridge, N.J.


Strangers Replace A Pet Dog
WE all depend on occasion -- on the kindness of strangers, but in this northern Westchester community one man's kindness brought hundreds of strangers  together to help a neighbor.
When Michael Weissleder came home from work one day last September, he read a story in The Lewisboro Ledger about the hit-and-run death of Max, a 2-year-old Labrador retriever owned by an Elmwood Lane resident, Mary Ellen Jahn.


Inquiry Sought on a Death in Guatemala
After visiting the widow of an American archeologist two weeks ago, Representative Robert G. Torricelli has asked the United States Embassy in Guatemala for a new investigation of the violent death of her husband in Guatemala City in 1992.


I.B.F. Orders a Foreman-Schulz Rematch
The International Boxing Federation told GEORGE FOREMAN yesterday that he must fight a rematch with AXEL SCHULZ, the German challenger he narrowly defeated, by Oct. 3 or be stripped of his heavyweight title.
The I.B.F. made Schulz the mandatory challenger after a 12-member executive committee reviewed the tapes of his April 22 bout with Foreman.


Feather Island's Peaceful Shores
AMONG the 24,000 islands of the Stockholm archipelago, none is more accessible than Fjaderholmarna, or Feather Island, a 25-minute boat ride from the center of town. (There are actually four islands in the group known as Fjaderholmarna, but the term has come to refer to the main island, the only one  that can be visited.)
The island is hilly, with a scattering of houses (there are a handful of year-round residents), and somewhat reminiscent of the Maine coast.
During the May-to-September season, 200,000 day trippers visit the 30-acre island by ferry  from three points in central Stockholm. (There is no place to spend the night.)


Holy Alienation and Anxiety, Kafka!
WHAT: "Give It Up! and Other Short Stories" (NBM, $14.95), a book pairing comics by Peter Kuper, a graphic artist, with stories by Franz Kafka, with an introduction by the cartoonist Jules Feiffer.
The book, arriving in stores this  month, is only the third work of graphic fiction published in hardback; the "Maus" books, Art Spiegelman's account of his father's Holocaust experiences, and "Jack the Ripper," by Rick Geary, are its predecessors.
Only three of the eight stories included in "Give It Up!" were published during Kafka's lifetime.
FROM PRAGUE TO CLEVELAND: Kafka was born in Prague in 1883 and spent most of his working life as an insurance clerk.
He died of tuberculosis in 1924, leaving instructions that his unpublished works be burned, instructions that were disregarded.
Mr.
Kuper was born in Cleveland in 1958 and has written and illustrated many comic books, like "ComicsTrips," "World War III" and an adaptation of Upton Sinclair's "The Jungle."


Banging a Tin Cup With a Silver Spoon
THERE was a time in municipal finance when troubled cities, like New York, Philadelphia and Cleveland, that teetered on the brink of bankruptcy did everything they could -- cut jobs, raise taxes and issue new bonds -- to keep themselves afloat and pay off their debts.
But Orange County, Calif., is doing something far different -- and, many say, unthinkable.
This county, one of the wealthiest in the nation, is seeking to use every legal option to wriggle out of its financial obligations.
First, there was the stunning decision to file for bankruptcy to protect itself from those to whom it owed money after the county made a wrong-way bet on interest rates with  billions in public dollars.


'It's Getting Pretty Snazzy': A Brownstone Enclave of Jazz
When the musicians in Lester Bowie's Hip Hop Feel-harmonic want to get together for a jam session, they don't have to go very far.
"Most of the guys live in the neighborhood," explained Mr.
Bowie, the jazz trumpeter.
The neighborhood is Fort Greene. And the owner of a local jazz club summed it up well.


Inflationary Times
To the Editor:
Had Pat H. Broeske bothered to check the Consumer Price Index over the past few decades, she might have drastically revised her list of the 50 highest-grossing films ["The Top Money Makers, for Now," May 14].


May 28 - June 3: Moguls;Trump and Helmsley Spat Over Empire State Building
Given their towering egos, what better place for the long-smoldering enmity to erupt between the skyscraper moguls Donald J. Trump and Harry B. Helmsley than the Empire State Building?
Mr.
Trump started the high-rise spat last July when he claimed that without  laying down a dime he had acquired half ownership of the landmark building, which two of Mr.
Helmsley's companies lease, and so would be pocketing half of any increased rents from them.


Where Herring Is Not a Fish
HERRING is the pre-eminent Nordic food, much loved in all of its many guises  -- pickled, smoked, marinated, curried, fried or jellied, chopped into salad, slathered with cream, sauced with mustard or perfumed with dill.
It is as typically Swedish as the hamburger is typically American, so much so that the Swedes use the word fisk, meaning fish, to describe cod and trout and plaice, but never to describe herring.
Herring, in a class all by themselves, are called stromming if they come from the Baltic Sea, or sill if not.
The great 17th-century trading guild the Hanseatic League was organized because the Germans had the salt the Scandinavians coveted for their herring.
We began our gastronomic adventures in Stockholm with the lunchtime smorgasbord at the Operakallaren, a restaurant of Victorian splendor, opulently  draped and paneled in oak, that stands near the waterfront in the heart of the city.
Its smorgasbord is the genuine article, stripped of foreign accretions and restored to its traditional glory by Sweden's Escoffier, Tore Wretman, who ran this and three other Stockholm restaurants in the postwar years. (He is still active -- a partner, among other things, in Aquavit in New York.) A dozen dishes of herring occupy one end of the 25-foot-long oval table and always form the first course.
A second is often composed of fish dishes, such as smoked eel, smoked salmon and one of the supreme Scandinavian delicacies, the cured salmon called gravlax, served with a dill-mustard sauce.
A third might include cold meats, cheeses, eggs and salads, a fourth small warm dishes such as kottbullar,  or Swedish meatballs, and a (highly redundant) fifth, dessert, usually fruit.


Public Service Can Mean Private Pleasures


D. L. Kleykamp 3d, Helen Kaulbach
Dr.
Helen Claire Kaulbach, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Maximiliaan Kaulbach of Marblehead, Mass., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Donald Louis Kleykamp 3d,  a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kleykamp Jr. of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Joseph O'Keefe performed the ceremony at Our Lady, Star of the Sea Church.
Dr.
Kaulbach, 32, is keeping her name.
She was until recently a chief resident in internal medicine at Arlington (Va.) Hospital.
She is to become a fellow in endocrinology next month at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Williams College and received her medical degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a cardiologist in Salem, Mass.


Calculating Manhattan Rents
To the Editor:
"Big Demand and Short Supply Lifts Rents in Manhattan" (April 23) makes the mistake of confusing the Upper East and West Sides with Manhattan and New York City.


Does Bob Dole Fully Endorse 'Lion King'?;True Misogyny
To the Editor:
Re your June 1 article on Bob Dole's attack on the entertainment industry: In the movie "True Lies," Arnold Schwarzenegger's character, who divides his time between shooting bad guys and humiliating his wife, remarks: "Women: you can't live with 'em -- and you can't kill them."


Justice Sought For Killings By Chile Army
After the Chilean Supreme Court reaffirmed prison sentences this week for two senior military officers in thekilling of an opposition leader in 1976, rights groups and politicians here say they plan to seek justice for other crimes committed during the rule of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
But social and political analysts say the conviction of two officers for the  assassination of the opposition leader, Orlando Letelier, is unlikely to reverse the broad amnesty that has been granted to the military for past human rights abuses or to change the overall positive view that Chilean society has of its armed forces.


Mexican History
To the Editor: Bruce Selcraig did a fine job in describing various travel guidebooks on Mexico ("A Guide to the Guidebooks," May 14).


Step Over Cracks and Watch the Caravaggio
Late last month, a curly-haired man in smudged khakis, a work shirt and worn  Timberlands began applying gold, red and earth pastels on a Union Square Park sidewalk, occasionally picking up a piece of styrofoam to blend some colors or stepping back to check the proportions.
A small copper pot stood nearby, quietly asking for contributions.
It's a scene that's familiar to visitors to Paris, Rome and Madrid, as art students supplement their educations along tourist footpaths.


Corrections
A music festival listing for Indiana in the special Summer Arts section on May 14 misstated dates for the Firefly Festival of the Performing Arts in South  Bend.
It will be held June 23 and 24, not in July.


Michael Ugo Stille, Newspaper Editor And Writer, 75
Michael Ugo Stille, a New York correspondent for the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera for 40 years who moved to Milan to become its chief editor in 1987, died yesterday in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions;The Ups and Downs of A. B. See, Elevator Maker
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Indian and Burmese Troops Join to Fight Rebels
For the first time since the 1980's, Indian and Burmese troops have been cooperating in a military operation against Indian insurgents, trapping the rebels in a pincers movement near the border, intelligence officials and diplomats say.
The cooperation is a result of a significant shift in India's relationship with Myanmar, formerly Burma, following a trade agreement between the two nations in April and quiet diplomacy and low-key official visits in the last three years.


QUICK BITE/Long Branch;Official Purveyor of Hot Dogs to the Governors
The skin splits during careful grilling but the 9-inch hot dogs at Max's still snap to the bite and release the flavor that has drawn fans since 1928.
People anywhere near the north shore of New Jersey often find an excuse to stop by, including the state's last four governors, three of whom have issued proclamations that use words like "gourmet delight" and "culinary masterpiece" to describe the pork and beef franks lined up wide and deep on the busy grill.


Angela R. Parisi; F. A. DeLara Jr.
Dr.
Angela Rosina Parisi, a resident in radiology at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Francisco Arturo DeLara Jr., a fellow in neuroradiology at Thomas Jefferson Hospital in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
John Savage officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Saviour in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Parisi, 28, graduated from Cornell University and received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Son Kyong and Quirino Parisi of Huguenot, S.I.


Beyond Sylvia's: A Designer Soul Scene
IT'S 8 o'clock on a Friday night and the buppies are out in force on Avenue A. With their power suits and wire-rim glasses, Halle Berry haircuts and designer dresses, these men and women are a peculiar sight on the Lower East Side.
Past white kids with dreadlocks and homeless men of all hues, they file into  Mekka, one of several new soul food restaurants that have opened in the last three years, establishments where upwardly mobile blacks go to see and be seen.
But don't expect to find them chowing on chitterlings.


For Young And Old
A gala welcomes a museum's new dinosaur halls and a block party celebrates a  children's school in Harlem.


Priscilla Gilman, R. A. Prud'homme
Priscilla Nesbit Gilman, a daughter of Richard Gilman and Lynn Nesbit, both of New York, was married yesterday to Richard Anderson Prud'homme, a son of Sarah Prud'homme of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Richard B. Prud'homme.
The Rev.
Henry Millan Jr., a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Gilman, 25, and Mr.
Prud'homme, 27, are studying for Ph.D.'s in English literature at Yale University, where they also received undergraduate degrees, she summa cum laude, and where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


High 50's, Low 60's: Upper Midtown East
AKBAR * (212) 838-1717; 475 Park Avenue, near 58th Street; $(c) all major credit cards


Connecticut Lawmakers Approve Strict New Welfare Rules
A welfare overhaul that would give Connecticut, the wealthiest state in individual income, some of the toughest restrictions on benefits for the poor, has passed the Legislature and is heading to the Governor's office for signing.
The House of Representatives voted, 132 to 16, on Friday in favor of a measure that would shut off benefits to families after 21 months, roll back benefits to levels of the late 1980's and require all welfare recipients to be electronically fingerprinted.
The measure passed the Senate on Wednesday, 21 to  15.


Cynthia L. Ryan, William J. O'Brien
Cynthia Lynn Ryan, the daughter of Maren and Terry Ryan of New York, was married yesterday to William James O'Brien, a son of Mary and William O'Brien Jr. of Enfield, Conn.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Madison, a catering hall in New York.
Ms.
Ryan, who is keeping her name, is the manager of retail consulting services at Planned Expansion Group, an architectural and retail design firm in  White Plains.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where her husband received a law degree.
Her father is a screenwriter and playwright and was a staff writer for "Love, American Style," "Car 54, Where Are You?" and other television shows.
Her mother manages the gift shop at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.


2 Teams Learn Value Of Molding Own Aces
With legitimate closers virtually unobtainable in trades, teams in need of this rare species have to try to create them.
Not develop.
Create.
The Philadelphia Phillies and the Cleveland Indians, the best teams in the major leagues these first six weeks, happen to have created closers this season.
The success of the two teams is in no small part attributable to their creations.


Who's John Doe?
Searching for the perpetrators of the Oklahoma City bombing, the F.B.I. issued warrants for "John Doe No. 1" and "John Doe No. 2." After the quick identification and accusation of Timothy McVeigh, a second John Doe remained at  large.
Why do we call him that?
Why not "Mr. X" or "Suspect Unknown"?
The answer is  in the deep recesses of English legal tradition.


Lindsey M. Callen, Peter B. Strong
Lindsey Morrell Callen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Callen of Rumson,  N.J., was married yesterday in Dorset, Vt., to Peter Brand Strong, a son of Mr.  and Mrs.
William L. Strong 3d, also of Rumson.
The Rev.
Hal C. Miller 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at the United Church of Dorset.
Mrs.
Strong is a vice president at Putnam Investments, a money management company in Boston.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a managing director of Ward Howell International, an executive search firm in New York of which he was a chairman.


Friends, a Princess and a Sheer Sense of Fun
IT was an adventure filled with unexpected delights: an early Shakespeare play (his first, some say) on a late-morning student matinee.
Most unexpectedly, no one coughed.
And then they ate pizza together, the students and the actors.
To a theatergoer who grows increasingly agitated about uncontrolled adult audiences that wheeze, undo candy wrappers and otherwise pay no mind to appropriate behavior during a live performance, here was a model lesson in attention, self-control and decorum.


Japan's Ruling Parties Divided Over Push to Apologize for War
An effort by Japan's governing coalition to express remorse for World War II  has collapsed, at least temporarily, as its parties failed to agree on whether Japan had done anything in the war for which it needed to apologize.
Unless leaders of the parties reach some compromise in the coming weeks and pass a resolution expressing remorse, the Asian countries that Japan invaded and occupied during the war will be sure to respond in a wave of anger.


William M. McVey, Sculptor, 89
William Mozart McVey, a sculptor whose nine-foot bronze statue of Sir Winston Churchill stands outside the British Embassy in Washington, died on Wednesday.
He was 89.
He also executed a set of bronze doors for the Federal Trade Commission building in Washington.
His other work includes sculptures of Jesse Owens, in Cleveland; John W. Heisman, at Georgia Tech, and a stone frieze, near Houston, commemorating the battle of the Alamo.


On the Roads and Bridges, 9 Trouble Spots to Steer Clear of (if YouCan)
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed  through June.


Karadzic's Bosnian War: Myth Becomes Madness
Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, noted this week that the Roman Emperor Caligula once appointed his horse as a senator.
"That horse," Dr.
Karadzic said, "was more of a senator than Bosnia is a state."
This was a graphic way of making a point that Dr.
Karadzic has been determined to prove for more than three years -- that Bosnia does not really exist.
In order to prove it, the Bosnian Serbs have cajoled and killed, negotiated and shelled, manipulated and massacred.
This week, they took hundreds of United Nations peacekeepers hostage and shot down an American jet fighter.


Don't Smoke, Drink or Keep Fish
Catch-and-release angling is becoming a religion.
Although in some instances  it is essential to the survival of the species sought, in others its major effect is to cloak its more evangelical practitioners in a mantle of righteousness.
The word is spoken from many pulpits, as in a recent newsletter from a firm that specializes in fly-fishing gear.
The captions under picture after picture of smiling anglers gently cradling their catches all state that the fish were released after the photo was taken.


NOBLES: The Russian Nobility -- Forgotten but Not Gone
The Communists are gone and the capitalists are in favor, but the Russian nobility, harkening back to the days of the Czar, is still here.
And "here" in this case, is the Plaza Hotel in New York, where the Russian Nobility Association Spring Ball was held last month.
Guests ate, danced to "Climb Every  Mountain" and "Twist and Shout," talked politics (mostly anti-Communist) and placed bids at the silent auction table for Faberge eggs and Darci Kistler's autographed toe shoes.
She is the daughter of a colonel in the Czar's army  and escaped with her family to Turkey during the revolution.
Alexis is a cabinetmaker in Massachusetts.


Rebecca M. Loew, Paul Carmichael
Dr.
Rebecca Marie Loew and Dr.
Paul Harvey Carmichael, assistant professors of social work, are to be married today at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg is to officiate.
The Rev.
Canon Nancy  Rosenblum is to take part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Loew, who is keeping her name, teaches at the Adelphi University School of Social Work in Garden City, L.I.
The bridegroom teaches at the Fordham University School of Social Service in Manhattan.
They received Ph.D.'s in social policy from Brandeis University.
The bride graduated cum laude from Vassar and received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
Dr.
Carmichael graduated from McGill University and received a master's degree in social work from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
Congratulations on "Untold War Stories" (May 7).
The bravery of those who served should not be forgotten.
Your first-person accounts will help assure remembrance.
Leo E. Litwak's article "The Wound-Tender" struck a particular chord.
In April 1946, I was at a community seder, in Naples, for Allied troops celebrating Passover.
The participants included American, British, Canadian and Palestinian  Brigade Jews.
The service was led by a British chaplain.
The hundreds of Jewish  servicemen were served their Passover meal by dozens of German P.O.W.'s.
After almost 50 years, I still remember the call "more gefilte fish, Fritz!"


Hitching His Star to the Bronx;Ferrer's Career Mirrors Fortunes of His Often-Neglected Borough
The Bronx is still a reliable punch line in many crowds.
At the Yale Club in Manhattan on Tuesday night, after Fernando Ferrer delivered a lengthy political pitch to the Protestant Lawyers Association, the group's president tactfully wound down the evening by saying that some of the lawyers had long commutes home "to the outer boroughs -- like the Bronx."


POSTINGS: Coping With Budget Cuts;A Panel On Pain
The death by budget sword last week of a proposed 22-mile rail link from Manhattan to Kennedy International Airport gives a sharper edge to a symposium to be held on June 15 by the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects.
The 90-minute symposium is entitled "Coping with Capital Budget Cuts"; panelists are to include City Comptroller Alan Hevesi; Richard T. Anderson, president of the New York Building Congress; the architect Richard Dattner, and representatives from the Citizens' Budget Commission and Moody's Investor Services.


Wistful, Uneasy Days at Cannes
THE MAIN SELECTIONS AT THIS year's Cannes International Film Festival, which  ended last Sunday, were preceded by brief, single-theme montages called Preludes, and the Preludes broke hearts.
The subject might be a favorite star (Jean Gabin, Rita Hayworth), the Eiffel Tower or the uplifting power of gospel music (in films as different as "Sullivan's Travels," "Elmer Gantry" and "Jezebel").
Trains alone, as a topic, meant Dietrich, Garbo, Ava Gardner and Fred Astaire.
There were too many days during the festival when the main attractions couldn't follow acts like that.
It wasn't often wise to remind Cannes' audiences of the glories of the past.


Nina Perales and Javier Maldonado
NINA PERALES, 28, and Javier Nyrup Maldonado, 27, both advocates for the civil rights of Latinos, met at a dinner party three and a half years ago.
At the time, Mr.
Maldonado was working for Legal Services of New York, helping welfare recipients who needed legal advice but couldn't afford it.
"I was really excited to meet him because I knew he was working on behalf of poor people," Ms.
Perales said.


In Defense of Her Father
To the Editor:
Since I am hardly a disinterested party, I have refrained from commenting on  the current controversy over Barbara Leaming's biography of Katharine Hepburn.
Naturally, I do not see my father, Spencer Tracy, as Ms.
Leaming portrays him.
I have never before written a letter to the editor.
But on one issue I must speak  out.


A Last Supper: Why Couldn't Gage &amp; Tollner Turn a Profit?
The gas-lamp chandeliers glowed, the revolving doors swept in customers, and  courtly waiters in white aprons offered coctkails before the food arrived and fresh pepper when it did.
It looked like any other night at Gage &amp; Tollner, the  landmark Brooklyn restaurant that has served chops and oysters on Fulton Street  for 116 years.
But Wednesday night was different.


CORPORAL JOHNSON, THEN AND NOW
From just a glance at our May 7 cover (above), Ken Johnson, an employee of Reuters, instantly recognized his uncle in a photograph of 50 years ago.
Johnson called us, ending our search.
Frank Johnson was a 20-year-old corporal in Company L, 399th Infantry, 100th Division, when the photo was taken.
The Battle  of the Bulge was a month away.
"We were in the Vosges Mountains moving forward and we got up into a place where we were pinned down by German fire," he recalls.
"The company commander -- Captain Downey -- sent me back for some more  ammunition and bedrolls; we were going to be pinned down a while, so we might as well sleep." For Johnson, the heaviest fighting was to come.
In Alsace-Lorraine, he took a piece of shrapnel in the leg.
After the war Johnson returned home to Brooklyn and got a job at Woolworth's.
Later he serviced oil furnaces and started a trucking business with his brother.
Retired since 1986, he lives in Brooklyn with his wife, Lillian.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE BETWEEN By Tananarive Due. HarperCollins, $22.


Vendors' Eviction Pending Again
Bedford-Stuyvesant's street vendors, who transformed a strip of Fulton Street into a teeming outdoor market and were scheduled to be removed by the city last  Thursday, have been granted an uncertain reprieve.
The deadline came and went and the vendors remained.
Local elected officials  said that while the vendors were given a brief extension, they will still be asked to leave the busy street for a vacant lot a few blocks away.


Police Find Good Reason for a Man's Reported Memory Loss
When a handsome mystery man recently walked out of the hills and said he had  no idea who he was, it seemed like a fairy tale.
Last week, the police said they thought it was.
Instead of an amnesia victim, the mystery man, Larry Rhinehart of Murfreesboro, Tenn., turned out to be a wanted man with plenty to forget.


POSTINGS: 19-Story Hudson Center Project Needs a Zoning Variance;TriBeCa Residents Are Fighting A Plan for a High-Rise Hotel
A group of TriBeCa residents, led by Community Board 1, plan to keep fighting plans for a high-rise hotel in the neighborhood.
The 19-story, 340-room Hudson Center Hotel, which would be partly in the TriBeCa North Historic District, was approved by the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission last fall after being rejected by the Community Board, which objected to the project's height and use.


Thompson Lowers Boom on Dodgers
Dallas Green huddled with his coaching staff in his office here this afternoon.
It was just an informal meeting, one spent dissecting -- and bemoaning -- the dreadful state of the Mets' offense.
And it broke up with one ugly conclusion: Somebody besides Bobby Bonilla had better start hitting, or the Mets are not going to win many ball games.
Bonilla, who had the Mets' only two hits Friday night here against the Dodgers, had two more this evening, one a two-run home run off Pedro Astacio in  the first inning of the game.
But after the Mets squandered their lead in the sixth inning, two other Mets -- Joe Orsulak and Brett Butler -- stepped up with  seventh-inning singles to provide New York with a 5-3 victory over Los Angeles.


More Than Entertainment
To the Editor:
The flaw in Caryn James's argument in her essay "They're Movies, Not Schoolbooks" [May 21] is her assertion that facts have little to do with entertainment and only limit the artist's vision.
But she omits some important considerations.


For American Press in Canada, a Simpson Free-For-All It's Not
The judge presiding over a sensational murder trial in Toronto recently warned American journalists here that they could not only be barred from his court but that they could be charged with an offense under Canada's Criminal Code if they reported prohibited testimony.
In an American court, as millions know who watch the sparring in the murder trial of O. J. Simpson daily from Los Angeles, little that goes on in open court is withheld from the public.


Julius Wile: Business and a Love of Wine
FUTURE chefs now have the opportunity to close the gap between industry and academia.
In 1993, the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park became the first and only culinary school authorized by the State Board of Regents to grant a bachelor's degree in culinary arts management.
The first class is now enrolled in the new baccalaureate section known as the Julius Wile Wing.
Mr.
Wile has also received the first honorary degree, doctor of fine arts, granted by the college in "recognition of his 60 years as a businessman and educator." And thereby hangs a tale.


CHATTER: Covering the News;A Local Cable Source
I read the local papers, like The Little Ferry Express and The Sun.
Occasionally, I read The Record.
And Channel 10 News on cable is probably the best local news source I've found.
TRACEY LAWRENCE Little Ferry


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3 There's one industry group that is even hotter than tech stocks this year.
No kidding -- it's the savings and loans.
By Edward Wyatt.


Adam B. Shafritz, Megan L. Jacobson
Megan Lee Jacobson, the daughter of Amy and Edward Jacobson of Larchmont, N.Y., was married on Monday to Dr.
Adam Brent Shafritz, a son of Sharon and Dr.
David Shafritz, also of Larchmont.
Rabbi Jeffrey J. Sirkman performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shafritz, 25, is a law clerk to Judge Roderick R. McKelvie of Federal District Court in Wilmington, Del.
She graduated magna cum laude from Williams College and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an architect in Larchmont.
Her mother teaches kindergarten at the Seely Place School in Scarsdale, N.Y.


One in Six in County Suffers From Hunger
DESPITE Westchester's status as the 11th-richest county in the United States, with a median household income of $48,405, according to the 1990 census, a recently released study on hunger revealed that one out of every six residents faces hunger on a regular basis.
This translates into about 150,000 people, 45,000 of whom are children, who used the services of a food pantry, a soup kitchen, a shelter or some other program.
In a recent Federal study prepared by  the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the county's estimated median income of $66,900 for 1995 ranks it third in the country.
The study was commissioned by the White Plains-based Westchester Community Foundation, a nonprofit affiliate of the New York Community Trust, which administers a variety of philanthropic funds.
The study, "A Growing Hunger: A Study of Food Inadequacy in Westchester County, 1993," was made between January  and August 1993 by 180 students and 10 faculty members from the Volunteers in Action/Pace group, a program sponsored by the Dyson College of Arts and Sciences at Pace University.


Actor's Injury Doesn't Dissuade Riders in Horse Country
The hurdle where a horse threw the actor Christopher Reeve was considered so  elementary that few people saw the accident that paralyzed him last Saturday.
Most spectators were gathered farther down the meadow at the course's more demanding jumps -- over a ditch, a stone ramp and a water hazard.
Mr.
Reeve, who had insisted on performing his own stunts while filming the Superman movies he starred in, fractured two neck bones when his horse balked at a three-foot-high stack of cedar logs at Commonwealth Park here.


Shame On Conner
To the Sports Editor:
Dennis Conner accomplished something no other American sailor has.
He managed to lose the America's Cup twice.
The first time he lost it fairly and squarely.
The second time was by fraud.
In the preliminaries, racing under rules agreed to by the United States contenders, Conner discovered he was about to become low man to Young America and Mighty Mary and thus be eliminated.
So he got the rules changed to have another set of round-robin races.
Conner has turned the auld mug into a tin one.
WILLIAM C. WINSLOW New York


Finding Stockholm's Sunny Side
DRIVING into Stockholm last summer after an absence of almost 10 years, my wife, Betsey, and I were reminded at once of a pronounced Swedish characteristic -- an esthetic sensitivity so well developed that an occasional graffito on a teller machine or a microscopic bit of litter seems grossly intrusive.
Every factory along the expressway from the airport is modern, glacier-white and perfectly maintained.
Every public space is immaculate, even tunnels and downtown squares.
The retaining walls are faced with natural stone, not concrete, and the light stanchions arch as elegantly as a giraffe's neck.
You will not fail to notice how fit everyone looks; this is the land of Bjorn Borg and Stefan Edberg.
Nor how handsome everyone is.
"This is the only city," Betsey said once, "where the women are so beautiful that even your wife looks out the window and says, 'My God, look at that one.' "


18 States Hurt By Bad Water From Others
Using a computer to analyze the movement of a pollutant, a Government study has found that most of the water pollution problems in 18 states originate outside their borders.
Richard Smith and Richard Alexander of the United States Geological Survey sampled water throughout the nation for presence of the chemical phosphorous and then analyzed the pollutant's movement by computer.


Mexican History
To the Editor: Having visited Puebla and Jalapa only recently, I was pleasantly surprised to see articles about these two places on May 14, "A Celestial City" by Eric Lawlor and "A Hillside Haven" by Marilyn Sides.
Both articles convey the vibrancy of daily life in these little-visited Mexican cities, but not enough of their history or pre-Hispanic attractions.
Puebla, established by Spanish settlers after the conquest, is the place where the Mexicans defeated French colonial troops on May 5, 1862, making the day Mexico's national holiday.
But it is in the adjacent town of Cholula that history and prehistory met when Hernando Cortes, marching from Veracruz to the Aztec capital, today's Mexico City, turned on a friendly tribe and in one day massacred 6,000 of its people.


May 28 - June 3: O.J.'s Alternates;The Incredible Shrinking Jury Threatens to Shrink Yet Again
Last fall, when Judge Lance A. Ito announced that he wanted a jury of twelve  members and twelve alternates for the O.J.
Simpson murder trial, he was criticized for being excessively cautious.
Now, it seems, he was a bit too optimistic.
The original panel has shrunk to 12 jurors and four alternates.
And  after attorneys met twice last week with Judge Ito to discuss allegations of misconduct against three more jurors, speculation was ripe over what will happen if their number falls even further.
A few of the dismissed jurors have tried to cash on the double murder trial  with book deals.
Others are said to have lied under oath.
No one wants a mistrial, but that prospect looks ever more likely.
KENNETH B. NOBLE


A Return to Vietnam With Aid, Not Bullets
FRANK CORCORAN'S first trip to Vietnam was in late August 1968.
Then an 18-year-old marine, he was stationed in the hills west of Danang.
After about a  month, his platoon was airlifted into an ambush of North Vietnamese soldiers.
Mr.
Corcoran was shot in the stomach in that engagement and would have died there had it not been for two men -- Daniel Kelly and Michael Trout -- who gave their lives while saving his.
"I was lying there bleeding to death, and Danny straddled me to stop the bleeding," Mr.
Corcoran said.
"He was killed -- blown off of me. Danny lay down  beside me, and Michael crawled on top to take over. He had just finished the job, and as he did, Michael was blown off of me and killed."


Is Time Finally Running Out For Salomon's White Knight?
THE date had been set for almost a year.
All around the globe, the managing directors of Salomon Brothers Inc., Wall Street's bond-trading powerhouse, were  preparing to gather at the firm's headquarters in the World Trade Center for their annual meeting, scheduled for the third weekend in May.
But Deryck C. Maughan, Salomon's chief executive, knew he could not have the  meeting without offering the 180 directors at least an outline of how he expected to deal with compensation, an incendiary issue ever since he announced  cutbacks late last year.


The Lucky Graduate Gets a Good Job And a Good Fund
Graduation gifts tend toward the practical - watches, luggage and fancy pens.
Money, of course, makes the list, whether it comes in crisp bills, pristine gift certificates or savings bonds.
As an alternative this year, why not give mutual  fund shares?
A number of funds allow small initial investments, an the money can usually be sent directly to the fund once the account holder completes and signs a simple form.
Funds are a good way to encourage a saving habit.
John Rekenthaler, associated publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter, points out that investments in stock funds should be held for several years.
"Savings bonds don't appreciated over time like equity funds," he said of the fund advantage.
Here's an alphetical list of the stock funds that will accept initial investments of $250 or less.


2-Year-Old Boy Hurt In Pet Cougar Attack
A 2-year-old Queens boy who was curious about the strange sounds coming from  his neighbor's basement window went to investigate Friday evening and was bitten on the hand by the neighbor's pet cougar cub, the police said.
The boy, Armando Santiago, wandered over to the iron-barred window and stuck  his left hand in to pet the animal as his mother unloaded groceries from a car in front of their Ozone Park home, said Officer Kathleen Kelly, a Police Department spokeswoman.


Julie Hastings, N. C. Stevenson
Julie Campbell Hastings, a daughter of Peter and Carol Hastings of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Nicholas Cushman Stevenson, a son of Lincoln Stevenson of Rye, N.Y., and Mrs.
William Crouse of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Edmund D. Fitzgerald, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Claire in Westerly, R.I.
Mrs.
Stevenson, 28, and her husband, 29, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a director of development for the New York Special Olympics.
He is an associate in investment banking at Smith Barney.
Both work in New York.


Why Americans Have a Vital Interest in Bosnia
To the Editor:
During Watergate, Deep Throat warned, "Follow the money." In Bosnia, the admonition should be, "Follow the guns."


May 28 - June 3: Unmaskings;Is that Herr Professor Or Hauptsturmfuhrer?
Until his 85th year, Hans Schwerte may have figured he could fool all the people all the time.
Since just after the World War II, the respected professor  of Germanic studies had built up a reputation as a politically liberal academic; he had even been honored by the German Government.
Only now has another reality emerged: until the end of the war, Mr.
Schwerte  was Hans-Ernst Schneider, a Nazi officer on the personal staff of Heinrich Himmler's SS and a leader of the so-called Ahnenerbe (Ancestral Heritage) unit,  whose responsibilities ranged from analyzing folk-dances for traces of Germanic  influence to carrying out grotesque experiments on prisoners at the Dachau concentration camp.


Auschwitz Camp Decays For Lack of Funds
THE Auschwitz concentration camp near here is slowly decaying.
Although some  repairs are being made at the former Nazi camp, curators worry that without an infusion of funds, invaluable evidence of the horrors perpetrated here may be lost.
At Auschwitz and at adjoining Birkenau, Nazi captors killed more than 1.5 million people, many of them Jews who were sent to gas chambers immediately after arriving here on trains from ghettos throughout Europe.
After the site of  the camp was turned into a museum in 1947, its upkeep was paid for solely by the Polish state.
But the state had limited resources, and slowly Auschwitz began to fall apart.
No major repairs have been made in 50 years.
According to one study, a proper conservation and restoration effort would cost $42 million.


Traction Control Learns Some New Tricks
SMART cars cannot prevent dumb driving, but sophisticated new systems may help to keep awkward maneuvers -- and ugly weather conditions -- from causing accidents.
Electronic traction control systems -- now common on large cars, and increasingly on midsize models as well -- keep wheels from spinning, help to prevent skids and preserve a driver's control, even during hard acceleration and cornering maneuvers on slippery roads.
Stomping on the accelerator taps into only the power that is appropriate for the road conditions.


Fearless Heroines With Looks to Match
Up she rose, bosom like a prow, in a bionic version of Botticelli's Venus.
Pamela Anderson of "Baywatch" was cranking up the publicity machine at the Cannes Film Festival, wearing a waist-cinching corset with thigh-high boots, big blond hair and wraparound shades.
The male photographers cheered and right-thinking women groaned as Ms.
Anderson incarnated Barb Wire, the comic-book heroine she will play in a movie scheduled to be released next spring.


BEST SELLERS: June 4, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


Geraldine Nager, W. J. Griffin 4th
Geraldine Monica Nager, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George T. Nager of Baltimore, was married yesterday to William John Griffin 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Griffin 3d of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
John Struck officiated at the Weekapaug Chapel in Weekapaug, R.I.
Mrs.
Griffin, 35, is a vice president and an auctioneer in New York for Sotheby's, the auction house.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a  professor of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Her mother, Dr.
Mathilde H. Nager, now retired, was a pediatrician in the Baltimore City Department of Health.


Militants Kill 9 in Egypt
In one of their deadliest attacks in weeks, suspected Muslim militants shot and killed nine people, including a 10-year-old child, and injured three others  today near the southern Egyptian town of Malawi, security officials said.
Five militants opened fire on the group, which was sitting in front of a mosque in the village of Tanda, and then escaped in by truck.


Festivals and Programs for Youths
IN June 1988, the cellist Ruth Sommers began the Dobbs Ferry Chamber Music Festival as a way of bridging the period between the end of the winter season and the start of summer festival activity.
So successful were the programs that  gradually the concept was expanded to include recitals in other venues and at other times of year.
In time the core players formed what is now the Festival Chamber Music Society.
This year the society has spread out its Westchester appearances over June and July, with the four 8 P.M. concerts collectively called "A Little Summer Night Music" at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.


Twentysomethings Haven't Adopted Mrs.
To the Editor:
You propose in "That'll Be Mrs. to You, Boomers" (Week in Review, May 28) that you see evidence of a backlash against feminism, and a further split between the "boomer" and "buster" generations.
"Mrs. is back," you declare.
"Chalk it up to nostalgia from a generation whose mothers shucked tradition for  careers and the work force."


BOB (TORRICELLI) AND BIANCA (YES, THAT ONE) TO THE RESCUE
IT IS SPRING BREAK IN CONGRESS, AND representative Bob Torricelli has shifted his focus from human rights to the Rights of Man, a 62-foot sloop that wanders the turquoise splendor of the Bahamian seas.
Champagne, grapes and brie adorn the dining table, and steel drum echoes of Jimmy Buffett float across the deck.
Torricelli plucks a brownie from the tray of temptations and dangles it before the lips of the world's best-dressed human rights advocate, his romantic companion, Bianca Jagger.
"I don't think I'd do anything differently," he says to no one in particular.
"I don't think I have any regrets."


Martha Ellis, Jeffrey McMahon
Martha Blair Ellis, the daughter of Holly Ellis of Louisville, Ky., and Edward Ellis of New Smyrna Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Ferrell McMahon, a son of Alyce McMahon of Haverford, Pa., and Ed McMahon, the television personality, of Beverly Hills, Calif.
The Rev.
Mario Prietto, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mrs.
McMahon, 30, is an event marketing manager at Sports Illustrated magazine in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father retired as the general counsel to Holiday Inns Inc. in Memphis.


Foreign Affairs;Lift, Lift, Contain
I don't know much about Bosnia.
But I have a feeling that I've been to this play before.
It was an almost identical ethnic conflict between Muslims and Christians and it was called Lebanon.
It had a sad ending.
As America tiptoes toward deploying troops in Bosnia, I offer these lessons from the 1982 U.S.
Marine intervention in Beirut.
Lesson One: There is no such thing as a peacekeeper or neutral force in an ethnic conflict.
The very meaning of an ethnic conflict is that a society has been torn asunder, every community has grabbed a slice and there is no neutral ground left.
That is why shortly after the Marines went to Beirut as part of a peacekeeping force to support the central Government, they discovered that there was no center to support.
Even the Government was on one of the sides, and by supporting it the Marines were drawn into the battle.
That is why the Marines were re-named by the locals "the International Militia." That is why the Marines in Beirut quickly went from trying to protect others to defending themselves.
That is why if we plan to intervene in Bosnia, in any way, we better decide whose side we are on, otherwise the locals will do it for us.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Morality Play;Now, Social Engineers Design at Right Angles
THE phrase "social engineering" has long been a pejorative fired off in the heat of argument to suggest government manipulation run amok.
Conservatives have invoked the phrase to attack liberal policies ranging from busing to affirmative action, from health care reform to lifting the military's ban on gay soldiers.
Mostly, the charge has been lobbed from right to left.
But when the Christian Coalition recently unveiled its platform for shoring  up the family and re-tethering America to certain moral moorings, some conservatives seemed to be committing the very sin of which they had accused the left.
Here were self-styled defenders of individual liberty, proponents of getting government off people's backs, asking the government to subsidize housewifery, decide who -- if anyone -- can get a legal abortion, enable more parents to send their children to private or parochial schools and to let them pray in public ones.


Plan for Electronic Magazine Earns Teacher a Fellowship
The category was education, and the winner was Brian Hanson-Harding.
Mr.
Hanson-Harding, an English teacher at Northern Valley Regional High School at Old Tappan, was the New Jersey winner of the national Christa McAuliffe Fellowship for his proposal to publish an electronic student magazine  on the Internet.


May 28 - June 3;Fair Harvard, Please Meet Geraldo
USUALLY commencement at Harvard University draws so much public attention that the school sets up a "media center" offering press kits, sandwiches, telephones and computer hookups to the national and international correspondents who flock to Cambridge, Mass., for the pomp.
But this week the welcome mat has already been worn down by reporters and producers from lurid television talk shows prowling the campus for tidbits about the murder-suicide of two female undergraduates last month -- and that is only the latest in a series of scandals that have plagued Harvard lately.
Even while university officials are quick to point out that Harvard has had  a record year in fund-raising and student admissions, journalists are in pursuit of fouler game.
And they have not been disappointed.
The number of sensational news stories coming from Harvard this year could easily fill an ivy-covered tabloid.


The '95 Primary: Candidates and Districts at a Glance
Here is a brief look at the contested Assembly races in Tuesday's primary.
There are two seats in each district, and primary winners will run in the November election.
An asterisk indicates an incumbent.
There are also a variety  of other local races.
The polls will be open from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. (Information  about the districts comes from the New Jersey Political Almanac, published by the Center for Analysis of Public Issues.) 3d District
THE DISTRICT One of the state's most agricultural districts, and one of its  poorest, covering all of Salem County and parts of Cumberland and Gloucester.
Though both seats are now held by Republicans, the Democrats have generally done well in recent elections.


Records Set in Heptathlon and Shot-Put
The national college track championships concluded today with two memorable events: the best shot-put in the world in the past four years and a performance  that shattered Jackie Joyner-Kersee's 12-year-old collegiate heptathlon record.
The championships also included two familiar results: Louisiana State won its ninth straight women's crown and Arkansas took its fourth straight men's title.


U.S. Issues Warning On Mexico City Taxis
After several of its employees in Mexico City were assaulted in taxis earlier this year, the United States Embassy has recommended that travelers and foreign  residents there use only cabs from designated stands, called sitios in Spanish.
Embassy officials say that since the recommendation was issued, there have been few reports of new incidents.
The assaults earlier this year typically took place when taxi drivers took passengers to remote areas to rob them, often with  the aid of others who were waiting there.


IN SHORT: FICTION
JOHANNA A Novel of the van Gogh Family. By Claire Cooperstein. Lisa Drew/Scribner, $22.


Ms. Monachino, Mr. Lapey
Jennifer Leigh Monachino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Alan Monachino of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Dundee Lapey, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen Lapey of Milton, Mass.
The Rev.
William P. Saum performed  the Presbyterian ceremony at Huguenot Memorial Church.
The bride, 25, graduated from Smith College and is a third-year law student at St.
John's University in Queens.
Her father is a vice president and national  sales manager of Systems Tax Service, a tax and payroll service, in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother, Annette Monachino, is a librarian at the Siwanoy School in Pelham Manor.


Clarke Has Buffed Away the Rough Edges
Bob Clarke is a hockey man from the old school, from that generation of Canadian boys who didn't necessarily finish grade 12 and angle for a college scholarship.
Like other talented athletes from Flin Flon, Manitoba, in the 1960's, Clarke  left the classroom in his midteens for a life divided between the demands of junior hockey and the hard labor at the zinc and copper mines.


Growing Up Means Keeping It Down a Bit
SOUL ASYLUM DOESN'T BLAST any more.
The band was known in the 1980's as one of the loudest acts on the punk club and college circuit, pounding and blaring through songs about aimlessness and disillusion.
"Everything you wanted somehow  leaves you wanting more," Dave Pirner sang in a typical pronouncement.
Soul Asylum's seventh album, "Let Your Dim Light Shine" (Columbia; all three formats), begins with a punk-rocker's count-off of "1, 2, 1-2-3-4," but it's followed by the finger picking of two acoustic guitars, as if to put aside Soul  Asylum's youthful excesses once and for all.
In its early years, Soul Asylum was part of Minneapolis's indelible post-punk rock scene, which also included the Replacements and Husker Du.
The three bands  shared a fondness for smart lyrics, well-turned melodies and raucous guitars; before grunge came along, they were linking pop catchiness to a punk attack. (Grunge would add a crucial ingredient for mass appeal: a heavy-metal edge.) The Replacements and Husker Du broke up, leaving behind middling record sales and a  dedicated following among fans and musicians; Soul Asylum persevered.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the front-page review in The Times Book Review today, about "Comrade Criminal," by Stephen Handelman, is missing a line of type at the start of of its final paragraph, on page 19.
The affected sentence should read, "It is that tension that renders Russia's emergence from despotism so gripping, and that leaves us, after concluding Mr. Handelman's tour through the  underworld, still hungry for more guidance on its meaning."


A New Way to Play Me and My Shadow
Neutralizing Eric Lindros and his companions, Mikael Renberg and John LeClair, is the biggest task for the Devils in their playoff confrontation with  the Flyers.
And judging by tonight's 4-1 triumph in the opening game of the series at the Spectrum, Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire has the necessary ingredients to keep the Legion of Doom quiet.


In Mystic, a Two-Year Fight Over Public Restrooms
THE problem seemed trivial and unlikely to generate much squabbling.
But the  issue of restrooms turned out to be too sensitive to settle easily.
So the members of the town council did what public officials often do.
They appointed a task force.
In this case, the Mystic Public Restrooms Task Force.
More than two years and countless hours of debate have gone by since merchants in downtown Mystic first started pushing for public restrooms to serve the tourists, who crowd the sidewalks every summer, and residents, who patronize downtown stores all year.
Mystic -- which has no local government and  is partly in the Town of Groton and partly in Stonington, still has no public restrooms.


Make Me a Match, But Not With 'Yenta'
To the Editor:
In your May 21 article "You Will Buy a House From This Woman!" you say that Roxanne Gennari approaches her job as a real estate agent "like a matchmaker, a  yenta." I wonder why you would use so derogatory a term as yenta about someone you write admiringly about.


50 Classic Old Cars On Display in Montreal
Fifty cars from Britain, Germany, France, Italy, the United States and Canada are currently on display at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.
The show runs until Oct. 15.
The earliest example is an 1886 Benz Patent Motor Car, the first patented internal combustion motorcar, considered in design an adaptation of the horse-drawn vehicle.
A Belgian race car from 1899, the Jamais Contente, marked the appearance of aerodynamic design -- the museum's director, Pierre Theberge, calls it "a torpedo on wheels" -- and could hit an unprecedented 62 miles an hour.


Follow Connecticut's Lead; Make the Parkway Toll Free
To the Editor:
As I ride the Garden State Parkway, especially at this time of year, I dream  of driving past my commuter's exit and heading straight to the Jersey Shore.
My  vision is quickly interrupted, however, as I contemplate the reality of a road system that creates traffic jams that batter residents on their way there.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
World War II was not always as serious as portrayed in your articles.
I was a corporal in a Special Services Company.
We played for many of the U.S.O. shows in the European theater, traveling from place to place, setting up a bandstand and portable stage and carrying a piano around with us.


HUMANITIES: Animal Welfare
Fishermen have long maintained "no kill" sections of rivers, where all the fish caught must be released unharmed.
Now, the world of animal rescue has invented the "no kill" sanctuary.
Sanctuaries in 38 states will take in lost or unwanted animals and not put them to death if they're healthy.
Each shelter has its own mission.
In Utah, the Best Friends Animal Sanctuary cares for 1,500 dogs, cats, horses and farm animals.
Pigs, a Sanctuary, in West Virginia, is home to 125 potbellied pigs.


The World;A Neighborly Style Of Police State
AS dozens of New York City police officers were wreaking havoc in Washington  hotels last month, some of them running around naked and drunk and harassing other guests, Tokyo's finest were handing out umbrellas to people unexpectedly caught in spring showers.
And while American investigators struggle to unravel the Oklahoma bombing, the Japanese police appear to have pretty much wrapped up their investigation of the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system.
The police have arrested more than 100 members of the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult -- albeit after having ignored Aum as it was allegedly murdering people in earlier years -- and have pressed some members into giving detailed confessions.


Martinez Is Perfect for 9, but Human in 10th
Pedro Martinez of Montreal pitched nine perfect innings tonight against the San Diego Padres before giving up a leadoff double in the 10th inning of the Expos' 1-0 victory.
Martinez, the first pitcher to take a perfect game into extra innings since Harvey Haddix did it for Pittsburgh in 1959, received credit for neither a perfect game nor a no-hitter.


High Ceilings And High Tech On the Triple 7
IN recent years, designers have set aside their attempts to make commercial aircraft faster and concentrated instead on improving the quality of the time passengers spend in the air.
The latest advance in this direction is the Boeing  777, which makes its inaugural passenger flight on Wednesday.
When the first Boeing 777's go into service for United Airlines, passengers will be riding the  world's largest twin-engine plane, with the most powerful aircraft engines ever made for commercial flying and some of the roomiest seats and aisles available.
And once it is fully equipped, perhaps as early as next year, the aircraft will offer both a work station and an entertainment center at each of its 292 seats.


Last Year's Campers Hope To Be 2d Summer's Guests
Like fishermen swapping stories, the eleven children clustered around a table at the Harbor for Boys and Girls in East Harlem were debating about who had landed the best Fresh Air Fund family last summer.
"My stepfamily had a big pool," said Maria Hernandez, 7.


A Second Tony Award For the Goodspeed
THE Goodspeed Opera House, a magical palace where musicals rule, is to be hailed by the real world of television -- for the second time.
Practically speaking, the telecast of the Tony Awards beginning tonight at 9  on the CBS network, is essentially a two-hour-plus worldwide promotion for Broadway's commercial theater.
If cleverly produced, the show, strewn with star presenters and featuring a formidable lineup of 12 scenes from plays and musicals, half of them revivals, will perpetuate a fantasy of creative life on Broadway.
When was the last time a prime time television spectacular offered scenes from Shakespeare and Moliere, not to mention Tennessee Williams and Jerome Kern?


Airfill
FOR JUST A MOMENT, THINK OF IT as landfill, like 20 percent of modern Manhattan.
Imagine a vast stretch of valuable real estate suddenly added to your city.
As you might expect, its creation has set off a mad scramble for possession.
The owners of old land claim priority to annex the new.
The designers of the landfill say no, it was promised to them.
A few people shout, "Save some for parks and playgrounds!" Some dare to suggest an auction to help reduce the budget deficit.
If the argument were really about land so obviously worth billions, the public would surely recognize its stake in the debate.
The struggle at hand, however, concerns not landfill but airfill -- vast new space in the broadcast spectrum.
The imminent availability of that space has arisen from what is murkily called the Digital-HDTV problem, as if to make sure that only a few thousand comprehending Americans will bother to decipher the technical, economic and political issues involved.
But that new airspace is precious real estate indeed.
It is worth billions.
It was created at government initiative and its disposition should not be left to lobbyists and the legislators they routinely bribe with campaign contributions.


Mismatched


Time Travel, Through Dance
It is a common complaint among immigrants -- their American-born children, westernized by popular culture, have either forgotten or shunned the rich traditions of their ancestral lands.
Denny Zivan's relatives have no such complaint.


A 50~ Frame That Just Might Hold a Treasure
Mark Holmes said he had never heard of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow when he paid pocket change at a garage sale last year for what might turn out to be a manuscript of one of the 19th-century poet's most famous works.
When shown the manuscript, which Mr.
Holmes had bought for its wooden frame,  a professor at the University of Houston, Dorothy Baker, said she was almost certain the handwritten work was a working copy of Longfellow's poem "The Village Blacksmith."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Celebrity Passages


Athena Christie, Eric M. Feldbaum
Athena Christie, the daughter of Aliki and Constantino Christie of New York,  is to be married today to Eric Mark Feldbaum, a son of Susan Feldbaum of Brooklyn and the late Joseph Feldbaum.
Judge E. Leo Milonas, the Chief Administrative Judge of the State of New York, is to officiate at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the fashion and marketing  director at Christie Brothers Furs in New York.
Her father is the president of the company.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of Miami and is a sales representative in Brooklyn for World's Finest Chocolates, a manufacturer in Chicago.


Haunted


A Show of Force in the East Village


On Sunday;Improvisations Are a la Mode If Money Isn't
WHAT'S the budget? Zero!"


Q. &amp; A.
Owning Shares In a Co-op


Go Ahead, Make His Day. Argue With Him.
DON'T ARGUE WITH Charles Rosen.
He knows more than you about almost everything, much more.
At the moment, Mr.
Rosen is discoursing on mathematics, specifically about its logical foundations, while you are just wondering how the conversation drifted onto this arcane subject in the first place.
Only a minute ago, while preparing a roast in the small kitchen of his book-lined apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, he was deep into a survey of the  different wooden casks used to make cognacs and whiskies.
Which caused him to deliver a rather technical history of Champagne.
Increasingly desperate, you lobbed a question that seemed almost apropos, about  the doctorate he got in French at Princeton.
This prompted him to recall the great mathematics department there, which led him to theories of logic.
You are, by now, eating delicious lamb and leeks (he's an excellent cook) but feeling rather queasy.
It is the feeling you had in school when you hadn't done your homework and feared the teacher would ask you a question.
But much worse.


Jennifer Woolf, J. F. McCarrick Jr.
Dr.
Jennifer Adair Woolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Woolf of Gulf Breeze, Fla., was married yesterday to James Francis McCarrick Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCarrick of New Hope, Pa.
The Rev.
B.
Madison Currin performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Pensacola, Fla.
Dr.
Woolf, 25, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
She received a veterinary degree last month from the University of Florida.
Mr.
McCarrick, 24, is studying for a Ph.D. in fusion at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass.


Cold War Book Reviewing?
To the Editor:
I hope that Steven Merritt Miner's reading of archive documents in Moscow is  more careful than is his "scanning" of "the scholarly literature on the Soviet Union" ("Revelations, Secrets, Gossip and Lies: Sifting Warily Through the Soviet Archives," May 14).
In particular, he attributes to me views I have never written, spoken or held -- that early Bolshevism "was democratic and genuinely socialist."


Wave From Russia Transforms L.I.U. Campus
As soon as the semester ended last week at Long Island University, several members of the Jewish-Russian Heritage Club left for Israel.
Last year, L.I.U. had no Jewish-Russian Heritage Club.
Ten years ago, it had hardly any Russian students at all.
Now, in one of the many aftershocks of the revolution that turned the Soviet  Union into the former Soviet Union, Russian-speaking students are among the fastest-growing groups on L.I.U.'s Brooklyn campus.


Sherman Paul, 74, A Literary Scholar
Sherman Paul, a literary scholar who wrote studies of Emerson, Thoreau, Edmund Wilson and other American writers, died on May 28 at a hospital in Bemidji, Minn.
He was 74 and lived on Wolf Lake, near Bemidji.
The cause was complications from leukemia, said his wife, Jim.


With a Disciplined Approach, a Teacher Coaxes the Artist From Within
The classroom is silent except for the trilling of birds.
One student, shrouded in a sheet, poses by the chalkboard.
As they sketch his shape, the others move their pencils to the cadence of the bird songs from a tape player.
At Hudson Catholic High School, a boys' school in a gritty Jersey City neighborhood, art is taken as seriously as history and physics.
Textbooks and exams are integral to the curriculum, and the teacher, Joseph Amorino, insists that every student rise to the challenge.
To him, art is an academic discipline  rooted in techniques and theories.


Excerpts of 2 Addresses By Clinton on Bosnia Role
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's radio address yesterday about the United States role in Bosnia and an excerpt from his speech on Wednesday at  the United States Air Force Academy, both as transcribed by the Federal News Service, a private company:


Prefontaine Legacy Enjoys a Long Run
Twenty years after his death in an automobile accident, Steve Prefontaine's legacy is in full flower.
Pre, who set 14 American records at distances ranging  from 2,000 to 10,000 meters, never won an Olympic medal, but his bold front-running style, brash willingness to take on the sports establishment and dedication to using his fame to help others set a standard for all athletes.
For American distance runners, Prefontaine offers much-needed inspiration.
American sprinters have no dearth of role models to choose from: Jesse Owens, Harrison Dillard, Tommie Smith, Carl Lewis, Michael Johnson.
But, an American has not won an Olympic gold medal in the 1,500 meters since 1908, and the United States has only won the 3,000-meter steeplechase, 5,000, 10,000 and marathon once each over the same period.
America's leading miler, Steve Holman, was a year old the last time an American was ranked No. 1 in the world in the 1,500 meters.


CONSPIRACIES: Not All the Same Nuts
Some folks on the political margins are feeling more maligned than usual these days.
"When people talk about conspiracy theorists since Oklahoma City, they're talking about these militia types," says Kenn Thomas, editor and publisher of Steamshovel Press, a small St.
Louis magazine.
But there are many kinds of political paranoia.
"We may all be nuts," Thomas says, "but we're not all the same nuts."
Thomas thinks of himself as part of the "marginals press," which includes a variety of small magazines and publishers with names like Paranoia and Feral House.
He says he is "uniquely tolerant of the gun-toting right," and will publish "the rant" of one of the two Michigan Militia leaders who suggested that the Japanese could be responsible for the Oklahoma bombing.
But he himself is nonviolent.


Julie Friedman, Alan R. Koffler
Julie Friedman, the daughter of Heidi Friedman and Arthur Friedman, both of New York, was married on Thursday to Alan Robert Koffler, a son of Frederick and Barbara Koffler of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated at the Park  East Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Koffler, 28, is the executive director of the New York University Jewish Culture Foundation, a student activities organization in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
Your cover photo evoked memories for at least one combat veteran.
Frank Johnson was every infantryman who served during that miserable winter.
Corporal  Johnson, wherever you are -- this Bud's for you!
DON FREEBERG New Rochelle, N.Y.


Sports of The Times;The Big Boss Uses Straw For Mischief
DARRYL STRAWBERRY's chances for successful long-term rehabilitation took a serious downturn yesterday with the confirmation that the well-known Samaritan George Steinbrenner is interested in his welfare.
In the same way, the Yankees' chances for recovery from their slump suffered  a dreadful blow with the news that George would like to court Strawberry.
Even a team as well-run as Buck Showalter's Yankees cannot ignore the looming mischief of Darryl-mania.


Fear of Dying
My long dark hair has always been my security blanket, man-magnet, shield and political statement.
It expresses me: unruly, tangled, hanging loose and free.
Once when I put my hair up, everyone said I looked like my Grandmother Sophie, my mother's mother.
Sophie had hair the color of black bread, the exact shade of mine.
She wore it up, braided elegantly on top of her head like a prize.
Sophie died when my mother was 7.
She was a mystery to me, the woman whose face  they say I stole from the photograph that scared me as a child.
My mother whispered, "The Goodman women are witches."
My mother has auburn hair, shiny as flames.
She wears it neat, short, swept up and feathered lightly over her brown eyes.
She has it cut, tinted and touched up to preserve its natural shade.
When I was 4, she initiated me, her only daughter, into the Saturday beauty-shop ritual.
I remember mostly middle-aged women being dyed, dipped, ironed and clipped.
They smelled bad and looked even worse: tinfoil and white and black goo lining their temples, space helmets over  their heads.
I was put on a high spinning chair and watched the mirror in horror as my beloved long hair was sheared into a pixie.
My first-grade picture shows a sad girl (with Sophie's dark side even then?) sporting a 1965 bob, one clump jutting out.
I've had long straight hair since.


Shirley Jung, Alex S. McDonald
Shirley Jung, a daughter of Leu Heung Lee of Brooklyn and the late Hong Wu Lee, was married yesterday to Alex Sean McDonald, a son of Vonna and Alexander F. McDonald of Euclid, Ohio.
The Rev.
Fernando Ferrarese performed the ceremony  at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
McDonald, 39, teaches the first grade at Public School 104 in Brooklyn.
She received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in elementary education from Brooklyn College.


Hellooooo' and, Maybe, Goodbye
IT'S BEEN about four months since Lloyd Lindsay Young uttered the distinctive on-air "Hellooooo" that put him on the map.
He was told to stop by the management of WWOR, Channel 9, where he has been weatherman and unlikely celebrity for nigh on 12 years.
"They're afraid it may offend too many viewers," Mr.
Young explained.
"They're afraid that there's some small minority of people out there who don't want to be yelled at. They've done that before; the last time was about five or  six years ago. I just try to roll with the punches."


Serbs Vow to Hold Hostages Until NATO Halts Air Raids
Swinging from conciliation to intransigence, the Bosnian Serbs said today that they would not release the remaining United Nations troops they hold hostage unless NATO formally renounced the use of air strikes in Bosnia.
The Serbs issued the statement a day after they freed 121 hostages and as NATO searched for an American pilot whose fighter jet was shot down by a Bosnian Serb missile while on a NATO monitoring mission on Friday.
It was still unclear  tonight whether the pilot was alive or dead.


Sloan-Kettering To Leave E. 62d After Air Tests
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center announced last week that it had found  "unacceptable levels of carbon monoxide" in its administrative offices at 410 East 62d Street and planned to leave the building.
The building, which houses about 750 employees, has had a long history of complaints about its air quality.
Members of the staff have been known to take regular fresh-air breaks out in front and to complain of skin rashes, dizziness  and nausea.
Last week, the landlord was hit with a second multimillion dollar lawsuit based on the quality of its air.
The first was filed earlier this year.


Cordelia Hazen, Todd L. Tappin
Cordelia Hazen, a manager of home-video marketing at MGM/UA Home Entertainment in Santa Monica, Calif., was married yesterday to Todd Laurence Tappin, a vice president of finance at 20th Century Fox in Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Kenneth Deasy performed the ceremony at the Church of the Assumption in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Tappin, 31, graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Hazen of Brooklyn.
Her father is a managing director of J.&amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company, an investment-management firm in New York.
Her mother, Judith Hazen, retired as the executive assistant at Sculpture House Casting in New York.


Pet Owners Growl: Rangers Are Too Dogged
Amy Chenette, a 32-year-old sales executive, recalled the recent Sunday morning melodrama in Riverside Park.
"Out of nowhere, they came up in a van and  six people popped out and surrounded us," she said.
"They're hiding behind trees, they're everywhere. People are running from them."
"They," as it happens, are Park Rangers, those familiar folks in the Smokey Bear hats and green uniforms.
And they appear to be on an uncharacteristically tough campaign to crack down on lawbreakers like Ms.
Chenette who fail to leash  their dogs.


It's Official: Willie Brown Runs for Mayor
Willie L. Brown Jr., the irrepressible former shoeshine boy from Texas who battled past poverty and racial discrimination to become Speaker of the California Assembly and one of the nation's most powerful black leaders, embarked on a new political journey today.
After 30 years of legislative service in Sacramento, half of them in the Speaker's job, he announced that he would run for Mayor of this city of many hills and individualists.


Juliet Whitcomb, Elliot Schrage
Juliet H. Whitcomb, the daughter of the Rev.
Barbara Nielsen of Boston and Dr.
Frederick Whitcomb of Wellesley Hills, Mass., was married yesterday to Elliot J. Schrage, a son of Bertha Schrage of Wilmette, Ill., and the late Prof.
Samuel Schrage.
Jane Redmont, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Somerset Club in Boston.
Ms.
Whitcomb, who is keeping her name, is a graduate of Barnard College.
She  is completing her doctorate in clinical psychology at Adelphi University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist at the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
Her mother is an Episcopal minister and a psychotherapist in Boston.


Disneyland for a Day
For the world premiere of its new animated feature, "Pocahontas," on the Great Lawn of Central Park next Saturday, Disney is planning what it calls "a huge family picnic," with jugglers, musicians and lots of licensed merchandise (And 305 portable toilets.)
But it's for 100,000 ticket holders only.
A phalanx of New York City police officers will "establish a perimeter" beyond the fenced-in viewing area, Disney  officials said, complementing a force of park rangers and 140 Disney security officers that will keep gate-crashers out.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


East Meets West
MARCH *** (212) 754-6272; 405 East 58th Street; $$$(c) all major credit cards


A Tribe Sees Hope In Whale Hunting, But U.S. Is Worried
The children of this American Indian village at the far western edge of the continent struggle with the usual demons of modern life, drugs, alcohol and violent videos among them.
And like parents elsewhere, Makah tribal members say  that a return to old-fashioned values might be just the thing to bring their youth around.
But in this case, tradition means going out in fierce Pacific Ocean swells to chase and kill gray whales, which have not been hunted legally in American waters for more than 40 years.


The True Confessions of a Costumed Entity
IT is several weeks since the Plainsboro Founders Day Parade, and my skull still throbs from where the giant fox's head pressed down on it.
The price of celebrity, it appears, is a dented noggin.
I saw the May 7 parade commemorating my town's birth from the inside, costumed as Wicoff J. Fox, the mascot of one of Plainsboro's elementary schools.
I shall not here dwell on how a man of my age and stature came to be parading down the street with a huge papier-mache fox head on his bean and a tail pinned to his rear end.
I shall merely note that New Jersey apparently has  no law against one member of a household's volunteering another member of a household for embarrassing P.T.A. duty without that member's knowledge or consent.
Inquiries from the American Civil Liberties Union are welcome.


Day of the Doers: Success Stories On the Podium
BENNETT R. COHEN and Jerry Greenfield -- better known as Ben and Jerry -- say the only reason they were invited was because they were bringing ice cream.
But there is a much more plausible reason why the two executives delivered commencement speeches at the Southampton branch of Long Island University two weeks ago.
Although business people are hardly the most sought after of campus speakers -- actors and musicians are far ahead -- the ones who are invited these days are right out of Ben and Jerry's mold: self-made.


Abigail L. Flynn, Christopher Daley
Abigail Lord Flynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Flynn Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Daley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Daley of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Michael Crimmins, a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich, Conn.
The couple graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Mrs.
Daley is a sales consultant for Cowtan &amp; Tout Inc., a textile sales company in New York.
Her father is the president of Rogers &amp; Goffigon Ltd., a home furnishings textile sales company in Greenwich and New York.


Who Should Investigate Asian Gangs?
An order by the New York Police Department transferring investigations of most Asian gang crimes to a Manhattan-based squad has angered business people and elected officials, who say that police robbery squads in Queens and Brooklyn have developed effective methods of fighting extortion and other gang-related activities.
In a May 1 memorandum, Charles G. Reuther, Chief of Detectives, transferred most of the Asian crime investigations from robbery squads in Brooklyn and Queens to the department's Major Case Squad, an elite unit that investigates high-profile crimes, including several large-scale Asian gang cases.
The memo stated: "In order to unify the Detective Bureau's approach in combating citywide organized criminal activity by Asian gangs, the Major Case Squad will assume case responsibility for the investigation of all Asian versus Asian kidnappings, abductions and extortions of Asian businesses or business persons."


Bookshelf


Does Bob Dole Fully Endorse 'Lion King'?;Clinton's Competition
To the Editor:
Re your May 27 Political Memo declaring that Bill Clinton has the field to himself in the Democratic Presidential race: This is wrong.
I declared as a Democratic candidate in Los Angeles on April 26 and so, again, the national press has looked upon me as some sort of comedian, conveniently forgetting my heroic run in 1992.


Bus Passenger Hurt by Driver Wins Suit
On a winter day more than seven years ago, a bruised and distraught woman told a Transit Authority supervisor that a bus driver had beaten her after she boarded his bus, an M15 on the Upper East Side.
The driver's account was that the passenger had punched him in the eye during an argument.
He pressed charges, and a week later she was arrested.
In a hospital examination on the day of the quarrel, the driver, James T. Hill, showed no sign of having been hit.
But the woman, Mira Kroupova, had to wear a brace for months for a sprained neck.
She was also diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder, the condition suffered by some combat veterans,  which was brought on by the beating and arrest.


Mexican History
To the Editor: It was interesting to read about Jalapa.
However, the Museo de Antropologia is described as "a triumph of contemporary Mexican museum design."  In fact, I designed this museum in 1984 on the site of the existing museum, which was demolished.
I was at the time vice president in charge of design at Edward Durell Stone Associates in New York City.
The client was Agustin Acosta Lagunes, then Governor of the State of Veracruz.
Working drawings were done by a local firm.
PAUL BALEV New York, N.Y.


Corrections
An article on May 14 about the sculptor Mark di Suvero and his exhibition at  the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y., misidentified Enrico Martignoni, who runs Mr. di Suvero's studios in Long Island City, Queens.
He is  Mr. di Suvero's nephew, not his brother-in-law.
The article also misstated the name of Mr. di Suvero's daughter.
She is Verite, not Very.


Colleen R. Cooper, David E. Bloom
Colleen Robertson Cooper, a daughter of Elizabeth and Dr.
William C. Cooper of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to David Edward Bloom, a son of Jane and Michael M. Bloom of Haddonfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Ronald Allison performed the  ceremony at the Second Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Cooper, who is 27 and is keeping her name, is an assistant product director with the McNeil Consumer Products Company in Fort Washington, Pa..
She  graduated magna cum laude from Hamilton College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is an attending ophthalmologist at New York Hospital and a professor of clinical ophthalmology at Cornell University Medical College.


No News, Most of the Time
IT is Monday, May 22, a fairly brisk news day in New Jersey.
An Essex County  freeholder has been accused of stealing $2 million from the City of Newark in a  scheme to rent it a dilapidated school building he secretly owned.
The State Assembly has passed a bill aimed at preventing hospitals from discharging new mothers the day they give birth.
But here is the entirety of New Jersey coverage on the 11-o'clock news on one New York station, in this case WCBS, Channel 2:


50 Years of Remembering
To the Editor:
The most authentic memoir about infantry combat that emerged from World War II was written by a soldier from my outfit, the 87th Division.
The author's name is Lester Atwell, and his book is "Private."


On the Waterfront


DIARY
Politics


As Tax Debate Simmers, Senate Counts Dollars
June has arrived, which means that the Whitman administration has less than a month to overcome the grumbling among its fellow Republicans in the Senate and get its 15 percent tax cut passed in time for the budget deadline, June 30.
Not to worry, the administration says.
Last year's 10 percent cut was not even introduced until the second week in June, and it passed with days to spare.
Still, there are only two voting sessions and two committee hearings scheduled for the rest of the month, and there are plenty of worried noises coming from the Republican Senate leadership itself, once again demonstrating the knots that powerful people can tie themselves into while trying to maintain a rigid public  posture on an important issue.


A QUESTION FOR: Betsy McCaughey
Q: How important is appearance to a politician?
A: Appearance should be relatively unimportant.
Many articles about women candidates focus on their wardrobe.
In my case that isn't true because my wardrobe is so small.
I have my red blazer.
I have the bright blue knit suit that I wore nearly every day during the campaign and still wear almost every day.
And I have my bright pink jacket.
I could use a new dress.


Can He Eat a Blueberry Pie?
IT WAS a tense moment in June two years ago when executives at Harrah's Atlantic City casino hotel discovered that Richard (Otto) Filsinger would not be able to compete in the annual Atlantic City Casinolympics pie-eating contest.
Mr.
Filsinger, who works in the casino's blackjack and baccarat pits, was on  vacation with his family at Disney World when his coach, Gary Imperatore, a Harrah's pit boss, telephoned him at his hotel room.


On a Beleaguered Block, Success Never Smelled Sweeter
It stands out -- with its tan woodwork facade and its 70-foot mural of cotton fields back home -- as a respite from the strips of pennant-draped auto parts stores and the sullen cinder-blocked windows of Atlantic Avenue in East New York, Brooklyn.
In the 25 years since the Carolina Country Kitchen came into being -- as a hot plate in a storage bin behind a bar -- it has become a source of pride in an otherwise beleaguered neighborhood, a landmark beckoning to people from near  and quite far who yearn for a memory and a taste of the South, for hominy grits  and ham hocks, collard greens and candied yams.


A Study in Budgetary Realities
Throughout last year's campaign for governor, and continuing with this year's budget negotiations, Gov.
George E. Pataki promised "dramatic change," "sweeping change," even "fundamental change." And in many ways, he delivered with a budget that will reduce spending and taxes, toughen welfare requirements and lengthen sentences for hardened criminals.
But in a host of lesser ways, many of them central to the process of budget-making in Albany, the more things change, the more they seem to stay the  same.


Does Anyone Know Where Lind Is?
The Kansas City Royals said yesterday that second baseman JOSE LIND did not appear for the second straight game and still had not contacted the team about his whereabouts.
Lind, who last played Wednesday, possibly was in Puerto Rico because of an illness in his family, General Manager HERK ROBINSON said before the Royals played Milwaukee.
"It's not one of those things where we think we have to call the police to find a missing person," Robinson said.
The Puerto Rican scout JOHNNY RAMOS was sent to try to find Lind. (AP)


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TURTLE RITUAL


Keelin Brennan, Adam J. Weiss
Keelin Marta Brennan, a daughter of Tommi and Dr.
Michael J. Brennan Jr. of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Adam Jay Weiss, a son of Elaine and Robert D. Weiss of New York.
Associate Justice Pamela M. Macktaz of the Rhode Island Family Court in Providence performed the ceremony at the Astors' Beechwood mansion in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Weiss, 29, is a consultant at William M. Mercer, a human-resources consulting firm in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Amherst College, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is a professor emeritus of economics at Wesleyan University  in Middletown, Conn.
Her mother retired as a psychiatric nurse at Butler Hospital in Providence.


Preschool Called a Help For Kindergartners
FOR most parents, sending their first child off to kindergarten can be a daunting prospect.
But when Stacey Reazer's daughter, Ashley, enters the Bedford public schools as a kindergarten student next September, Mrs.
Reazer is confident that Ashley will more than hold her own with the other children.
"Ashley was a shy child, but ever since she started at preschool, she can stand in front of a large group and recite anything you tell her, " said Mrs.
Reazer, a paralegal who lives in Bedford Hills, and who until this year had had  her daughter in day care.
"She's really thrilled about show and tell. She can sit for hours and be content. When I read to her, she'll stop and say, 'Mommy, you forgot that word.' It's really amazing."


Brown Wins 3d Straight
Brown won the Intercollegiate Rowing Association's championship for men's varsity eights for the third straight year today and turned in the fastest time, 5 minutes 31.3 seconds, in the 100-year history of this regatta.
With the addition of Harvard, for the first time since 1897, and Washington for the first time since 1972, this race was tantamount to a national-championship event.


A Character Actor With the Heart of a Leading Man
Anthony LaPaglia HAS BEEN here once before, on the receiving end of a heap of praise and a streak across the public stage beneath the media's love lights.
Five years ago, in his first film, "Betsy's Wedding," he was widely singled out  as a love-smitten gangster who wooed Ally Sheedy ("Maybe you like classical music, like Sinatra?").
"I got a lot of heat off that movie," said Mr.
LaPaglia.
Along with movie offers came requests for interviews and appearances, but he ducked nearly all the attention, dismissing it as claptrap.


Affirmative Action, Affirmed
A confidential report to the President prepared by Administration officials should be enough to dissuade Mr.
Clinton from joining the Republicans' gathering crusade against affirmative action.
Better yet, it might even persuade him to tackle the Republicans head-on with a principled, public defense of a strategy that has demonstrably enlarged the opportunities for blacks, other minorities and women to move into the American mainstream.
The report, which has not been released, argues that with some exceptions the Federal Government's affirmative action programs are morally and constitutionally justified to overcome "manifest imbalances" in the workplace and in the country's educational institutions.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson put the case for affirmative action more briskly when he called it a "conservative remedy to generations of unfair practices that favored white men."


Mary L. Greco, Paul G. Cummings; Sandra Greco, George Raymond 3d
Mary Lou Greco is to be married today to Paul George Cummings in a double wedding ceremony at which her sister, Sandra Greco, is to marry George F. Raymond 3d.
Msgr.
Anthony Dalla Villa is to officiate at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mary Lou Greco, 35, graduated from Elizabeth Seton College.
She is a trade analyst in the marketing department of Alitalia Airlines in New York.
Sandra Greco, 25, graduated from Iona College, where she is completing her master's degree in education.
Their parents are Alfred and Maria Greco of Bronxville, N.Y.


Couriers at the Ready
Ordinarily, 1,000 bike messengers pedaling furiously through the streets of a city would not be cause for celebration.
But Toronto is playing host to the third Cycle Messenger World Championships from Aug. 11 to 13.
Events will include an obstacle course competition, a road rally and a fashion show.


Q and A
Round-the-World Freighters


Patricia Sypher, Richard Cavanagh
Patricia Ann Sypher, an administrator at the Boston Consulting Group in Boston, was married yesterday to Richard Edward Cavanagh, the executive dean of  the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
The Rev.
Steven  Harris performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Paul the Apostle in New York.
Mrs.
Cavanagh, 37, graduated from Wesleyan University, as did the bridegroom, and she received a master's degree in education from Harvard.
She is a daughter  of R. James Sypher and Linda Sypher, both of Windham, Conn.


Elder Flowers Lend Whisper of Spring
RECENTLY I tasted something I had not had in years: elder flowers.
They have  a wonderful, distinctive scent that took me back, like Proust's madeleine, to my childhood in Dorset, in the southwest of England.
Elder flowers are the blossoms of the elder tree, which grows wild in Northern Europe, and the first tiny white blossoms, appearing in May, signal spring's arrival.
In England we used them to  flavor rhubarb pie and gooseberry fool, desserts that date back to medieval times.
The elder flowers I tasted recently were in a concentrate made by Thorncroft, a company in Hampshire, England, from a recipe that dates back to Victorian times.
Thorncroft also makes a sparkling nonalcoholic elder flower drink, based  on a recipe for elder flower ale.
It has a delicate, lemony taste and makes a pleasant cooling summer drink.


Letting Down Their Hair


Reviews by Weekend Moviegoers Are In. Dole Gets a Thumbs Down.
It hardly mattered whether they had come to the Showcase Cinema to see "Casper," "The Bridges of Madison County" or rough-and-tumble films like "Braveheart," "Johnny Mnemonic" and "Die Hard With a Vengeance."
Most moviegoers interviewed today as they filed into the theater complex, west of downtown, disagreed with Senator Bob Dole's finger-pointing at Hollywood and the recording industry as causes of a morality meltdown in the United States.


Alan I. Colburn, Laura Henriques
Laura Henriques, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Henriques Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Alan I. Colburn, a son of Mrs.
William Colburn of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Mr.
Colburn.
The Rev.
Richard B. Martin, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Larchmont Avenue Church.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Colburn, 32, is studying for a Ph.D. in science education at the University of Iowa, where Dr.
Colburn, 34, received the same degree.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father owns the J. B. Henriques Sales Corporation in New Milford, Conn., manufacturers' representatives for the plastics industry.


NATO Members Agree on 2 Special Forces
At an emergency meeting called to deal with the hostage crisis in Bosnia, defense ministers from 15 Western countries agreed today to set up two separate  rapid-reaction forces in the region to protect United Nations forces there.
The two brigades -- the 5,000- strong British 24th Airmobile Brigade and a new international force made up of British, French and Dutch troops -- could be  operatingby the end of the month, said Defense Minister Charles Millon of France.


Lucy R. Anthony, Geoffrey Webster
Lucy Royall Anthony, a daughter of Bettina Moran Anthony of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Roscoe Tate Anthony, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Lehman Webster, a son of Suzanne Lehman Webster of Washington and Laurence Jackson Webster of Holderness, N.H.
The Rev.
John A. Boehning performed the ceremony at  the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Webster, 30, is an independent special-events planner in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father was a partner in Anthony Real Estate in Palm Beach.
Her mother is an associate at Florida Prudential Realty in Palm Beach.


Hess Has More Time, but Isn't Likely to Take More Control of the Jet
Will the Jets' owner, Leon Hess, be taking a greater day-to-day role in running the team now that he has resigned as chairman and chief executive officer of Amerada Hess Corporation, the oil company that he and his father established in 1933?
Hess turned over control of the company to his son, John B. Hess, during a surprise announcement at a stockholders meeting on May 3.
That combined with Hess's unusually active role in the dismissal of Pete Carroll and the hiring of  Rich Kotite has given rise to that question.


Lindsay J. Felcyn, Glenn A. Zaccara
Lindsay Julia Felcyn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith G. Felcyn of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Glenn Anthony Zaccara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony C. Zaccara of Brookfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
The couple graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Mrs.
Zaccara, 23, is an assistant in the development department at Boardwalk Entertainment, a television production company in New York.
Her father is the chief of correspondents for Business Week magazine in New York.
Her mother, Sylvia M. Felcyn, is an artist.


On the Trail, in a Mine: Learning Away From School
A sampling of field trips taken this spring: HOWELL TOWNSHIP MIDDLE SCHOOL Farmingdale


Talk About Perfect, and in Badminton
WHEN Al Improta heads to the Smith Haven Mall, he wears his varsity jacket, the one with the name of his high school sport prominently displayed on the back.
As macho-looking Al walks, shoppers stare.
The back of Al reads "Badminton."
"People see it and they say, 'What is this?' " he said.
"Then I tell them that we're in the Guinness Book of Records, and their mouths drop to the floor."


An Unconventional Course Tries to Fly
A GROUP of 50 Fairfield University students and faculty members had good reason to feel discouraged as they huddled together on a remote airstrip in Stratford this month.
On an afternoon that was to have culminated in an unusual  business course project, just about everything seemed to have gone wrong.
The weather was atrocious: a cold and steady rain had pelted the group for almost two hours.
Because of the weather, apparently, they had been unable to launch any of the eight Piper J-3 Cub model airplanes that 83 Fairfield University students had built.
Then when one of the planes was launched, it rose only about 20 feet before diving and crashing upside down.


Miss Dolard, Mr. de Gramont
Jacqueline Dolard, a daughter of Elizabeth and Francis Dolard of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Alexandre de Gramont, the son of Carol and George de Gramont of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Sullivan performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs. de Gramont, 25, is studying for a law degree at Georgetown University.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a vice president and the general manager of J. &amp; F. Martel Incorporated, the cognac importers in White Plains.


The Crowds Were There At Pregones Theater Shows
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct certain impressions left by your article about Pregones Theater, St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in the Bronx and me ("Now Playing:  Hoops Improv," April 23).


Small Court, Big Game
IT was a rivalry that led to romance.
He was an up-and-coming player, a national champion among players over 30 and president of the New Jersey Table Tennis Club.
She was an established star, an agile athlete and a recent immigrant from China.


Elaine Simek, Christophe Kusel
Elaine Cronin Simek, a daughter of Lynn C. Simek of Greensboro, N.C., and David Simek of Edinburg, N.Y., is to be married today to Christophe Michel Kusel, a son of Jane Humphreys Kusel of Leesburg, Va., and the late Antoine Kusel of St.-Come, France.
The Rev.
David Bena is to officiate at the Calvary Episcopal Church in Burnt Hills, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kusel, 29, is the legislative director and counsel to United States Representative Thomas J. Manton, Democrat of Queens and the Bronx.
She graduated from Boston University and received a law degree from George Washington University.


INSIDE
Disagreeing With Dole


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about two appointments in the City University system misstated the title of Kristin Booth Glen, who has been named a dean.
She is a justice of the New York State Supreme Court; there are no associate justices.
The article also misstated the name of the law school where she was appointed.
It is the City University Law School, on the campus of  Queens College, not Queens College Law School.
The headline misattributed the appointments of Justice Glen as well as Allen Lee Sessoms, the next president of Queens College.
They were appointed by the CUNY board, not by Queens College officials.


'Let the Hall Have Its Way'
To the Editor:
James R. Oestreich's article "Europe's Elite Ensembles Gather at the Summit"  [May 21] interested me greatly, especially in its references to the superb acoustics of the Amsterdam Concertgebouw.
For the past 36 years as organist and  teacher at Yale University, I have performed and taught in a similar building.
Yale's Woolsey Hall, which was built in 1901 of natural materials, is also a squarish rectangle.
It has two balconies, the lower one U-shaped and partly overhanging the main floor.
It also has a world-famous pipe organ behind the stage.
The hall can accommodate 2,700 people, just a few more than the Concertgebouw.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17


Ideas &amp; Trends;You Talking to Me? The Tough Black Man
BORED moviegoer seeks honest, hard-working, intelligent black man for short-term relationship (Two hours on a Saturday night should do it).
Should be  sensitive and witty.
No Stepin Fetchits.
Can even be a little nerdy.
Macho men need not apply.
Such a plaintive wail might be found in the personal columns of a black magazine.
But it could also be on the minds of many blacks and probably more than a few whites who go to the movies and find themselves wondering whatever happened to all those gentle brothers.


In Illinois, Klan's Protest Answered With a Mariachi Celebration
The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan marched to the beat of a different drummer today in this western Illinois suburb.
In fact, their angry calls for total white power were accompanied by guitars and violins as a nearby 26-piece mariachi band serenaded the white supremacist group in an unusual act of protest.
The paradox of Constitutional rights and race unfolded this morning as nearly 400 protesters impatiently shouted for the Klan members to leave the courthouse, where they had been given a local permit to demonstrate.


Ms. Safirstein, Mr. Bergmann
Meredith Hara Safirstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin H. Safirstein of Montclair, N.J., was married last evening to Marshall Adam Bergmann, the son  of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Bergmann of Westport, Conn., and Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Ms.
Bergmann, 25, is a program developer and analyst for the Medicaid programs at Oxford Health Plans, a health maintenance organization in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Colgate University.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE LIBRARY By Sarah Stewart.
Illustrated by David Small.
Unpaged.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (All ages)
EVERYBODY knows an Elizabeth Brown.
She's the little girl who was born with a library card, was reading before she was out of diapers and got her first pair of Coke bottle glasses in kindergarten.
In "The Library" Sarah Stewart rhymes her way through Elizabeth's entire life, a dozen jaunty lines to a page at most, just enough to put a small reader happily to bed, where, if she's like Elizabeth, "with a flashlight under the sheet . . . she'd make a tent of covers  and read herself to sleep."


If You're Thinking of Living In/Allendale;A Tower Symbolizes Its Aspirations
A RED-BRICK clock tower presides over an island of flowers at a key intersection on West Allendale Avenue, the main business street in the Bergen County borough of Allendale.
The tower, which matches the new, brick-paved sidewalks of the three-block, 19th-century business district, was the finishing touch of a two-year renovation.
It was paid for by private donations in honor of Allendale's previous Mayor Clarence L. Shaw, the driving force behind the renovation, which  was completed in 1993.


H.M.O. Doctors Benefit From Limited Patient Care
To the Editor:
Your May 21 article "H.M.O.?" fails to mention capitation, the method used by some managed-care health plans to compensate primary-care physicians.
For those  health plans, the chart that accompanied the article showing dollar figures for  "First Visit" and "Follow-Up" are passe.


Pathmark Plan Provides Thrust For a Drive Against the Drug Trade
Given the community battles it stirred up, the new Pathmark proposed for East Harlem seems primarily to connote bitter controversy.
But now it looks as if the supermarket may prove to be an impetus for cleaning up the neighborhood.
While drug trade has long been a staple of street life on Lexington Avenue between 124th and 125th Streets, recently members of the community have begun to make more noise about it.


25 and Under
Of all the Southern restaurants in New York -- and more seem to be opening every week -- few are as authentic as Carolina Country Kitchen.
That's because the best food at this simple but pleasant cafeteria-style restaurant actually comes from North Carolina.
That is where the owner, Patricia Lee, grew up, and that's where her father,  George H. Lee, still farms.
And in the parking lot of the pine-timbered restaurant, alongside a pastoral mural of a farmer and mule plowing a field, it's not unusual to see a truck marked "Lee's Farms, Magnolia, N.C.," parked after having made its weekly delivery of sweet potatoes, greens, hams, corn meal and other supplies.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Big Apple On-Line: For and About the City


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Gadfly or fly in the ointment?
Man the telephones: A guide to the civic zealots  of the Upper West Side.


A Voice as Bracing as the Sea
MOST PEOPLE associate Malta with crenelated castles and the age of chivalry rather than any contribution to musical culture.
Yet the island has produced one of the most compelling new singers to come along in years: Miriam Gauci, whose rich, brilliant soprano is as bracing as the spray of the Mediterranean.
The Belgian label Discover has devoted a series of releases to Ms.
Gauci, showcasing her in works by Puccini, among others.
These recordings offer something all too unusual on the vocal scene these days: a fully formed, multidimensional artistic personality that is as intriguing as the well-schooled voice that accompanies it.


The Wizard of Pop Who Turned On the Guitar
THE WOOD-FRAME house at the end of a winding driveway with a rusting Cadillac under a pine tree hardly looks like a shrine to American popular music.
"Hey, where the hell you been?" barked the owner, Les Paul, as a visitor arrived late  at his home in this northern New Jersey town.
Mr.
Paul, a puckish, red-haired octogenarian, is widely considered one of the great jazz guitarists of his generation, whose astonishing versatility has won admirers ranging from Django Reinhardt to Slash of Guns 'n' Roses.
And as an inventor, Mr.
Paul is to the electric guitar what his fellow Jerseyan, Thomas A. Edison, was to the reading lamp.


Lacrosse Took a Timid Girl And Made Her Confident
To the Editor:


THE ANTI-MANDELA
I thoroughly enjoyed Bill Keller's article "The Anti-Mandela" (May 14) and am glad he found my biography of Winnie Mandela useful.
I agree with him that the phrase "a blistering inferno of racial hatred," used to describe her childhood,  is an overwrought one.
However, credit where credit is due. It is not my phrase, it is Winnie's own.


The You-Can't-Win Dept.: Roachco Is Now Too Popular
Shooting a movie on the Lower East Side can be vexing.
Consider the trials of the film company Roachco as it tries to complete "Joe's Apartment," the story of a community garden built by roaches.
First the community fought them off, with high-concept, high-energy demonstrations that had people dressing like insects and chaining themselves to a community garden fence.
Now, they're fighting to keep them -- or at least the film crew's movie-set garden, filled with blue spruce, petunias and maple trees, on a lot next to Junior High School 60, on 12th Street, between First Avenue and Avenue A.


The World: Russia and Japan;Making Up Is Hard to Do
IN the odd world of national neuroses, the feelings Russians seem to have about the Japanese are especially intricate.
Last week Boris Yeltsin found it politic to refuse foreign aid for hundreds of earthquake victims dying under the rubble of a Russian town on Sakhalin Island rather than accept an offer of relief from nearby Japan.
Russia need rely on no foreigner for aid, Mr.
Yeltsin explained, sounding an increasingly monotonous but evidently de riguer nationalist theme.
Otherwise, he said, "someone will start speculating on the basis of his participation after rendering this assistance."


Jesse A. Cappello, Daniel R. Torrey
Jesse Anna Cappello, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Carlos Cappello of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Raymond Torrey, a son of Raymond J. Torrey of Block Island, R.I., and the late Patricia O. Torrey.
The Rev.
Judith T. Baumer officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Torrey, 25, graduated from Goucher College and is studying for a master's degree in art education at New York University.
Her father is the senior vice president of corporate relations at the ITT Corporation in New York.


Helen P. Starr, Albert Church 3d
Helen Pollock Starr, a lawyer, and Albert Marion Church 3d, an emeritus professor of economics, are to be married today in Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Roger Fritts, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to officiate at George Washington's River Farm, the headquarters of the American Horticultural Society.
The bride, 48, will keep her name.
She practices law in Washington.
She graduated from Chatham College and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Pollock of Potomac, Md.


Change and Lack of It
Gov.
George E. Pataki promised change in this year's budget process.
And in many ways, he delivered.
But in other, lesser ways, many of them central to budget-making in Albany, the more things change, the more they seem to stay the  same.
Page 44.
News analysis, page 44.


F.Y.I.
Time and MONY


Once-Humbled Thrifts Are Outrunning the Pack
TECHNOLOGY is hot, but savings and loans are hotter.
S.&amp; L.'s?
The same institutions whose recklessness personified the excesses of the 1980's?
Whose penchant for risky loans nearly caused a financial meltdown?
And whose bailout, at last tally, cost American taxpayers more than $200 billion?


Where Melody Merges With Moonlight
IN OLIVER SACKS'S FAMOUS CASE history in "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a  Hat," music provides a form of salvation.
Dr.
Sacks tells about an injured musician whose brain lesion prevents him from recognizing the most familiar objects.
Only during the act of singing can he negotiate simple tasks like dressing or bathing.
Music helps reconstruct the world for him, restoring it temporarily to a kind of order.
Music does the same in Dr.
Sacks's "Awakenings" for a patient whose parkinsonism leads to involuntary jerky movements.
"By far the best treatment of her crises was music, the effects of which were almost uncanny," Dr.
Sacks writes.
"One minute would see Miss D. compressed, clenched and blocked, or jerking, ticcing and jabbering -- like a sort of human bomb; the next, with the  sound of music from a wireless or a gramophone, the complete disappearance of all these obstructive-explosive phenomena and their replacement by a blissful ease and flow of movement." Music turns behavioral dissonance into virtuosic dance.


It's Time to Mow (and Mulch) the Grass
THIS is the time of year when the lawn is glorious.
The turf is thick and green, a truly luxurious landscape carpet.
But, like it or not, this is also a growing season, when the lawn should be mowed twice a week.
This sort of recommendation often falls on deaf ears because the golf course, tennis court or other leisure pursuits beckon.


A Jew Among the Cossacks
1920 DIARY By Isaac Babel.
Edited by Carol J. Avins.
Translated by H. T. Willetts.
Illustrated. 126 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $20.


In the Region/Westchester;As Rooms Fill Up, Hotels Lure the Business Traveler
WITH hotel managers expecting an occupancy rate of close to 70 percent for for the first time in years, several of Westchester's largest hotels are planning changes to make them more competitive in attracting the business traveler.
"All the hotels just had their best April in a long time," said Marcia Dmochowski, president of the Westchester Hotel Association.
"We're expecting occupancy to inch near 70 percent, from 67 percent last year."


Patricia Barroll, Charles Sellman
Patricia Mutien-Marie Barroll, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Lewis Barroll Jr. of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., was married yesterday to Charles Randolph Sellman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Robert Sellman of Santa Monica, Calif.
The Rev.
Joseph Tobias performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John the Baptist in Ottsville, Pa.
The bride, 31, is the vice president of marketing and communications at Carillon Importers Ltd. in Teaneck, N.J., an importer and marketer of liquor.
She is a graduate of the University of Virginia.
Her father retired as an export manager for the Ford Motor Company in Wixom, Mich.


Tappity, Tappity: The New Two-Tones
A staple of summers past, the 1930's and 40's two-tone shoe has returned in all it's classic styles, from spectators to patent-leather penny loafers with new clunky heels; even basic leather pumps have black toes and heels.
Many low-heeled sporty styles have been recolored in brown and white for summer.
Some of the more stylish men, who started out wearing vintage shoes years ago, are now wearing the new wing-tip black or brown and white classic dress shoes with black or white trousers.


Susan J. Bank, Paul Simonson
Susan Jeanne Bank, a special-education teacher at the Quaker Ridge Elementary School in Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Paul Simonson, a founding partner in Simonson, Hess &amp; Leibowitz, a New York law firm.
Rabbi Mark Winer is  to perform the ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in political economics from Columbia University.
She  is the daughter of Drs.
Norman and Ronee Bank of Scarsdale.
Her father is a professor of medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx and the director of the renal division of Montefiore Medical Center there.
Her mother, who practices under the name Dr.
Ronee Herrmann, is a psychiatrist in Scarsdale.


Striped Bass's Comeback Buoys East End Baymen
STRIPED bass , a prized fish whose population dwindled so precariously that the state instituted a moratorium on the catch 10 years ago, has recovered, and  East End fishermen are anticipating better fortunes.
But the resurgence is also rekindling old disputes with recreational fishermen.


CLINTON, FACING OBJECTIONS, REFINES NARROW CONDITIONS FOR USING TROOPS IN BOSNIA
Moving to quell a firestorm of Congressional and public criticism, President  Clinton today sharply scaled back his definition of the circumstances in which American ground troops could be used to aid United Nations peacekeepers in Bosnia and said the prospect was "remote, indeed highly unlikely."
Just three days after saying the United States should be prepared to help in  a "reconfiguration and a strengthening" of United Nations forces, Mr.
Clinton used his weekly radio address today to refine that idea.
He said American troops would be used only if the NATO allies "become stranded and could not get out of  a particular place in Bosnia," in which case the United States would help with "an emergency extraction."


900 Volunteers Against a Sea of Need
If Speaker Newt Gingrich has his way, the Government's welfare functions may  be taken over by charities like the Union Gospel Mission of Seattle.
The mission is one of relatively few social-service providers in the United States -- most of them religious agencies -- that takes no Federal money.
More than 80 cents out of every dollar it raises comes from individuals; the rest comes from corporations and foundations.


It's Time to Mow (and Mulch) the Grass
THIS is the time of year when the lawn is glorious.
The turf is thick and green, a truly luxurious landscape carpet.
But, like it or not, this is also a growing season, when the lawn should be mowed twice a week.
This sort of recommendation often falls on deaf ears because the golf course, tennis court or other leisure pursuits beckon.


Karin M. Kenny, Payson Peabody
Karin Marie Kenny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis P. Kenny of Brooklyn, was married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Upperville, Va., to Payson  Rowe Peabody, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm E. Peabody of Washington.
The Rev.
Robert A. Davenport performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
George Peabody, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part.
Mrs.
Peabody, 29, is studying for an M.B.A. at Georgetown University.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
She was a management consultant at Price Waterhouse in Washington from 1992 to 1994.
Her father is a computer consultant in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Alyce M. Kenny, is the coordinator of graduate medical education at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.


Gym Relents, Giving Women Equal Access
Men and women will have equal access to all weight-lifting equipment at a city-owned gym, three days after a female bodybuilder was arrested over the issue, officials said today.
The woman, Debra DiCenso, said she was pleased by the decision but angry that the city had not dropped the trespassing charge against her for using men's weights at the gym, the L Street Bathhouse.
She has threatened to file a sex-discrimination suit against the city.


Facing Cuts in U.S. Contributions, U.N. May Rejuggle Its Books
Aware that United States contributions to peacekeeping and other United Nations expenses are certain to be cut this year, a group representating more than 80 countries is preparing to recommend major changes in the way nations are assessed for contributions.
Among the suggestions being considered is a formula that would return the level of American peacekeeping contributions to the 1973 rate of 27 percent of total costs.
For peacekeeping, the United States is now assessed about 31 percent, which amounted to $1.07 billion in 1994, a figure that varies according to the number of operations each year.
Like all permanent members of the Security Council, the United States pays a surcharge because of concessions for  developing nations.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 4, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Trouble in Thebes: This Is a Pop Quiz
Class: Emma Betta's senior humanities class, Red Bank Regional High School.


Smokey Joe's' Creators: Long Shots for Tonys
TO the soothsayers of Broadway, "Sunset Boulevard" may be a shoo-in for the Tony Award as best musical, which is to be announced on CBS during tonight's live telecast from the Minskoff Theater, starting at 9.
But then, it was once widely assumed, even embarrassingly announced, that Thomas E. Dewey would be the nation's 33d President before the final count was in.
No believers in miracles, upsets, long shots or sure things that aren't should discount the possibility that "Smokey Joe's Cafe" may turn out to be the  Broadway theater's 1995 counterpart to Harry S. Truman as victorious underdog.


No-Show Rules On Cars, Rooms
IF you get the feeling that hotels and car-rental companies are tightening their rules, it is not an attack of paranoia.
Like the airlines with their nonrefundable tickets, these companies are fighting no-shows.
Show up or pay up  is increasingly their attitude.
In the hotel world, better business is fueling the trend.
The accounting firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand reported in May that occupancy rates in the United States in 1994 were the highest in 10 years, at 65.1 percent.
The American Hotel and Motel Association has projected 67 or 67.5 percent occupancy for 1995.


Dutchman Strikes Chord In a Less Confident Japan
One might think that a scathing critique of Japan by a Dutchman who speaks only limited Japanese and has no college degree would sell about as well here as a primer on styling blond hair.
But such a book, "The System That Makes Japanese Unhappy," by Karel van Wolferen, has become a best seller in Japan, with 240,000 copies in print so far.


The Fastest Phones in the (Upper) West
If you kill me, you will not easily find a successor to me who will be, if I may use such a ridiculous figure of speech, a sort of gadfly, attached to the state by God, for the state is a great and noble horse who is rather sluggish, owing to his very size, and requires to be stirred into life."
Socrates, speech to the Athenians


Ms. Bernhard, Mr. Pearlman
Elizabeth Anne Bernhard, the daughter of Mr.
Robert B. Bernhard and the Rev.
Margaret M. Bernhard of Corvallis, Ore., was married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y.,  to Ted Louis Pearlman, the son of Dr.
Mickey Pearlman of Cliffside Park, N.J., and Sy Pearlman of Fort Lee, N.J.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Strong, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Barnes Concert Hall at Cornell University.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Cornell.
She is an assistant librarian at William Paterson College in Wayne, N.J.
Her husband, a jazz musician, is also a computer network administrator at the Sony Corporation  in Montvale, N.J.


Gingrich's Welfare Vision Ignores Reality, Charities Say
What America needs, Speaker Newt Gingrich says, is a dismantling of the welfare state, with many of its functions turned over to private charities.
But  from the Union Gospel Mission of Seattle to the Forest Hills Community House in  Queens, charity leaders say they are already hard pressed to meet existing needs.
And they say the Speaker's ideas are unworkable because his vision of what charities do and how they are financed is a page out of Norman Rockwell, a far cry from reality.


The Wild Bunch
Vegetables in the vanguard of spring (asparagus, morels, fiddlehead ferns) defy the impediments of cold and rain and push their way toward the sun.
But the world is a far different place when watercress begins to sprout.
By then the earth has warmed, and the elements are sympathetic to the delicacy of sorrel, purslane and ramp.
These are the peppery greens of spring, a tart boon to the salad bowl.
Served with a mild lettuce, or sauteed with other ingredients, they  are a veritable blast of the season.
Not that I knew this, or would have cared, back in Ohio, where watercress sprouted on the banks of the creek where we played.
We were an iceberg lettuce sort of family and weren't the least bit miffed when a neighbor said "cress" was too good for us kids.


Wildlife Champion At 100
A dinner, dance and camel rides at the Bronx Zoo raise $1.2 million at the Wildlife Conservation Society's centennial, June 1.


Guilty Plea Expected In Fires at Clinics
A woman who shot an abortion doctor in Kansas will plead guilty to setting fires at abortion clinics in Oregon, California, Idaho and Nevada, The Oregonian reported today.
The woman, Rachelle Shannon of Grants Pass, Ore., was convicted of attempted  murder in the shooting of Dr.
George Tiller in Wichita, Kan., in August 1993.
She is serving a 10-year prison sentence.


A. K. Pomerantz, David H. Cohen
Alexandra Kazan Pomerantz, a daughter of Edward Pomerantz and Sandra Kazan of Manhattan, is to be married today in Brooklyn to David Howard Cohen, the son of  Michael and Lynn Cohen of Huntington Station, L.I.
Justice Marcy L. Kahn of State Supreme Court in Manhattan is to officiate in the Palm House at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Pomerantz, 27, is the founder of Alexandra's Brownies, a baking company in Manhattan.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
Her father is a novelist and screenwriter.
Her mother is an actress  and the speech coach at Hebrew Union College in Manhattan.


INSIDE
ON THE MAP How did Double Trouble get its name? Ask George Burke. 3


Take a Hike, Darwin
To the Editor:
David Papineau does a disservice to your readers in his review of some recent books on evolutionary theory (May 14) by implying that scientific (as opposed to religious) opponents of neo Darwinism are motivated by a quasi-religious quest for the "meaning" of life.
This is nonsense.
The growing discontent with orthodox selectionism is overwhelmingly driven by a recognition of its scientific inadequacy.


Cute, Furry, Cuddly, And Born in a Lab
WHEN A NERVOUS extra approached the director Frank Marshall early in the production of "Congo" and asked what to do if the gorilla suddenly attacked, Mr.
Marshall was elated.
For Amy, the gorilla who is the star of the film, which opens on Friday, is actually a diminutive gymnast in a costume with three puppeteers manipulating her facial expressions by remote control.
Amy, in other words, is a very persuasive fraud, which is just what Mr.
Marshall was trying to make her.
Describing the extra's reaction, Mr.
Marshall said: "He had to have seen Amy's entourage, but he completely believed she was real. When that happened, I knew we were O.K."


A Stunning Center-Court Collapse Is Familiar Occurrence for Novotna
Jana Novotna, vanquished from yet another Grand Slam tournament where match points slipped through her grasp like a handful of sand, has never been accused  of having ice water in her veins.
Sometimes her headband seems to function more  like an invisible noose.
Martina Hingis, vanquished from the Slam event she ran roughshod over in the  junior division, will probably spend the rest of her career being accused of --  or complimented for -- the ice water that appears to course through her veins.


You Loved the Show? We're Sorry, It's History
ANGELA CHASE, THE TEEN-AGE heroine of "My So-Called Life," won't have to worry now about her hopeless parents, the horrors of high school or her general  angst.
Her series, which critics fell all over themselves praising when it had its premiere last fall, died two weeks and four days ago at the age of 19 episodes.
The cause of death was low ratings, recently estimated at 10 million viewers, followed by a two-month hiatus.
Valiant efforts were made to save it, including those of Operation Life Support, a group of fans on America Online who raised money to place ads in Hollywood trade publications begging ABC not to let the show die.
But when the network announced its fall schedule on May 17, "My So-Called Life" wasn't on the list.
Clearly, grass roots aren't what they used to be.
In the Internet age, fans of a troubled series can get their message across faster and farther than ever,  but making a big noise no longer guarantees results.


Habitats/Greenwich Village;Friday the Rabbi Stays in His Bleecker St. Duplex
THE rabbi wanted a rental.
Rabbi Eliyahu M. Cohen lives with his wife, Yehudis, and their seven children in the top half of a two-family house in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
He also heads the Chabad program at New York  University in Greenwich Village -- and a significant part of that program centers on celebrating the Sabbath with students.
As a Hasidic Jew, Rabbi Cohen and his family cannot take public transportation or drive on the Sabbath.
After he took part in the traditional Friday night supper at N.Y.U. celebrating the beginning of the Sabbath, how could he get home to join his family?
If his family came into Manhattan earlier  in the day to celebrate with him, where would they stay?


If It's the Memorial, It Must Be Raining
Through the years, there has been lightning.
There has been thunder.
There have been floods and warnings of floods.
There have been times when you could get the same lie in the nearby Scioto and Olentangy Rivers that you could in the fairways at Muirfield Village Golf Club.
If it's raining, this must be the Memorial Tournament.
No golf event this side of Pebble Beach has endured more weather woes than this event, which was founded 20 years ago by Jack Nicklaus.
There have been just six Memorial Tournaments that have not been hectored in some fashion by rain.
All told, 18 of the 79 rounds of the Memorial have been delayed, interrupted or canceled because of inclement weather.


Nets' Season May Be Over, but Turmoil Is Still a Constant Companion
They have already lost two assistant coaches, they are about to lose a European player they coveted more than any other, and their best player -- Derrick Coleman -- is working out with players from the Detroit Pistons.
The Nets said they were going to make a lot of decisions in the off season; they just did not know those decisions would be made for them.


The World: Inaction Figures;How the World Makes Bosnia Safe for War
BOSNIA'S is a war nobody wants to lose and nobody wants very badly to win.
Except of course the Bosnian Serbs and the Bosnian Muslims, for whom it is a matter of life and death.
Like most of the conflicts that have pockmarked the globe since 1945, it is  a local war that might spread; it is a civil war that looks like something else.
Lose it, people say, and your credibility (or that of the Atlantic alliance, or  the United Nations, or the civilized world) will be destroyed.
Lose it, people say, and the established order will crumble.


C. C. Manning, Thomas Wright
Cameron Camille Manning, the daughter of Wayne and Jo Manning of Ponte Vedra  Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Thomas Knowlton Wright, the son of Thomas  H. Wright Jr. of Titusville, N.J., and Martha G. Otis of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
John C. Fowler performed the ceremony at St.
Agatha's Episcopal Church in DeFuniak Springs, Fla.
Ms.
Manning, 25, is keeping her name.
She is an account executive at Drenttel Doyle Partners, a graphic design firm in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is the president of the Jacksonville (Fla.) Landscape Company.
Her mother is an author of cookbooks.


Salon Mexico


The White Sox Saying Farewell to Sabo
The Chicago White Sox requested waivers on CHRIS SABO yesterday for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Sabo, who signed a one-year, $550,000 contract on April 10, had been designated for assignment on May 24, when the team signed JOHN KRUK.
Sabo, 33, batted .254 with one homer and eight runs batted in in 20 games.
He spent the 1994 season with Baltimore. (AP)


Elmsford Company Offers 'Good News' Revival
A BAD news revision of "Good News" was dubbed "the conspicuous demise of the  year" in the Burns Mantle Best Plays annual of 1974-75.
The show expired after 15 post-opening-night performances following 51 previews -- and a loss of $1.5 million, something of a record at the time.
Now the collegiate football musical, once a hit, has been restored to its kick-off years, the late 20's.
Those who insist that the real downer of the version in the 70's was a Depression-era resetting are not acknowledging the 30's as a high time for escapist musicals like "42d Street."


Ratfink Nation
Loose lips, it was once said, sink ships.
Not anymore.
All around, an outbreak of loose lips is infecting the country once renowned for its strong silent types, citizens who could be counted on to keep mum.
Consider:
*
A Roman Catholic priest in California revealed in a sermon what an individual said in confession, not naming the penitent but providing enough details so that some listeners could identify him.


Morro Bay
To the Editor: I spent a pleasant overnight at the Inn on Morro Bay several years ago, and it's one of the few places from which one cannot see those three  towering power-plant smokestacks mentioned in "Between a Rock and a Soft Place," by Lenny Kleinfeld, Feb. 26.
But nary is there a mention of the incredible roar  the plant makes 24 hours a day, a noise that dominates the coastal town.
That roar is one of the most salient features of Morro Bay.


Memories


ON THE TOWNS
Music


Little Loans Tailored to Tiny Ventures
On a recent humid day in Washington Heights, Daryl Young lumbered out of his  liquor delivery truck to buy his wife some lingerie.
"Better give me a size 10 -- a sexy one," Mr.
Young told the saleswoman, Jacobina Irizarry, one of several vendors who sell their wares on 175th Street between Broadway and Wadsworth Avenue.
Until last month, Ms.
Irizarry might not have been able to accommodate Mr.
Young's extra-large request.
But a small-business loan from the Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation has enabled her to afford to stock merchandise with designer labels instead of generic brands, in a variety of colors and sizes.
Ms.
Irizarry is among the first group of struggling entrepreneurs to benefit  from the development corporation's first-ever loan program, which grants small loans, from $400 to $4,000, to individuals in Washington Heights and Inwood.
"We have lots of people who need smaller amounts of money and find it impossible to  get loans from conventional sources," said Dennis Reeder, the corporation's executive director.


Does Bob Dole Fully Endorse 'Lion King'?
To the Editor:
I am terribly pleased that Senator Bob Dole has endorsed as "friendly" Walt Disney's animated film "The Lion King" (front page, June 1).
This film contrasts the sage administration of King Mufasa, whose sensible regulation of natural resources led to prosperity for his subjects and himself, with the evil incompetence of Scar, whose refusal to regulate led his subjects into hunger and ultimately drove himself to ruin.


It's Time to Mow (and Mulch) the Grass
THIS is the time of year when the lawn is glorious.
The turf is thick and green, a truly luxurious landscape carpet.
But, like it or not, this is also a growing season, when the lawn should be mowed twice a week.
This sort of recommendation often falls on deaf ears because the golf course, tennis court or other leisure pursuits beckon.


The Auction: How to Play the Game
ENTER Sotheby's.
The doorman, Richard Piccinich, in a cap and dark gray uniform, opens the heavy glass doors into the limestone building that holds treasure-troves from different worlds and a time past.
Check your coat.
Pick up a catalogue.
Smile politely to the well-bred young women clad head-to-toe in Ralph Lauren, pearls, and velvet headbands -- some hauling around 17th-century paintings under their arms.


Susan D. Morley And Toby Dewey
Susan Deborah Morley, a daughter of Roger Morley of Speracedes, France, and the late Juanita Morley, was married yesterday to Talbot Dewey Jr., a son of Priscilla Dewey Houghton of Cohasset, Mass., and the late Mr.
Dewey.
The Rev.
John B. Coburn, the retired Episcopal Bishop of the Diocese of Massachusetts, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
Dr.
Morley, 41, is keeping her name.
She is a psychologist at the Boston Regional Medical Center in Stoneham, Mass.
She graduated from Johnston College and received a master's degree in education from Beacon College and a doctorate  in clinical psychology from Antioch University.


Jody Buonanno, John M. Shue
Jody Maria Buonanno, a daughter of Martha and Bernard V. Buonanno Jr. of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to John Madison Shue, a son of Anne Harms of Shelter Island, L.I., and James Shue of Brooks, Me.
The Rev.
Robert Randall performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Peter's-by-the-Sea in Narragansett, R.I.
Mrs.
Shue and her husband, both 25, graduated from Harvard University.
She is the sales development manager at Sports Illustrated for Kids magazine in New York.
Her father is a partner at Edwards &amp; Angell, a law firm in Providence.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN Rita Dove Reads Her Work In a Sylvan Setting


Suzanne Martin, John T. Raffalli
Suzanne Margaret Martin, a daughter of Alyce and James Martin of Holliston, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Thomas Raffalli, a son of Josephine and Henri Raffalli of New Hyde Park, L.I.
The Rev.
William Haley officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Holliston.


The World;French Annoyance At the U.S. Comes In Several Courses
THE French have always been prickly allies good to have on your side in a fight but ready to pick one as well, particularly if you come from an Anglo-Saxon country like Britain or the United States.
These days, Britain is on France's side in the European-American disagreement over what to do about the war in Bosnia, but regarding the United States the French are in a disgruntled mood.


Why Americans Have a Vital Interest in Bosnia;What Serbs Want
To the Editor:
We are witnessing the fruits of a failed policy in Bosnia.
The way out is simple: Find a solution fair to the Serbs, and the killing can stop.


Amanda Schafer, Charles Brainerd
Amanda Hofheimer Schafer, a daughter of Diane H. Schafer and Oscar S. Schafer, both of New York, was married last evening in Brooklyn to Charles Corbin Brainerd, a son of Anne Eddison Brainerd of Cambridge, Mass., and Stanford H. Brainerd of New York.
Justice Harold Thompkins of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Museum.
Mrs.
Brainerd, 27, is studying for a master's degree in architecture at Columbia University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Cumberland Associates, a money management firm in New York.
Her mother is the chairman of the Rensselaerville Institute in Rensselaerville, N.Y.


Elder Flowers Lend Whisper of Spring
RECENTLY I tasted something I had not had in years: elder flowers.
They have  a wonderful, distinctive scent that took me back, like Proust's madeleine, to my childhood in Dorset, in the southwest of England.
Elder flowers are the blossoms of the elder tree, which grows wild in Northern Europe, and the first tiny white blossoms, appearing in May, signal spring's arrival.
In England we used them to  flavor rhubarb pie and gooseberry fool, desserts that date back to medieval times.
The elder flowers I tasted recently were in a concentrate made by Thorncroft, a company in Hampshire, England, from a recipe that dates back to Victorian times.
Thorncroft also makes a sparkling nonalcoholic elder flower drink, based  on a recipe for elder flower ale.
It has a delicate, lemony taste and makes a pleasant cooling summer drink.


Mural Maker
To the Editor:
In his article "A Flare for Fantasy: 'Miami Vice' Meets 42d Street" [May 21], Herbert Muschamp mentions firms competing for the 42d Street Development project, but he fails to identify the painter of the 10-story mural.
The mural was my last project for Arquitectonica, where I had been an intern for two years.
I was hired to design murals, textiles and furniture.


Sports of The Times;The Potential of Youth Hits Brown in 2 Ways
LARRY BROWN knows there are young ones who will try to take their steps faster than others.
He watched his own Friday afternoon at home.
His 11-month-old son -- "L. J." is what Larry and Shelly call Milton Lawrence Brown -- was stumbling about the house, the way the Orlando Magic would stumble  around Market Square Arena later that night in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference  finals.
Baby L. J. didn't quite walk Friday, and the youthful Magic never did make it a game against Brown's aroused Indiana Pacers.
Still, the Magic has home-court advantage for tonight's decisive seventh game, and who back in April  believed Orlando would have had this kind of playoff staying power?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FIRE From "A Journal of Love." The Unexpurgated Diary of Anais Nin, 1934-37.
Harcourt Brace, $25.


Find Real Lyme Data, Not Anecdotes
We would like to express our disappointment regarding "Lyme Disease Moves to  Populated Areas" [May 14] because it is replete with incorrect information, wrong impressions and several hearsay stories.
The statement about the sharp rise in Lyme disease cases in Suffolk County in 1994, which had been included in a press release by the State Health Department, is incorrect.
The 1,784 cases reported to our department in 1994 did not only include those patients who had their onset in 1994, but also those who had the first symptoms in prior years.
Of all cases reported in 1994, only 809 had their onset in 1994.
This figure is evidently lower than the incidence of 1,065  of 1993.
This means that in 1994 there was a decline in incidence.


Mexico's Bad Times Are Past. Or Are They?
AFTER several months of nothing but bad news for investors in Mexico, signs of a turnaround are beginning to appear.
But even as optimism rises, analysts emphasize that the hard times may not be over.
"In many ways the patient is out of the critical unit but should be under observation," said Jorge O. Mariscal, manager of the Latin American equity research group at Goldman, Sachs.


'West Side Story Suite'
A Robbins premiere at New York City Ballet's Spring Gala, May 18.


THE ANTI-MANDELA
Your May 14 cover depicts, on one side, Nelson Mandela, "a conciliator and an optimist," and, on the other, his estranged wife, Winnie, "a volcano of grudges  and vendettas."
Whatever one may think of Winnie Mandela, she is a woman with a political position and following.
Such American exponents of the grudge and the vendetta as Gingrich and Dole have yet to be described as volcanoes in your pages.
Women  and people of color are forces in political life, not forces of nature.


H.M.O. Doctors Benefit From Limited Patient Care
To the Editor:
Your article left out an important fact: at least some H.M.O.'s discourage comparisons with their competitors.


Return of the Dinosaurs
Movies like "Jurassic Park" are swell.
Virtual reality is swell.
Neither compares to the real thing, not when the real thing is a dinosaur's skeleton large as life and twice as ugly and brandishing a tail that could knock down a brownstone or two.
Nor do they compare to reaching out a timid finger and touching a fang-like tooth that has a serrated edge and belonged to a relative of the big guy in the  center of the gallery -- the one whose mouth is sporting what looks like several sets of steak knives.


STARING INTO THE HEART OF THE HEART OF DARKNESS
IN WHICH SATAN MAKES A BEAUTIFUL PRESENTATION


Century-Old Chain of Tutoring
NOT a cough, whisper or shuffle could be heard when Andrew Armstrong, a 21-year-old pianist with a trail of awards, played works by Chopin recently at the Hoff-Barthelson Music School here.
Among the listeners in the rapt audience  was Garrick Ohlsson, the Chopin master who is marking his 25th anniversary as a  Gold Medal winner in the International Chopin Competition with an intensive series of concerts.
Mr.
Armstrong recently won the Silver Medal and the Best Concerto Award at the American Chopin Competition in Miami and will participate in the International Competition in Warsaw in October.
Although he has appeared in recitals worldwide -- and earned much of the money for tuition at Columbia University, where he will be a senior, by winning piano prizes -- this will be his first contest abroad.
To help him prepare, Mr.
Ohlsson was invited to conduct a master class in Chopin at Hoff-Barthelson with Mr.
Armstrong as the guest artist.
The two musicians share ties to Westchester County: Mr.
Ohlsson grew up in White Plains and attended the Westchester Conservatory of Music there before going to the Juilliard School; Mr.
Armstrong, a Connecticut native, studied at Hoff-Barthelson with Miyoko Nakaya Lotto, who will accompany him to Warsaw.


Schott Cleared in a Wrongful Firing Suit
The Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, has been found innocent in a wrongful firing suit that resulted in disciplinary action against her by major league baseball.
Schott was sued by the former Reds controller TIM SABO, who alleged that he was fired in retaliation for providing testimony detrimental to  Schott in a lawsuit by minority owners.
Schott contended that she fired Sabo, who was controller from 1989-91, because of unsatisfactory job performance.
A Hamilton County Common Pleas Court jury ruled on Friday that the firing was lawful and that Schott was not liable for back pay and punitive damages sought by Sabo.


Geese Cause Fire in Jet Landing at J.F.K.
An Air France Concorde arriving at Kennedy International Airport yesterday morning caught fire after two of its four engines sucked in a number of birds, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.
No one was injured, the plane landed safely, and evacuation measures were not necessary, the spokesman, Mark Marchese, said.


Working Fifi: The Secrets of a High-End Auctioneer
A skillful auction is theater, orchestrated to make you want to spend.
And it is done most skillfully at the glamorous high end.
Meet Christopher Burge, the star auctioneer and president of Christie's in New York, a polished British gentleman with a sense of humor about his craft.
Consignor often insist that his participation is written into the contract.


May 28 - June 3: Affirmative Action;The Race to Win Over The Angry White Male
Last week, in the boldest move he has made yet in his quest to win the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California latched determinedly onto the issue of affirmative action, ordering state bureaucrats to end all California programs not specifically mandated by law or court decree.
Recent polls indicate that many Americans believe too much hiring and promoting is done on the basis of race and sex rather than merit.
And some political pundits predict that affirmative action will be the mother of all wedge issues in next year's election.


A Film Library To Rival Great Art
The film collection at the Museum of Modern Art turns 60, May 31.


The Debate on Diversity in California Shifts
The photograph in Sproul Hall of the 10 Cal "yell leaders" from the early 1960's, in their Bermuda shorts and letter sweaters, leaps out like an artifact  from an ancient civilization.
They are all fresh-faced, and in a way that is unimaginable now, they are all white.
But here on the flagship campus of the University of California system, the epicenter of the affirmative-action debate in higher education today, the popular arguments that often frame the debate in images of black versus white seem as out of date as the ducktails and bouffant hairdos of those 60's cheerleaders.


Alyson B. Gardner, Robert S. Kiesel
Alyson Brooke Gardner, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Gardner of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last evening to Robert Scott Kiesel, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Kiesel of Allentown, Pa.
Cantor Jerry Heller officiated at the Fenway Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Stoner, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gardner Kiesel, 25, is a bond trader at M. J. Whitman, a securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is an orthodontist in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Fearing for Desert, a City Restricts Mountain Bikes
A decade ago, this mining town of 5,000 was rescued from economic collapse by mountain bikers who found gold in the miles of rugged trails in the surrounding  rocky desert.
But in recent years, residents and the managers of public lands have come to regard mountain bikes as running roughshod over their land.
So, Moab is getting tough.
"Something needed to be done," Clark Minson, an assistant manager at Kaibab Bikes, said of the restrictions imposed this spring.
"This is where we live. We  didn't want to see people trashing our home."


Taking Power in Their Own Hands. And Fists.
ROBERTA SCHINE remembers the exact moment she first had the urge to do karate.
It was 1970, and Ms.
Schine, a 26-year-old anti-war activist walking through  the streets of New York, was handed a pamphlet called "A Journal of Female Liberation Vol. 2." As she flipped through it, she noticed a list of do's and don'ts for the liberated female.
"I don't remember anything else on the page," said Ms.
Schine, "But I remember 'DO KARATE.' "


An Upward Spiral
That dizzying moment when fashion and design come full circle


A German Master Takes an Epic Journey
IT'S ALWAYS STARTLING TO SEE AN artist's mind turned inside out, especially when the mind is as famously rigorous and enigmatic as that of the German painter Gerhard Richter.
Such is the acrobatic feat brought off by Mr.
Richter's "Atlas," seen in an extraordinary show at the Dia Center for the Arts.
Accumulated over the past three decades, and still very much in progress, "Atlas" might be described as the post-modern artist's notebook par excellence.
Its pencil is the camera; its basic mark is the photograph, usually taken by the artist himself, although scavenged news photos, postcards, snapshots and a few traditional drawings and sketches figure in as well.
These sundry images are mounted on panels singly or in grids of up to 20.
At Dia, the framed panels are  hung double and close together, covering the walls of several large galleries with a nearly continuous 680-foot-long band of images, about 3,800 in all. (The  show closes June 24 but reopens on Sept. 14, after Dia's summer hiatus.)


Ms. Saint-Louis, Mr. Bradley
Dominique Saint-Louis and Kirby John Bradley, television producers in New York, were married yesterday at the Church of the Resurrection in New York.
The  Rev.
Allan Bevier Warren 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Ms.
Saint-Louis, 28, is keeping her name.
She is an associate producer at the NBC-TV program "Dateline NBC." She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Janine Denizard Saint-Louis of Westwood, Mass., and the late Pierre Saint-Louis.
The bride's mother is the creative arts and crafts instructor for the primary school at the Dedham (Mass.) Country Day School.
She  is also a designer of wedding veils and headpieces.


Jane Read Martin, Douglas McGrath
Jane Read Martin, a children's book author, and Douglas Geoffrey McGrath, a contributing editor at The New Republic, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Canon John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Church.
The bride, 37, is a co-author of "Everybody Really Hates Me," published by HarperCollins.
She was the personal assistant to Woody Allen on nine of his films and was an associate producer of his movie "Alice."


Republicans Scrutinize Nonprofit Groups That Get Federal Money
Republicans in Congress are taking a new look at charities and other nonprofit groups that have flourished with Federal grants dispensed during decades when Democrats ruled Capitol Hill.
They are questioning whether the services of such groups are even desired by  a Republican majority that stresses self reliance and conservative values.


May 28 - June 3;  The Pelted Kind
It is the genetic version of a lost and retrieved memory, a souvenir of our shaggy roots plucked from evolution's locket.
When scientists last week announced the discovery of a mutation in human beings that causes hair to grow luxuriously like a pelt across much of the body, covering torso, cheeks, forehead, nose and eyelids, the scientific journal where the paper appeared couldn't help indulging in a bit of sensationalism.
Like carnival barkers, the editors of Nature Genetics in their press release said that patients with the rare condition bore "an uncanny resemblance to a werewolf."


May 28 - June 3;She's Fed Up to Here


RESULTS PLUS
RUGBY


Brooklyn Confidential


Returning to View, Paintings With Stories Larger Than Life
THE small but powerful 1926 painting, a patriotic allegory by James Daugherty over a second-floor fireplace at the Westport Y.M.C.A., contains a motto, "We will strive increasingly to quicken the public sense of civic duty."
John Solum, of Westport, has taken those words to heart, making it his crusade to bring public attention to the works of Mr.
Daugherty, a Connecticut artist whose paintings, created for public spaces, have in many cases been neglected and lost.
Thanks to Mr.
Solum, one of those works, which was long forgotten and hidden from view, under layers of industrial paint, at a school in Darien, has been rescued.


Milwaukee
Long before it acquired the nickname Brew Town, Milwaukee was called Cream City.
The name arose from the first bricks produced here in the middle of the last century.
The local clay was low in iron, so the bricks turned out creamy white instead of red.
The disappointed brickmakers sold them anyway, and everything from tanneries and packing plants to brewers' mansions were built of  the distinctive brick.
Soon someone likened the effect to that of Italian marble, and demand for Milwaukee brick began to come from as far away as Germany, not to mention Chicago and New York.
Now many buildings made of the local brick have been torn down; others are sullied by pollution.
The elegant old streets of the East Side and Yankee Hill still display a few of the pretty white buildings -- like the All Saints Episcopal Cathedral complex in the 800 block of East Juneau Avenue -- but Cream  City is no more.
Then again, neither is Brew Town.
Whereas there were 25 breweries here in 1856, today there are but three: the two big ones, Pabst and Miller, and a microbrewery called Sprecher.


Building a Business-Friendly New York
AMBASSADOR is the title that most of his associates still use when speaking about Charles A. Gargano, in deference to his three-year posting to the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago during the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
But the 59-year-old Republican fundraiser and former Long Island contractor added a string of other important titles to his name this year: chairman and chief executive of the New York State Urban Development Corporation, commissioner of the New York State Department of Economic Development and vice chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Steinbrenner to Meet With Strawberry
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, confirmed yesterday that he planned  to meet with Darryl Strawberry soon to discuss the troubled outfielder's potential return to baseball, possibly with the Yankees.
Steinbrenner characterized the impending meeting as more of an olive branch to help the troubled Strawberry than an attempt to sign him.
When and where the meeting will take place is undetermined, though Steinbrenner said it would have to occur sometime after this week at a place he already has business meetings scheduled.


Sued and Sentenced, Self-Help Counselor May Find She Needs HelpHerself
Joyce Hartwell believes in rehabilitation and self-help: she runs a three-building strip in the East Village that sponsors scores of recovery-group  meetings, drug-free parties, a referral center and a shelter.
But a civil court judge thinks she should have paid attention to rehabilitating her buildings, too, and he has sentenced her to 30 days at Rikers Island for contempt of court in refusing to take care of problems that arose from more than $30,000 in unpaid utility bills.


Rosemary Lewis, Eric Birkholz
Rosemary Eleanor Lewis, a daughter of Peter A. Lewis of New York and the late Rachel Benet Lewis and a stepdaughter of Elaine K. Lewis, was married yesterday  to Eric Lawrence Birkholz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence C. Birkholz of Virginia Beach, Va.
Judge Louis J. Ohlig of the Suffolk County District Court in Central Islip, L.I., officiated at Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis's house in East Quogue, L.I.
Mrs.
Lewis-Birkholz is a writer in Tucson, Ariz.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in fiction from American University.
Her father is a limited managing director in Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
In 1968 and 1969, he was an assistant director of the United States Bureau of the Budget.


Harry N. Rosenfield Dies at 83; Resettled Refugees After War
Harry N. Rosenfield, who helped create the school lunch program in 1946 and then supervised the resettlement of European refugees in the United States, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 83.
In 1946, as the chief assistant to the Administrator of the Federal Security  Agency, a precursor of the Department of Health and Human Services, Mr.
Rosenfield helped draft the legislation that created the school lunch program.


FORWARD TO THE PAST
With Speaker Newt Gingrich and his Republican allies in the House set to dismantle as much of the Federal Government as they can, we seem to be watching  the twilight of the nation-state.
A wave of change is sweeping across national governments worldwide.
Regional governments everywhere, and state governments in the United States, will gain in strength relative to federal units as voters keep power closer to home.
And international institutions like the European Union, the International Monetary Fund and the newly established World Trade Organization will, with the help of market forces, erode national sovereignty from above.
Nations are being overwhelmed by markets.
Transnational corporations have no  allegiance to any government and sail the seas of the global economy under no flag but their own.
An international culture is taking shape.
Young people everywhere listen to the same music, wear the same clothes, watch the same movies.
At the level of elites, professional communities of knowledge know no national boundaries; Russian, American and Swiss physicists have more in common  with each other than with their lay neighbors.


Scientist Should Stop Being an Apologist
I think it is important for your readers ["Views Conflict on Pesticides," April 23] to know that Dr.
Bruce Ames has made a career as an apologist for the chemical industry, minimizing the very real health concerns of chemical exposure in general and pesticides in particular.
Dr.
Ames offers no evidence to support  his claims and ignores the wide body of research which points to serious health  concerns surrounding pesticides.
Dr.
Ames glibly dismisses concerns about increasing exposures to synthetic carcinogens by recommending that people should simply, "Eat your veggies and don't sleep around too much; don't smoke and you'll do fine."


Ready for Another Unflattering Closeup
SAY WHAT YOU WILL ABOUT BROADWAY, it still knows how to put on a show appropriate to the occasion.
If you have any doubt, tune in at 9 tonight when CBS will telecast the 49th annual Tony Awards from the stage of the Minskoff Theater, where Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Sunset Boulevard" is in residence.
I'm not talking about the obligatory emcees, performers, presenters and nominees, who will make jokes, accept prizes, shed tears and thank agents.
Nor about the excerpts from this year's nominated shows and the trailers for next year's hopefuls that will separate the standing ovations.
Something a little more subtle will be apparent tonight.


Julia Adler Foshko, 97, the Last Of a Stage Family Generation
Julia Adler Foshko, the last surviving member of a generation of Adlers who began their theatrical careers on stage with their parents in the Yiddish theater, died yesterday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
She was 97 and  had been a resident of the Actors Fund Home in Englewood for many years.
Although she was eventually eclipsed by her younger siblings, Stella and Luther, Miss Adler, the middle of the five children of Jacob and Sarah Adler, the founding stars of the American Yiddish theater, had her moments in the spotlight.


Randi S. Kramer, Andrew W. Siegel
Randi Susan Kramer, a daughter of Phyllis and Stuart Kramer of Brookville, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Warren Siegel, the son of Adele Siegel  and Bernard M. Siegel, both of New York.
Cantor Bernard Fitch officiated at Oheka Castle, a catering establishment in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
Mrs.
Siegel, 27, and her husband, 32, are lawyers in New York.
They received their law degrees from Brooklyn Law School.
The bride is a graduate of the University of Michigan.
The bridegroom graduated from Tulane University.


NJN: High Energy, Low Ratings, Little Cash
AT a local commercial station, the news director will say, 'Give me the pictures, and we'll do a story around it,' " said Michael Fairhurst, the news director at New Jersey Network. "We say, 'Give us issues, and we'll do a story around it.' "
In a state where television coverage almost invariably originates somewhere else and tends toward the hit-or-miss, the state-financed public television network -- created in 1971 expressly to provide New Jersey programs -- is a sober and comprehensive exception.


Re: Memorable Memos We'd Like to Forget
WINES for the summer outing.
The disposal of plastic spoons.
The dangers of rewarding perfect job attendance.
When The New York Times asked readers for examples of notable business memos that had come across their desks, no topic seemed off limits.
There are even memos on memos -- as the last of this selection from readers shows.
Lawyers have often been accused of writing dense, cold, unfathomable prose.
But such stereotyping is put to the lie by the clarity, passion and lyricism of  this memo from Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the law firm.


Peaks and Valleys in an Old Roadhouse
CUCINA'S full name is North Fork House Cucina.
But East End diners who do not know that will still be instantly aware that they are not in the Hamptons.
North Fork dining spots are generally less expensive, sophisticated and predictable than those to the south.
Cucina fits the pattern.
This Greenport newcomer has replaced Porky's, a 45-year institution.
Much of  the old look is intact.
The barroom, a classic with a wraparound mahogany bar dating from 1949, is a step back into another era.
The dining room, wood-paneled with flagstone fireplaces, is reminiscent of 1950's recreation rooms.


CRIME
Weep, cruel world, for Beansy Rutolo, a humble foot soldier in a Brooklyn mob who gets whacked on the first page of PIGTOWN (Crown, $23), William J. Caunitz's savvy new police procedural and his best book since "One Police Plaza" in 1984.
As one cynical detective puts it: "Beansy Rutolo is a five-and-dime hit. Solving gay and racially motivated hits are what make careers today, not wise guys."
Lieut.
Matthew Stuart, who owes Beansy from the old days, takes on the rinky-dink case, which plumps up like some poisonous fruit to contain every kind of crime from interstate drug trafficking and international money laundering to  bloody gang wars in Brooklyn and rank corruption throughout the police fraternity.
"You latched on to one helluva caper," a shaken colleague tells Stuart.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PACKWOOD The Public and Private Life From Acclaim to Outrage.
By Mark Kirchmeier.
HarperCollins West, $20.


Woman Ranks First In West Point Class
For the first time in the United States Military Academy's 193-year history,  a woman was named valedictorian of the graduating class.
The woman, Second Lieut.
Rebecca E. Marier, 21, of New Orleans, led the 988 members of her class in the school's three programs -- military, academic and physical.


Unsafe Abortions Become a Big Problem in Kenya
When she found out that she was pregnant, Atieno, 18, followed her school friends' advice.
She tried swallowing laundry detergent, herbal concoctions and  various pills, but nothing she tried induced an abortion.
When she was six months pregnant, she could no longer hide her condition from the high school authorities, and they threatened to expell her.
Atieno, a tall,  slim young woman who spoke on condition that her full name not be used, said she became desperate for an abortion.
She gathered all the pills she could find and  swallowed them: 12 aspirin, 6 painkillers and 4 capsules that she said a friend  had given her.


A Cherished Memory: Banishing Veronica
On the evening after Memorial Day, the Bayside Hills Civic Association convened to commemorate a victory in a battle that raged on its own streets 20 years ago.
The combatants were the residents on and around 213th Street and 56th Avenue, and the disciples of Veronica Lueken, a Long Island housewife who in 1970 announced that she saw visions of the Virgin Mary on the grounds of St.
Robert Bellarmine Church and was receiving divine messages from the Virgin and Jesus Christ.
Thousands of pilgrims flocked to what was previously a quiet neighborhood of one-family, Tudor-style homes, neighborhood residents recalled.


Some Light Summer Reading: Human Failings, Moral Decline
THE business best-seller list has settled into summer somnolence, with few changes since last month.
The naughty American public continues to spend no small portion of its ever-flattening wages seeking wisdom between the covers.
The hard covers, that is, of "The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success," which remains at No. 1.
Sneaking into the fray, at No. 14, is John Allen Paulos's latest contribution to his innumeracy oeuvre, "A Mathematician Looks at the Newspaper"  (Basic Books, $18), in which the author continues to encourage readers to beat up on themselves for having skipped out on higher math.
It is a rich, but as the current book shows, exhaustible topic.


Felicia Yun Gin Paik, Ty Yong Kim
Felicia Yun Gin Paik, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesun Paik of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Ty Yong Kim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew B. Kim of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride, who is 28 and is keeping her name, is a reporter at Dow Jones News Service in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is the executive vice president of Sakura Bank in New York and vice chairman of Manufacturers Bank in Los Angeles.


Knowledge Is Power. It's Also Smart Business.
AS the recent trade dispute with China over copyright protection for intellectual capital shows, competitiveness, more than ever, depends upon ideas.
This is not just true for high-tech businesses like computers, software and biotech.
It is also true of middle-tech fields like manufacturing.
Even humdrum  businesses, like shipping and distribution, compete on the basis of their systems rather than their technologies, which are increasingly generic and increasingly available.
Systems are not things; they are the applications of ideas.


50 Years of Remembering
To the Editor:
Samuel Hynes's essay "So Many Men, So Many Wars: 50 Years of Remembering World War II" (April 30) compels me to ask if there are any memoirs by women who served valiantly in hospitals for our fallen soldiers.


A Time-Tested Formula In a New Steak House
IN 1965, Ruth Fertel, a divorced mother of two, took out an $18,000 mortgage  on her house and used the money to buy the 22-seat Chris Steak House in New Orleans.
Today there are 46 Ruth's Chris Steak Houses, in the United States including Puerto Rico, Mexico and Taipei.
The newest of the casually elegant spots, which attract the expense-account crowd, as well as serious steak eaters  of all sorts, opens on the Island this month.
Its owner, Marcia Brown, who has operated Ruth's Chris Steak House in Philadelphia for seven years, said she expected Long Islanders to consume 125,000 steaks in the next year at her $1.5 million restaurant in the EAB Building at 699 Old Country Road in Garden City (222-0220).
She should know.
As  Ruth Fertel's banker in the early days of Ruth's Chris Steak Houses, she observed the growing chain from the inside, liked what she saw and bought in by  optioning the Philadelphia and Long Island markets.


Cigar and Winning Go Together Again
Was that the Horse of the Year coasting down the homestretch at Suffolk Downs today en route to winning the Massachusetts Handicap by four lengths?
It was Cigar, winning $150,000 in first-place money plus $500,000 in bonus money, winning his eighth straight race and winning the inside track on the title that went to Holy Bull last year.


Who Founded Art Academy


Shake Up the Cup
To the Sports Editor:
Let's get back to basic sailing in the America's Cup. Here's how.


Ilaria Quadrani, Stephane Dujarric
Ilaria Skouras Quadrani, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Federico Quadrani of Rome and New York, was married last Monday to Stephane Dujarric de la Riviere, a son  of Anka M. Begley of New York and Francois Dujarric de la Riviere of Paris.
Msgr.
Robert Charlebois performed the ceremony at the church of San Pietro in Montorio in Rome.
Mrs.
Dujarric, 24, is a researcher at the Kate Gansz Company, an art dealer in London.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in art history from New York University.
Her parents own the Odyssia Gallery in New York.


Meghan Walsh, George C. Knight
Meghan Maureen Walsh, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis X. Walsh of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to George Craig Knight, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Knight Jr., also of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan  performed the ceremony at St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Knight, 27, graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in education last month from Manhattanville College.
Her father, an internist and nephrologist, is chief of staff at Greenwich Hospital and an associate clinical professor of medicine at Yale University.


David Breslow, 78, Plastics Researcher
David S. Breslow, an industrial chemist whose research advanced the development of plastics, died on May 26 at Christiana Hospital in Newark, Del.
He was 78 and lived in Wilmington, Del.
Dr.
Breslow began experimenting with polymers, the long-chain molecules that  are the building blocks for thousands of materials, just after World War II.
His work helped to develop catalysts that produced the chemical reactions from which polyethylene and polypropylene resulted.
The research also focused on how to stabilize the materials so they could be used in the mass production of a vast array of consumer products.


Just Say It Isn't So
To the Editor:
Film makers must be free to depart from strict truth if their works are to entertain, to expose, as Caryn James puts it, "deeper knowledge" or to challenge "accepted views." But there is a way film makers could be more truthful without  interfering with these aims: When a historical film clearly departs from established fact, that information could be explicitly noted in the final credits, after the movie is over.
JONATHAN E. ADLER Glen Ridge, N.J.


Elder Flowers Lend Whisper of Spring
RECENTLY I tasted something I had not had in years: elder flowers.
They have  a wonderful, distinctive scent that took me back, like Proust's madeleine, to my childhood in Dorset, in the southwest of England.
Elder flowers are the blossoms of the elder tree, which grows wild in Northern Europe, and the first tiny white blossoms, appearing in May, signal spring's arrival.
In England we used them to  flavor rhubarb pie and gooseberry fool, desserts that date back to medieval times.
The elder flowers I tasted recently were in a concentrate made by Thorncroft, a company in Hampshire, England, from a recipe that dates back to Victorian times.
Thorncroft also makes a sparkling nonalcoholic elder flower drink, based  on a recipe for elder flower ale.
It has a delicate, lemony taste and makes a pleasant cooling summer drink.


Fugitive From a Tour Group
IT sounded good.
A 12-day tour of Turkey organized by a teacher of art history at a Westchester college.
Admittedly, I'd never been on a tour before.
But several people I knew had.
If they'd been willing to travel that way, why not me?
In a moment of madness I forgot that I am, when traveling, the quintessential dawdler, a lover of byways and detours, a philistine who thinks one can learn as much about a foreign country from a produce market as from a museum, and an ardent eater who believes that lunch should take at least an hour and dinner two, during which time the utensils used for the first course, especially if it  has been fishy or greasy, should be changed.
Wanting to see Turkey and laboring  under the widely held but, as it turned out, false belief that it isn't a country in which one can wander on one's own, I allowed myself to lose sight of  my predilections, and signed on for the tour.


Why Americans Have a Vital Interest in Bosnia;Muslims and Christians
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal in "Why Only Bosnia?" (column, May 30) characterizes the conflict as a war between "Serbian Muslims" and "Serbian Christians." This dichotomy is itself a figment of Serb nationalist mythology, to represent the Serbs as defenders of Western civilization against Oriental barbarism.
It is preposterous on at least four counts.


Sandhill Crane Season
If it's November, those must be sandhill cranes.
That's the essence of a book about northern California by Bill McMillon, the newest in the "Seasonal Guide to the Natural Year" series by Fulcrum Publishing in Golden, Colo.
The book breaks  down the year into months, and gives tips on when and where to go to see, for example, migrating whales.
A reader who wants to see sandhill cranes learns that they winter in the state's Central Valley, and that the best place to find them  is in the Merced National Wildlife Refuge.
The book costs $15.95 in major bookstores; it can also be ordered by calling (800) 992-2908.


Helene Rassias, William Miles
Helene Catherine Rassias, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Rassias of Norwich, Vt., was married yesterday to William Carpenter Miles, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Miles of Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
Karen Sheldon, an Episcopal priest, officiated in the Rollins Chapel at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.
Mrs.
Rassias-Miles is the founder of the Rassias Language Programs Abroad, an instruction program for high school students in France and Spain, based in Hanover.
She graduated from Amherst College.
Mr.
Miles is the founder of Odyssey Adventures, a company in Hanover that conducts European bicycle tours for high school students.
He graduated from Bowdoin College.


Bargain Prices in Bonds, Again
SOMETIMES opportunity knocks twice.
When rising interest rates felled the bond market last year, investors were able to snap up some municipal bond funds  at bargain prices.
Now, uncertainty in the municipal market -- induced by talk of a flat tax, debate about where rates are headed and Orange County's failure so far to make good on its debt -- has conspired to push the prices down again.
The best deals can be found in closed-end funds, which issue a set number of  shares and trade on stock exchanges.
Unlike their more plentiful open-end cousins, these funds sell at prices that don't always reflect the value of their underlying assets.


U.S. Doctor Supports Mitchell on Injury
KEVIN MITCHELL has gained support from an American doctor in his dispute with his Japanese employers over the seriousness of a knee injury.
JOE SROBA, Mitchell's agent, said yesterday that Dr.
RON KVITNI of the Jobe Clinic in California found that the outfielder has cartilage damage in his right knee that requires medication and three weeks of rehabilitation.
Kvitni, who examined Mitchell last week, said the knee should be re-evaluated then and did not rule out surgery, Sroba said.
He said Mitchell was told in Japan that he had minor ligament tears that should not prevent him from playing.
The dispute became so heated that Mitchell left Japan to seek a second opinion without permission from the company that owns the team.
The Hawks have accused Mitchell of breaching his $4.5 million contract, but Sroba said the Hawks have breached it by their actions.
The team suspended Mitchell without pay for two weeks, from May 25-June 8, Sroba said, because he had been critical of the club.


Double Duty, Royal Couple And Double Meanings
Uptown -- He has waited backstage in kitchens before performances.
He has been on the David Letterman show and "Sesame Street." He once filled in the time on stage when a string on his violin broke by doing standup comedy.
But May 31 was the first time that the jovial Itzhak Perlman would be playing two benefits  back to back.
"This is what we call having the benefit blues," Mr.
Perlman was saying backstage at Avery Fisher Hall just before he was to perform with the trumpeter  Wynton Marsalis, to benefit the programs of Jazz at Lincoln Center.
"All you need to make this situation more hectic is a dinner."


H.M.O. Doctors Benefit From Limited Patient Care
To the Editor:
I despair that the pay-or-die American "health care" system is likely to change only for the worse.


Checkbook Justice or Free Speech?
Can the jurors in the O. J. Simpson case, or any other criminal trial, be prevented from selling their personal stories to publishers and broadcasters?
The question has hovered around the Los Angeles murder trial for months.
It has  become more acute as the jury shrinks and Judge Lance Ito dismisses jurors who seem to flirt with the idea of wealth and fame from their service.
The courts are already being called upon to rule in this potential conflict between the defendant's right to a fair trial and the jurors' right to free speech and press.
But a few answers can be offered now.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Internal Revenue Service's efforts to hold a Philadelphia woman liable for her brother's unpaid Federal income tax on the proceeds from a robbery misstated the whereabouts of their father, Salvatore Merlino, whom the authorities have identified as a member of organized crime.
He is not in a witness protection program; he is in a state prison in Pennsylvania.


THE WAR AND THE LAW
I was as grieved as Max Frankel that Nuremberg glossed over Stalin's crimes like the Katyn Forest murders (Word &amp; Image: "The War and the Law," May 7).
But  if we await perfect justice, none will ever be meted out.
Until a world government is established with a legislature and judiciary, what would Frankel want Allied powers in World War II or the United Nations today to do with captured monsters?
Shoot them on the spot?
Turn them loose?
Try them by set rules in an open court?


How Many Justices?
To the Editor:
In the course of defending the Supreme Court's decision not to hear the Maryland scholarship case, Emil G. Michael (letter, May 31) asserts that the votes of three Justices are necessary to grant certiorari.
In fact, under the Court's longstanding practice, four Justices must concur in the decision to review a case.


Quick Draw Lotto Game Is Passed in Budget Bill
Although lawmakers in both parties have strongly opposed it in the past, a rapid-fire state lottery game to be installed in bars, restaurants, bowling alleys and other gathering places was included in the budget bills passed on Friday night.
The game, called Quick Draw, has faced strong criticism from many lawmakers who fear that players, their judgment dulled by drinking, could lose too much money too quickly because of the fast pace of the drawings.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


A Touch of Fine Art In the Art Poster
THAT art transcends national barriers does not make the sight of British and  Japanese artists exhibiting here under the same roof any less remarkable.
The British contribution consists of Shell Oil posters from the 1930's; that from Japan is contemporary work in -- not on -- paper produced by sculptors specializing in that medium.
As to the roof, it belongs to the Monmouth Museum at Brookdale Community College.
The posters come from the collection of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis Lee Smith (Mr. Smith is a museum trustee) and are uniform in horizontal format and size, 30 inches by 45 inches.
Some depict the scenery awaiting automobiles fueled by Shell petroleum; others illustrate concepts like superior quality -- of Shell products, of the people who use them and so on.


In Essex and Hudson Races, the Democrats Are Battling . . . AmongThemselves
Hudson County political lore tells us that Frank Hague, the late Democratic boss, once elected an inept candidate for county sheriff by running him under the slogan "He was good to his mother."
That was during the heyday of the powerful urban Democratic machines, when organization and patronage rather than an ideological upper hand produced majorities large enough to overcome Republican strength in the suburbs.
In recent decades, though, and as the state as a whole has fallen under Republican  domination, the urban organizations have tended to get by more on reputation and habit than on efficiency.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Commerce Department releases housing completions for April.
In March, completions increased 9.8 percent, but declined 9.1 percent in February.


C. A. Washington J. S. Carter
Cheryl Ann Washington, a reporter on "Good Day New York" on WNYW-TV, was married yesterday to Jerald Shirley Carter, an Associate Village Justice in Hempstead, L.I., and a partner in Carter &amp; Ervin, a law firm there.
The Rev.
Dr.
Calvin O. Butts 3d performed the ceremony at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York.
The bride graduated from Douglass College.
She is the daughter of Bertha and  Thomas Washington Sr. of Ocala, Fla.
Her father retired as a senior chemical operator at Beecham Pharmaceuticals in Piscataway, N.J.
Her mother, also retired, was the director of statistical service for the Boy Scouts of America in North Brunswick, N.J.


Cynthia Ann Lee, Stephen Polly
Cynthia Ann Lee, a daughter of Dorothy and Raymond Lee of Tinton Falls, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Polly, a son of Angela and Joseph Polly of Great Kills, S.I.
The Rev.
Victor J. Buebendorf officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary in Rosebank, S.I.
The bride is a staff lawyer in the juvenile rights division of the Legal Aid  Society in New York.
She graduated from Queens College and received her law degree from New York University.


New Stock, Familiar Ring, Ring
INVESTORS who are wary of the technology revolution may be hard pressed to find an initial public offering to their liking these days.
Most of the companies going public seem to require a Ph.D. in physics to understand and a trust fund to pay for, given that these tech darlings often double in price in the first day of trading.
But there's relief on the way, and it is right on the other end of the telephone.
The nontechnology offering, expected sometime this week, comes from the Sitel Corporation, one of the nation's largest independent telemarketers.
You may have already heard from one of the company's 3,400 representatives, interrupting your dinner on Sunday night to try to sell you an insurance policy  or a magazine subscription.
Located in Omaha, the country's telemarketing capital, and filled with pleasant, accentless Midwesterners manning the phones,  Sitel handles roughly 10 million calls a month and, like many telemarketers, its businesses include not just solicitations but also product service and customer  support.


Along the Sound, Signs of Success
AFTER a 30-year absence, harbor seals are frolicking again in Long Island Sound, which is some of the best news fishermen and environmentalists have received in recent years.
The fishermen believe the seals have returned because  the fish the seals feed on are also thriving.
The environmentalists, agreeing with that premise, also observe that some of their efforts to restore water quality may finally be paying off.
There is yet more welcome news.
Oyster fishermen are finding purple sea urchins in their catches, another sign that water quality is improving.
And Westchester County officials announced last week that the two public beaches along the Sound, which opened for the season over the Memorial Day weekend, have been untouched by pollution for more than two years.


Greta M. Eustace, G. F. Sullivan 2d
Greta Martha Eustace, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Francis Eustace 3d of Washington, was married there yesterday to Gregory Francis Sullivan 2d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sullivan of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Luther D. Miller Jr.  performed the ceremony, in which Msgr.
William C. Harms participated, at St.
David's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 24, is an advertising coordinator at Art News magazine in New  York.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father is the chairman of the navigation systems division of California Microwave, a communications equipment manufacturer in Sunnyvale, Calif.


Why Be A Junior Partner to Trump?
It was back in 1987, when Donald Trump bought voting control of Resorts International from the company's founding family, that public shareholders got a taste of what it is like to own a stake in a casino run by Donald Trump.
The public holders -- who owned most of the shares but a small minority of the votes -- soon came to rue the day they ever heard of Mr.
Trump.
The public shares traded for around $60 when Mr.
Trump got control; a few months later he offered to buy them for $15, and might have been able to do it had Merv Griffin  not intervened.
After a long fight, the public shareholders got out for $36, little more than half the value when Mr.
Trump appeared on the scene.


'What's The Big Deal?'
To the Editor:
I want to thank Michael Cunningham for his honest and sincere essay "Just Your Ordinary (Gay) Guy" [May 7].
We who are gay are not simply gay people living in a straight world.
We are men and women who date, have relationships, have a religious background, hold jobs and go through life -- just like everyone else in this world.
What's the big deal?


Boy, 3, Is Dragged By a Train in Bronx
A 3-year-old boy has been released from the hospital after being dragged about 20 feet by a subway train as it pulled out of a Bronx station, transit officials said.
The boy, who was not identified, was aboard the last car of a northbound D train with his mother about 8:15 P.M. on Friday at the 182d Street station when  his arm was caught in the closing door.
A passenger pulled the emergency brake cord and stopped the train, said Robert Slovak, a spokesman for the Transit Authority.


The Joy of Renouncing Love for Life's Details
THERE IS SOME WEIRD COSMIC BALANCE IN the fact that one of the all-time best-selling novels begins with one of the all-time worst poetic images: "There  are songs that come free from the blue-eyed grass." Blue-eyed grass?
That's how  Robert James Waller starts "The Bridges of Madison County," and we could sit around for a long time wondering just what that means. (Is blue-eyed grass more  sensitive than hazel-eyed grass?) But let's not.
Mr.
Waller's jabberwocky prose is surely not the secret of his book's bizarre success.
Still, any novel that has been on the best-seller list for nearly three years has hit some cultural nerve.
Oddly, the romantic story in "Bridges" is not what  hits that nerve, either.
The novel lures readers with its tale of the passionate four-day love affair between Francesca Johnson, a lonely farm wife, and Robert Kincaid, a lone-wolf photographer.
But under this romantic gloss lurks the book's buried message, and the key to its immense popularity: "The Bridges of Madison County" is really about the nobility of living an ordinary life.
It is about renouncing grand passion in favor of being a wife and mother, as Francesca does.
The story of Francesca and Robert would have been a lot less popular if they had run off together or if she had thrown herself under a train.
The book's message is reassuring to readers who have renounced their own great passions, and even more reassuring to those who have never found any.
It is a message the  new film version, which opened on Friday, is smart enough to grasp and run with.


Recycled Pop: New Life From Old Songs?
FORTY YEARS AGO, BEFORE THE record business became an entertainment behemoth, music publishers supplied popular singers with the material for their albums, and few regarded the end products as personal artistic statements.
Today, when the vast majority of performers write their own material and pop records are combed like Joycean texts, compiling such an album isn't so simple.
When a performer decides to put out a collection of nonoriginal songs, it can assume codelike significance in revealing influences, taste, sensibility and political  stance.
Recently, Elvis Costello, Duran Duran, Annie Lennox and Gloria Estefan have released albums of other people's songs.
Except for Mr.
Costello, whose choices  are largely unknown to the general public, these re-makes automatically compete  with original versions of songs that radio and records have grafted onto listeners' minds.


High Fashion
It's 10 A.M.
I've taken the Designer Drug but I'm not feeling anything yet.
Extracted from the chic weed (a plant that grows around fashion tents), the Designer Drug is supposed to induce opinions about everything.
11 A.M.
I'm starting to feel agitated.
My sofa, walls and carpet are annoying me.
Why?
Because colors that you can't name are what's new, and the palette of my apartment is painfully blue and green.
Maybe I should go outside.


Dose of Vitality From 'The Other America'
ON the Union Square subway platform, a Zimbabwean opened his duffel bag to show us watches and flashlights.
He picked them up in Brooklyn, he said, and was on his way to sell them in the Bronx.
In a richly insincere voice that recalled  childhood visits to Jewish clothing stores on the Lower East Side, he told us that he was practically giving the flashlights.
Such a good deal.
"That man is a red-blood corpuscle," said Joel Millman, once we were on the train to the Bronx.
"Immigrants are pumping oxygen and money into the city. They do jobs no one wants to do, they create markets that weren't there, they're replacing older immigrant groups."


May 28 - June 3: Heists;Babe Ruth's Stolen Pants Are Safe Again
Long-memoried fans know that Babe Ruth was not the sultan of base-stealing.
And now the world knows that William Wilson 3d is not the sultan of uniform-stealing.
This week, detectives caught Mr.
Wilson, a 39-year-old former  high school pitcher, as he tried to sell off the pinstripes that Ruth wore in the film "The Pride of the Yankees."
The police charged him with breaking into a car rented by Mark Lassman, a sports-memorabilia collector.
Mr.
Lassman had made the major league error of leaving the car unattended in Manhattan's garment district for a few minutes.
Mr.
Wilson smashed a window, popped open the trunk and made off with a bag containing something more than just another pair of size-44 pants and a size-50  jersey: Babe Ruth's name was sewn on the uniform in two places.
The police say Mr.
Wilson enlisted a go-between, Rodney Medley, to try to sell the uniform back.
Instead, the police arrested Mr.
Medley.


Mail-Bombings Inquiry Slows Despite Latest String of Clues
Nearly six weeks ago, the mysterious bomber who has terrorized scientists and executives sent his latest deadly package -- and a series of letters that gave more clues than the authorities had found in the 17 years since his first attack.
But the trail has grown cold again for the hordes of Federal investigators trying to track him down.
Officials say the investigation of the case that is code-named Unabom has grown to become among the longest and most costly in modern times.
Over the years, through 16 bombings that have killed 3 and injured 22, hundreds of investigators have followed scores of potential leads, only to come up empty-handed.


Manners Matter: Sony Ushers Get Disney World Outlook
One evening earlier this year, as weepy viewers walked out of a showing of "Boys on the Side" at the Sony Theater on 86th Street at Third Avenue, an usher  distributed Kleenex.
Give that usher a Mint Man Pin!
Providing this kind of "knock your socks off service" is one way Sony Theaters is trying to transform the moviegoing experience, starting with employee behavior.
"We've been killing ourselves to accomplish this," said Barrie Loeks, who runs the company with her husband, Jim, out of Sony's Fifth Avenue offices.
"One of our main missions was to change moviegoing and the way people are treated."


Norway Celebrates a Millennium of Christianity Despite Fires
For many Norwegians, this weekend's 1,000-year anniversary of the Norwegian Church has been overshadowed by a series of deliberately set fires that over the past three years has destroyed or damaged more than two dozen churches, including a 12th-century wooden church.
The latest, last week, destroyed an 1880 church in Holen, 25 miles south of Oslo, described as "one of the most beautiful in Norway."
As in most of the other fires, satanic symbols were left in the churchyard.
"They are telling the police and the public who has done this," said Arne Huuse, director of the National Bureau of Criminal Investigation.
"We're quite sure there are Satanists standing behind these criminal acts."


'Wrangler Rustic' (Via Hollywood)
THE ROMANTICIZED IMAGES of the handsome, lonesome cowboy and the wise, heroic Indian were largely an invention of Hollywood in the 1930's.
And those images dominated a style of decor that flourished throughout the Rockies in that period.
The "wrangler rustic" style, as it is now called, became popular in hotel lobbies, airports, clubs and lodges for Eastern dudes.
Today, the cowboy look, thanks in part to designers like Ralph Lauren, is one of the hottest trends in Americana collecting.
The man most responsible for bringing this glamorized Western style to interior design was Thomas Canada Molesworth, a furniture manufacturer and decorator of Cody, Wyo.
The largest collection of Molesworth furnishings and decorations in private hands will be auctioned on Wednesday at Christie's in New York.


Winged Creatures
WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU The Butterfly and the Bat.
By Edgar Munhall.
Illustrated. 175 pp.
New York: The Frick Collection/Flammarion/ Abbeville Press. $45.


City Closes Porn Theater on West 44th St.
In a growing crackdown on gay sex outlets, city officials have closed the New King Cinema, 356 West 44th Street, saying that the pornographic movie theater, like three others shuttered since February, was a setting for many acts of high-risk sex among the male patrons.
Trying to stem transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, officials  closed the Earle Theater in Jackson Heights, Queens, in February; the New David  Cinema in mid-Manhattan in March, and the Mayfair Theater in Fresh Meadows, Queens, in May.
The New King was closed on Wednesday night by order of Justice Salvador Collazo of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


CHATTER: Covering the News;Overshadowed by Cities
While all of the local television stations have New Jersey bureaus, very little news about New Jersey gets much coverage.
The only time New Jersey seems  to get on the local news is when there's a fire or murder or something similar.
There's very little coverage of the State Legislature, or the Governor, or major issues facing New Jersey alone.
Local radio stations are for the most part drowned out by New York stations.
The two all-news stations, WINS and WCBS, are  a little bit better with New Jersey news than their television counterparts.
But considering that they are on 24 hours a day, their coverage isn't great, either.


Paris Was Great, Thanks, but It's Swell to Be Home
Representative Earl F. Hilliard has been all over his district this week, pumping hands from Kiwanis breakfast to truck driver coffee break, clinging to the green, green fields of home as he tries to live down the "most frequent flier" moniker hung on him in a news expose of Congressional junketeering.
Thirty-eight days overseas in a single year on six taxpayer-financed trips is eminently defensible public business, the Congressman was insisting at stops along his crammed, thoroughly parochial Alabama itinerary.
Explaining it all, he seemed as confident and unreproachable as an umpire whisking home plate clean.


Their Bodies, Their Selves
COLD SNAP Stories. By Thom Jones. 228 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.
THIS striking, idiosyncratic gathering of short stories, like Thom Jones's first collection, "The Pugilist at Rest," forces us to realize how rarely the mysterious life of the body is evoked in literature.
Even the most determinedly  spiritual among us are forever at the mercy of accidents of blood chemistry, caprices of metabolism, illnesses, organic breakdowns.


FUNDS WATCH
Does Your Broker Need a Vacation?


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
The legless fighter pilot climbing into the cockpit of his Spitfire and described in Sharon Olds's poem is Group Capt.
Douglas Bader, Royal Air Force.
Having lost both legs before the war, he managed to persuade the Royal Air Force hierarchy to let him fly Spitfires against the Luftwaffe.
Your picture shows him climbing into his Spitfire, in September 1945, to lead the fly-past celebrating the end of the war.


With Ax and Scalpel, School Districts Find Ways to Cut Back
Governor Whitman has repeatedly assailed the state's 611 school districts for overspending, and while her plan to reign them in is meeting with growing resistance, some districts have responded in the way she intended, by eliminating administrators.
But those cuts have left some school administrators  feeling understaffed and overworked.
Last winter -- armed with studies that show that while New Jersey spends more per pupil than any other state (about $10,000), it ranks 49th in the amount of money that reaches the classroom -- the Governor devised a much-criticized plan  to punish districts that had disproportionately high administrative costs.


The Doors Are Closed At Upsala College
The buildings are shuttered and weeds are sprouting at Upsala College in East Orange, which drew its final breath last week.
After 102 years as a well-regarded liberal arts college, Upsala has closed under the crushing burden  of a $12.5 million debt.
The Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools held off withdrawing the school's accreditation so about 200 Upsala seniors could graduate on May 14.
But on Wednesday, the association officially stripped  the college of its accreditation.
The private four-year college could no longer  pay debts arising from building improvements, new equipment and delinquent student payments.
Only 435 students were enrolled in the spring semester, down from nearly 1,500 last year.
(AP)


Shortfall in Aid From Albany Adds to Pressure on Giuliani
With a new state budget all but adopted, the wrangling over New York City's budget began in earnest yesterday, as officials said that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had received even less help from Albany than previously estimated.
That worsened the city's fiscal picture and increased the likelihood of deeper cuts in services.
Although the details will not be known until the State Legislature adopts a final budget this week, officials at City Hall and in Albany agreed that the city had fallen at least $400 million short of the aid the Mayor had hoped for to balance a $31.1 billion budget for the fiscal year that begins on July 1.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DOGGONE FESTIVAL


The News Is All Bad For Sliding Yankees
The Yankees' owner, George Steinbrenner, didn't mince words yesterday: "There's nothing I enjoy about last place. It's like kissing your sister." At this rate, the Yankees might be kissing all their post-season hopes goodbye.
Their stunning tailspin continued yesterday with a 4-2 loss to the California Angels before 17,768 at muggy Yankee Stadium.
It was the Yankees' fifth straight loss and 10th defeat in 11 games, and there is no sign things will get  any better before they get worse.


In an Age of Synthetics, Style Is in the Substance
WHATEVER HAPPENED TO design?
That may be the most important issue raised by the Museum of Modern Art's new show, "Mutant Materials in Contemporary Design."  The Modern was the first museum to open a design department; its "Good Design" shows were instrumental in crystallizing the museum's concept of modernity.
But  it has been more than 20 years since the Modern presented a thematic design show comparable in scale to "Mutant Materials." Why has the museum treated design like a fallow field?
Inadvertently, "Mutant Materials" provides a clue to the answer: museums have a hard time reckoning with the elusive quality of style.
The exhibition, organized by Paola Antonelli, the Modern's new curator of design, sets out to show how the shape of design has been revolutionized by synthetic resins, carbon fibers, ceramic sponges and other creepy-crawly, high-tech products.
It's a sprawling survey: tables, chairs, lamps, medical products, building supplies, household appliances, sports equipment, more than 200 objects in all, punctuated with raw samples of some of the scariest substances this side of science fiction.


Beer, Spicy Dishes and Sweet Desserts
IN a large corner storefront space facing the green in Branford, Darbar India combines peacock green wainscoting with pink upper walls, matching pink tablecloths (under glass) and brass wall sconces.
A small center fountain divides the sizeable room.
Indian folk art and hanging plants provide decorative touches.
It is difficult to order quickly because the menu is a large and tempting one.
We began with Indian beer, a fine accompaniment to Indian food, along with a clutch of appetizers.
Simply spectacular was shrimp poori.
This dish consisted of a balloon of paper-thin, crisp poori bread.
Inside the hollow shell garlicky shrimp in a succulent pink tomato-cream sauce hinting of mustard seed, curry and garlic.
It  was a delicious conceit, pulling off bits of the unleavened poori to scoop up the aromatic sauce.
There wasn't a dollop of sauce or poori crumb left on the plate.
Another trustworthy starter was well-spiced chicken chaat -- marinated, tandoor oven-cooked chicken cubes mixed with bits of cucumber and fresh tomatoes and served cold.


The Nation: Unpopular Culture;In the Race Against Depravity
IT looks like Murphy Brown is going to be getting some company.
Three years have passed since Vice President Dan Quayle, struggling to get re-elected, denounced the single, pregnant and fictional television character, accusing her of undermining family values.
Now, as a new election cycle begins,  open season on popular culture has again been declared.


Denny Attacker Convicted
A man convicted in the videotaped beating of Reginald O. Denny at the start of the Los Angeles riots in 1992 has been found guilty of carrying a gun in violation of his probation.
The man, Antoine Eugene Miller, 23, was arrested last Aug. 21 for trying to fire a 9-millimeter pistol at a car.
On Friday he was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm.
Jurors also found him guilty of violating terms of his probation.


H.I.V. and TB Join to Form Deadly Spiral
Tuberculosis has become the leading cause of death worldwide among people infected with the virus that causes AIDS, the World Health Organization says.
International health officials met last week in Geneva to determine how to cope with the growing threat of the deadly combination of AIDS and tuberculosis.
They said the dual epidemics were not only causing more deaths but also undermining efforts to control the diseases.


Teddy Roosevelt's Hostage Hoax Just Keeps Bobbing Up Again
To the Editor:
H.
L.
Mencken in his later years would marvel at the longevity of a hoax he perpetrated in 1917.
In a column, "A Neglected Anniversary," he alleged that the first bathtub in America had been installed on Dec. 20, 1842.
In 1949, he wrote  that despite his numerous denials of its authenticity, the hoax was "still prospering."


May 28 - June 3;The Pecking Orders
Neither snow, nor rain, nor heat, nor gloom of night will prevent the space shuttle Discovery from its appointed launch next week.
No, this time the problem is woodpeckers.
Some yellow-shafted flickers have drilled six dozen holes, some as wide as four inches, in Discovery's orange foam fuel-tank insulation while the $2 billion shuttle was sitting on the launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla.


One Classroom, Different Grades
It used to be that one-room schoolhouses allowed children in different grades to have the same teacher.
Now, students at the Cedar Creek Elementary School here are taking a step back to those simpler days, as first- and second-grade students are being grouped in the same class.


Corrections
A music review on Thursday about a concert by Friends and Enemies of New Music at Greenwich House Music School misstated the instrumentation of Paul A. Siskind's "Rituale." It is for soprano saxophone and percussion, not for clarinet and percussion.


Mexican Tourism To Unit of D'Arcy
The Mexican Secretaria de Turismo in Mexico City has named the Noble/D.M.B.&amp; B. unit of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Mexico City to handle its North American tourism account, which had been handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York since 1983.
The billings were estimated at $4 million for the rest of the year; for 1996, they are estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


Hoboken's Out to Lure Shoppers
Hoboken may not be Paris, since Paris never had Frank Sinatra or century-old baseball fields.
But the two cities do have some things in common, like plenty of good restaurants and shopping, along with some nice river views.
To draw more visitors to the city's busy shopping areas, New Jersey Transit has created a Discover Hoboken card, which gives users a 10 percent discount on merchandise and meals at participating establishments.


Rap's a 10% Slice of the Recording Industry Pie
Rap music is not exactly a bit player in the multibillion-dollar music industry, but neither is it a star.
Rap music accounted for less than 10 percent of the industry's total sales in 1994 of more than $12 billion, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.
By contrast, rock music brought in more than $4 billion in sales that year.
Within the broad category of rap is the small but profitable sliver known as gangsta rap, a predominantly West Coast style thatis distinguished by lyrics that graphically describe scenes of gunplay, sex, drug use and violence, often referring to women as "ho's" and "bitches." In the broader category of rap, political and educational themes predominate.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the dedication of a statue of Lenin in Seattle misspelled the name of the Slovak city where the statue was purchased.
It is Poprad.


Equity Offerings for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ADC Telecommunications Inc., Minneapolis, 5.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.


Do You Believe in the Magic? The Indiana Pacers Do
The Indiana Pacers can hold onto their vision, the one in which they keep playing until the light is dying on the asphalt and everyone else has left the playground for the summer.
Shaquille O'Neal and his magical young teammates secured something with more permanence tonight:
They got the Dream.


Social Security Checks
To the Editor:
Paul W. Meek (letter, May 28) says "the funds received by Social Security are invested in United States Government debt." That is not true.
The funds are immediately spent on Social Security checks.
If what he says were true, Social Security would own trillions of dollars' worth of Government bonds, and it would be a true savings program.
JESSE BRYANT  New York, May 31, 1995


Are They Biting?


Celebration of 50 Years of Artistry
Ballet does not live by performances alone.
From Renaissance times, when it celebrated royal birthdays, the art form has thrived on special events.
American Ballet Theater's tribute to Fernando Bujones and Marianna Tcherkassky on Friday night was in the same tradition, if on a more democratic scale.
The audience at the Metropolitan Opera House came to yell and cheer, and did so uninhibitedly, although the final 15-minute flower-strewn ovation was not necessarily about the evening's double anniversary or about "Giselle," the work onstage.


In School Security, Issue Is Control
In Los Angeles, school security officers are fully armed and receive as much training as regular police officers.
In many other large cities, school systems are working more closely with police departments as parents and educators become alarmed by rising school violence.
With school violence in New York City having risen 28 percent in the fall semester over the year before, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has called for the Police Department to take over school security.


U.S. Plans to Give Bosnia Spy Planes
The Clinton Administration promised yesterday to provide United Nations commanders in Bosnia with unmanned spy planes, a move that would eliminate the risk of losing more American pilots following the downing Friday of an F-16 fighter.
Defense Secretary William Perry said that sending the drone aircraft would benefit the United Nations forces because the low-flying planes transmit images instantaneously to ground commanders and are not hampered by cloud cover.


The Train to the Plane Turns to Pie in the Sky
SOMETIMES, the truth will set you free.
Other times, especially if you're a public official, it will get you in trouble.
George J. Marlin, the new head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, learned that the hard way last week when he said out loud what everybody in politics already knew: The ambitious plan to build a 22-mile "train to the plane" was dead.
Of course it was -- probably had been for years.
But saying so miffed Gov.
George E. Pataki, because Mr.
Marlin, his man, had got out ahead on a controversial issue.
And it infuriated Rudolph W. Giuliani, who, being Mayor, would like to see his city treated a little more like the major capital that it is.


Devils on Ice? Is It a Country Band?
At 7:12 on Saturday night, when the Devils' Billy Guerin scored, the sports bar ignored it.
At 7:20, when Scott Niedermayer put the Devils ahead of the Philadelphia Flyers, 2-0, the joint shrugged.
But at 7:40, the Box Seat erupted in passion.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Housing Completions . . .
April  Tuesday  Wholesale Trade . . .
April  Wednesday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Producer Prices . . .
May


BUSINESS DIGEST
Many Contractors Underpaying Their Workers
Dozens of New York City contractors are increasing their profit by illegally underpaying hundreds, and perhaps thousands of their nonunion workers.


For Ex-Cult Members in Japan, a Hard, Slow Recovery
It has been five years since he left Aum Shinrikyo, the religious cult now accused of mass murder, but he has not yet been able to put Aum behind him.
"I still have nightmares," said the former sect member, a businessman who asked not to be identified.
"In my dreams, there is Aum music in the background and I am beating up Asahara, pulling at his beard."


Patents; U.S. proposes guidelines in an attempt to deal more effectively with software inventions.
LAST week the Patent and Trademark Office came a step closer to dealing more efficiently and effectively with software-related inventions.
The agency issued proposed guidelines for patenting software embodied in computer hardware or disks.
The agency has traditionally equated software with mathematical algorithms and other thought processes that cannot be patented.
Last summer and fall, however, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruled that several spurned software inventors deserved patents after all because their programming was an integral part of computer hardware.


Drug Smuggling Growing In Ex-Communist Lands
Acting on a tip from a Western anti-drug agency, Polish officials searched a Greek freighter when it docked at Gdansk on May 28.
Lashed to the keel beneath the waterline were watertight bags containing almost 480 poinds of cocaine, worth $30 million on the street.
It was the second-largest cocaine seizure in Polish history.
Five days earlier, customs officials had searched a fishing cutter and uncovered nine tons of hashish, worth $60 million on the street, secreted beneath a layer of herring.
That was the largest seizure of hashish in Poland.


Dole Won't Return Warner Donations
Senator Bob Dole said today that he would not return $21,000 in political contributions from Time Warner Inc., whose music division he criticized this week for promoting violence.
The Senator, a Republican of Kansas, said that by criticizing the company, he was showing that money could not buy influence with him.
"I think it demonstrates that they didn't buy anything with Bob Dole," he said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press." "They may have bought it with somebody else, but they bought nothing with me, and my view is that it sort of dispels this view that every time somebody makes a donation that you're in their pocket. I'm not in their pocket or anybody else's pocket."


President and Legislature Dueling in Nicaragua
A deepening quarrel between the President and the National Assembly has plunged Nicaragua into a constitutional crisis, with leaders of each branch of government citing rival Constitutions and looking to competing Supreme Courts to support their claims.
Four months of intermittent negotiations have failed to resolve the impasse.
The situation has exasperated ordinary Nicaraguans and the country's foreign aid donors, some of which are now threatening to cut off their economic assistance.
Hoping to avoid a slide into complete institutional paralysis, both sides this week called upon the Cardinal of Managua, Miguel Obando y Bravo, to mediate the dispute.


This Race Went to the Slimiest
"On that last lap last night," said the Atlanta pro mountain-bike racer Ron Miller, "I was contemplating many, many things, and had decided to quit cycling altogether many, many times. The problem was that I was at the top of the mountain and had to get down."
Such sentiments were presumably echoed by the 1,500 others competing in the grueling 24 Hours of Canaan bike race, a team relay race that began only four years ago but has become a spectacle that this year featured 360 four- or five-person teams and a liberal coat of mud.


New Businesses
The numner of new businesses in the region rose sharply last year, a sign of continuing economic recovery.
The trend continued in the first quarter of 1995, in contrast to the rest of the country, where business starts fell 9.1 percent from the same period last year.
Start-ups in financial services, insurance and real estate rose across the region in the forst quarter of 1995, compared with the same period last year. manufacturing and construction starts surged in New Jersey and Connecticut.
Business start-ups are a good measure of the health of the local economy.
Analysts say the biggest benefit to the area is obvious: new firms equals new jobs.


Bosnian Serb Insists NATO Forego Air Strikes
Gen.
Ratko Mladic, commander of the Bosnian Serb forces, has insisted that he will not give any information on an American pilot whose F-16 jet was downed on Friday until NATO renounces the use of air strikes in Bosnia, the United Nations said today.
At the same time, the Bosnian Serbs again increased pressure on Sarajevo, killing four people and wounding eight with a shell fired into the Dobrinja section of town.
The shell landed close to the entrance to a tunnel under the airport that provides the Bosnian capital's only tenuous link with the outside world.


CHRONICLE
ANN S. MOORE, president of People magazine, recently attended a baby shower, which got her to thinking about weddings -- and that gave her an inspiration for a new way to raise money for a worthy cause.
Gilda's Club, a center named for Gilda Radner that will offer cancer patients and their families a variety of support services, is to open next Tuesday in a renovated building at 195 West Houston Street.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Computer screen savers are becoming the new billboards.
EVEN if marketing on the Internet ends up a cyberflop, Madison Avenue is downloading dollars another way: making computer screens an advertising medium.
Screen savers, the software programs that fill otherwise idle monitors with images, are attracting sponsors and licensers eager for an efficient, inexpensive way to pitch products to, or ingratiate themselves with, computer users.


Challenge In Three Parts
A beloved choreographic rite of spring has taken place.
The School of American Ballet offered its 31st Annual Workshop Performances on Saturday afternoon and evening at the Juilliard Theater.
Dancers between 15 and 20 were challenged by three fine ballets.
Most of the challenges were met and the result was excitement.
The well-chosen program featured two contrasting works by George Balanchine: the evocative "Four Temperaments," to Hindemith, and "La Source," some bubbly balletic champagne to Delibes.
The program also included "Napoli: Pas de Six and Tarantella," a suite of excerpts from "Napoli," one of the sunniest creations of the great 19th-century Danish choreographer August Bournonville.


Sensing Trend Toward Renovation and Remodeling, Home Magazines Are Adding On
Ever on the lookout for the next hot trend, the magazine industry is listening happily to the sweet sound of hammering resounding throughout the land.
Sometime around the year 2000, for the first time in American history, more money will be spent on home renovation and remodeling than on new construction, said Bryan Patchan, executive director of the National Association of Home Builders' Remodelors Council.


One Dies and Three Are Hurt in Apartment House Fire


Abroad at Home; No More Illusions
What are the Europeans and the United States actually going to do about the latest criminal outrages by the Bosnian Serbs, the intensified shelling of civilians and the holding of hostages?
The likely answer, stripped of wishful thinking, is: nothing.
Western defense ministers sounded tough when they decided to set up a rapid reaction force for Bosnia.
But will it do anything more than come to the aid of U.N. peacekeepers menaced by the Serbs?
Will it take effective action to stop the aggressors from killing and starving Bosnians who want to live in a multi-ethnic state?


No Headline
"This year was a battle; next year is a war." -- ASSEMBLYMAN CLARENCE NORMAN, Democrat of Brooklyn, on the state budget.  [ B4:2. ]


People
*
John Martin, senior vice president and account group manager at Siddall, Matus &amp; Coughter, Richmond, was promoted to president, succeeding Peter Coughter, who becomes a consultant to the agency in addition to opening his own consulting company, Coughter &amp; Co., Richmond.
Also at Siddall, Matus, Elizabeth Longstreet Titmus, executive vice president and chief financial officer, was named to the additional new position of general manager, and William Hamby, president of the public relations division, was named to the additional new position of executive vice president.


Phillips's Bat Is Confiscated
Before one pitch was thrown yesterday, the California Angels had lost something: the leadoff hitter Tony Phillips's bat.
Yankee Manager Buck Showalter asked Umpire Dave Phillips to confiscate the bat.
It was X-rayed at the Stadium, and Dave Phillips left with the bat.
An announcement by the American League office is expected today.


Harvard Deaths Leave a Puzzle Whose Central Piece May Never Be Found
On the last day of final exams at Harvard University a week ago Saturday, Sinedu Tadesse did what she had never done in a lifetime of unblemished achievement: she missed a test and was marked absent.
It was one of several little-noticed signs that something was terribly wrong with Ms.
Tadesse, a gentle, brilliant 20-year-old junior from Ethiopia.
But because of the weekend, Harvard officials would not learn about her absence for days.


Why Not Israel?; Don't Say 'Confiscate'
To the Editor:
Articles, like your report on Yasir Arafat's trip to Morocco for talks with Israel (news article, May 28), have used "confiscate" or "confiscation" to refer to land in Jerusalem taken by Israel for building purposes.
The correct word is "condemned." In the United States, as in most countries, a government has the right to condemn land, paying the owner compensation.


Now Let's Consider an Airport Link That Uses Mass Transit
To the Editor:
Re your June 1 article about the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey airport rail plan:


Unmarried Couples Challenging State Law Barring Their Adoptive Plans
One couple appearing before the state's highest court today is heterosexual, the other lesbian.
But they have an issue in common, along with thousands of other couples around the country who want to legally join their families: because they are not married, one partner cannot adopt the other's biological child.
New York will be only the fourth state in the country to address the question of adoption by an unmarried mate.
And by requesting that the cases of unmarried heterosexual and lesbian couples be heard in tandem, the Court of Appeals has shifted its focus away from sexual orientation and toward the state law's requirement that an adoptive couple be married.


More Budget Battles; This Year's Fiscal Fight Is Over in Albany But Squabbling May Be Worse Next Year
Having just ended one of the longest and most bitter budget fights in state history, Gov.
George E. Pataki and the Legislature have now embarked on a course toward an even more caustic and protracted conflict next year.
The reasons lie buried in the budget agreed to by the Republican Governor and legislative leaders late last week.
The spending plan fails to address many of the state's long-term financial problems and has created new pitfalls that could significantly worsen future budget shortfalls.


Trimmer Budgets for Research Worry Seattle Health Institutions and University
For decades, powerful lawmakers sent money from "the other Washington." The money built bombers and a major research university, supported the invention of bone marrow transplants and studies of 18th century English labor poetry, trained doctors for rural Alaska and treated burn victims from Idaho.
Today, as Republicans in Washington seek a balanced budget, the future of those enterprises is in doubt.
They were built up by powers like Warren G. Magnuson, a 27-year veteran of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and preserved by Thomas S. Foley, Speaker of the House from 1989 through 1994.
But after last year's electoral changes that heritage is now in the hands of very junior Republicans who are committed to spending cuts, even if they pinch home districts.


Young Musicians Learn as Masters Listen In and React
"There are no casual notes," Isaac Stern admonished a young violin-and-piano duo who had just played, for the third time, a passage of a Brahms sonata.
Mr.
Stern, looking up at the musicians from the front row of Weill Recital Hall, was presiding over a chamber music seminar, the latest of the Professional Training Workshops that Carnegie Hall has been sponsoring since 1990.
The point he was making, bald and simple though it may seem, is a central tenet of music making, and one that came up again and again during the three days of public sessions last week.
The workshop, which began on May 20 and is to end with a day of free concerts on Wednesday, is similar in form to the one that Mr.
Stern conducted two years ago.
Young ensembles (the ages ranged from 15 to 28) sent tapes to Carnegie, and six ensembles were selected for coaching sessions with Mr.
Stern and a distinguished faculty.
Mr.
Stern's colleagues were the violinists Felix Galimir, Henry Meyer, Ida Kavafian, Jaime Laredo, Daniel Phillips and Todd Phillips; the cellists Janos Starker, Sharon Robinson and Timothy Eddy; the violist Steven Tenenbom; the pianists Joseph Kalichstein and Eugene Istomin, and the composer Leon Kirchner.


Into Arcadia With Simon Schama
In his eye-opening new book, "Landscape and Memory," Simon Schama journeys through "the garden of the Western landscape imagination" while exploring the topography of cultural identity.
A transplanted Englishman now rooted in American soil, Mr.
Schama lives with his wife and their two children 20 miles north of New York in a house overlooking the Hudson River.
Having grown up in London, he also has an affinity for cities.
On a recent spring morning, he sauntered through Central Park, ruminating aloud about his book and about varieties of Arcadia.
He talks the same way he walks, impulsively but with an intuitive sense of direction.
An observation is followed by encyclopedic asides.
Undeterred by a threat of rain in the air, he was filled with his customary ebullience (but he carried a fold-up umbrella).


Evicted Man Defends Right to Home
When Enrique Arrosa-Penagaricano first saw Apartment 1B seven years ago, it resembled a bombed-out shell more than a home.
Its rooms, he said, were buried under "a mountain of rubble," a charred legacy of arsonists and vandals who had stripped the six-story building at 541 East 13th Street in the East Village.
There were no windows, electrical wires, or bathroom or kitchen fixtures left in the building.
There was no roof.


Businesses in Country Music Capital Looking for Help in Faraway Places
Here at the Opryland Hotel, that emporium built on the popularity of country music, business is good, but that has not stopped some executives there from singing the blues.
And several restaurants in the city are forced to close at lunch on some days because they do not have enough employees.
Grocery stores, embarrassed by long waits at checkout lines, post apologetic signs to customers, and some fast-food outlets display "Now Hiring" signs as prominently as their logos.


Medical Care Can Never Be Purely a Business
To the Editor:
Re "An Anti-Patient Act" (editorial, May 31):


Special Day for Special Olympics


Time Warner Seeks A Delicate Balance In Rap Music Furor
Executives at Time Warner Inc. are locked in an anguished debate about the way they should respond to the fierce criticism of the gangsta rap music produced by the company's music division.
After a week of blistering attacks from Senator Bob Dole and William J. Bennett, the sometime politician who now directs a conservative research center, Time Warner faces a conundrum: Should it sever its ties to incendiary rap performers and risk a backlash in the creative community, or should it hang tough and become Exhibit A in a Republican crusade against the erosion of traditional values in society?


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about the actor Christopher Reeve, shown on horseback, misstated the date.
It was June 25, 1994, not shortly before his recent accident.


This Week's Treasury Auctions
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 5.40 percent and the rate on the six-month issue at 5.31 percent, traders said.


Most Wanted; New Rap Hits Outside the Fray
In the recent debate about offensive lyrics in rap songs, Time Warner's labels have been singled out.
But this week's highest ranking rap album and single - the "Friday" soundtrack and "I'll Be There For You" by Method Man, respectively - are on other lables.  [ A look at the economics of rap music appears on page D8. ]
On the television front, "Home Improvement" took the two top slots as ABC led the weekly ratings again, with NBC second.
CBS and Fox were also - rans - neither had a series in the top 10.


CHANGE OF POLICY ON U.S. IMMIGRANTS IS URGED BY PANEL
A Federal advisory commission will soon recommend gradually reducing legal immigration by one-third and reshuffling visa priorities to speed up the admission of spouses and young children of legal aliens, members of the panel have said.
The proposals, to be presented to Congress later this month, would make the biggest changes in more than 40 years in policies governing the selection of legal immigrants.


Panel Takes Up Tax-Cut Plan
It has been almost half a year since Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman called for another 15 percent cut in the state's income tax.
Today, the proposal will have its first formal consideration, when the Assembly's Policy and Rules Committee takes up the plan.


Special Counsels, Petty Cases
This nation will soon have four independent counsels investigating separate allegations of criminal wrongdoing involving President Clinton and his family and three Cabinet members, past and present.
A fifth independent counsel is investigating allegations that individuals in the Bush Administration sought information about Mr.
Clinton's passport.
A sixth is looking into the Reagan era's Department of Housing and Urban Development.
On the recommendation of the Attorney General, all five will have been appointed by a special court of Federal judges, as a result of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978.


Medical Care Can Never Be Purely a Business; Quality Coverage
To the Editor:
Re "An Anti-Patient Act" (editorial, May 31): I own a small business that employs 25 people.
Since the late 1980's, our company has faced annual increases in our health insurance rates of 20 percent to 40 percent.
We saw our premiums double from 1990 to 1994 at the same time we had to scale back the coverage we offered to our employees.


Accounts
*
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., to Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, New York, a unit of Euro RSCG, to handle advertising for its Hammermill Papers brand, previously at BBDO New York, a unit of Omnicom.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $5 million. *
DuPont Greater China, Hong Kong, a unit of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co., to Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle its account in China.
The billings have not been determined.
The account will be handled in Beijing, Hong Kong and Shanghai, with support from offices in New York and Wilmington, Del., by three Y.&amp; R. units: Dentsu Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, a joint venture with Dentsu Inc.; Wunderman Action Marketing, and Burson-Marsteller Public Relations.


Holman Leads The Field In Classic
Last month, Steve Holman entered the 1,500-meter race at the Carolina Classic in Chapel Hill, N.C., expecting to win.
He was, as he put it, "the next great American miler." For him, that race was a mere warm-up.
When William &amp; Mary's Brian Hyde finished first, no one was more shocked than Holman.
Hyde not only took the race but Holman's confidence along with it.
His confidence did not come back until today, after Holman ran the mile at the Prefontaine Classic.
Wearing borrowed clothes (his luggage had been lost en route from Washington) and relying on the confidence he used to have, Holman took the lead moments before the final lap and led a stunning field to the finish line.


Fleeing the Approaching Storm


C. J. Bensley, 87, Executive Who Led School Board Panel
Charles J. Bensley, a businessman who served on the New York City Board of Education and on the board of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation and was active in the United Jewish Appeal and other philanthropic organizations, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 87 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx, and also had a home in Atlantis, Fla.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his stepdaughter, Margery Baker Riker.


Fans Grit Their Teeth Over the Bigger Parimutuel Bite
It started innocently enough as Belmont Week opened: the track hostess Mary Ryan sitting with the trainer Lisa Lewis and the jockey Diane Nelson yesterday on the small stage beneath the paddock tote board at Belmont Park, talking engagingly about a woman's life in the world of horse racing.
But after they gave their seats on the stage to Kenny Noe Jr. and Steve Crist, the two ranking business executives at the track, the fantasy of racing's future came to grips with the reality of its present.
The first Fan Fair held at Belmont to expose the horse fan to the nuances of the game was transformed into a forum where the horse player could air his gripes.
And the chief target was the racing bill approved Friday by the Legislature -- and expected to be signed soon by Gov.
George E. Pataki -- that will increase the takeout on a majority of winning bets.


The Bane of Today's Banks: Those Educated Consumers
If you are a bank customer who always meets minimum balance requirements, never bounces a check and even took out a car loan, you might think that the bank would be eager to have your business.
Not so.
Even worse, if the tellers know you by name and ask about your children every couple of days when you cash a check, the bank president probably would like you to move your account elsewhere.


Now Let's Consider an Airport Link That Uses Mass Transit; Try a Guided Bus
To the Editor:
To many transportation professionals, it is not surprising that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has abandoned its proposed automated guideway system to connect Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports to Manhattan as too expensive (news article, June 1).


Harry Rosenfield Dies at 83; Resettled Refugees After War
Harry N. Rosenfield, who helped create the school lunch program in 1946 and then supervised the resettlement of European refugees in the United States, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 83.
In 1946, as the chief assistant to the Administrator of the Federal Security Agency, a precursor of the Department of Health and Human Services, Mr.
Rosenfield helped draft the legislation for the school lunch program.


The Artist Behind The Steps
Eleo Pomare has had a long and honorable career in modern dance, continuing to develop well after most choreographers would have been content to rest on their laurels.
He has never lost the emotional depth and commitment that in part characterize his dances.
The program presented by the Eleo Pomare Dance Company on Friday night at Florence Gould Hall had moments of long-windedness and inscrutability.
But the thinking, feeling artist behind the dances was never absent, a rarity today.
Mr.
Pomare's concern for one particular category of human being -- dancers -- was evident in "A Horse Named Dancer," an odd but affecting new group work.
Moving in front of a film of horses running, nuzzling and at rest, the performers were a different breed of animal: fleet-footed, beautiful creatures of great stamina but short work lives.


Taking In the Sites; A Place for Book Lovers To Gather
Words, words and more words are the centerpiece of a World Wide Web site that is covering the American Booksellers Association's annual convention in Chicago.
It's interactivity the old-fashioned way.
One might imagine Lewis Carroll's Alice, confronted with this page, saying: "And what is the use of a Web site without pictures or conversations."
While thousands of booksellers and publishers congregate at their convention and trade show in Chicago, which began Thursday and ends today, many are also descending on a Web site sponsored by Publisher's Weekly and R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons.
The site is linked to Book Wire, a service frequented by bibliophiles and industry insiders.


Time to Examine the Militias
House Democrats want them.
The Senate will have them.
Even the National Rifle Association wants them.
So why are House Republicans loath to hold hearings to investigate the militia movement?
With six days of hearings scheduled on the Waco tragedy, enthusiastically endorsed by the House Republican leadership, it might seem strange that the same leaders do not think it appropriate to hear testimony about these groups, which are heavily armed and advocate taking the law into their own hands.
But the politics are perfectly clear.
The Republicans fear that the militias could become an albatross for their party in the way the violent left became a liability for Democratic liberals in the 1960's.
As the Republican political analyst Kevin Phillips has pointed out, the public-relations taint of fringe elements can endanger mainstream parties even when the party does everything it can to distance itself.
So in all likelihood, House Speaker Newt Gingrich sees himself as choosing the path of political prudence in shying from a subject his party fears.


Man Strangled in Home
A 53-year-old man was found dead inside his apartment in Brooklyn yesterday, apparently strangled with a string of Christmas lights, the police said.
The man, Morris Augusto, was discovered by his wife when she returned to the couple's apartment on Lincoln Avenue in East New York at 5:30 P.M., Sgt.
Sean Crowley, a police spokesman, said.


On Tiananmen Anniversary, a Dissident's Appeal
On the sixth anniversary of the deadly military assault at Tiananmen Square, a leader of the 1989 democracy movement issued an open letter today demanding the release of political prisoners and the rehabilitation of the former Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang.
For the dissident, Chen Ziming, it was his first personal statement since being paroled for medical treatment under pressure from President Clinton in May 1994.
The letter also punctured a campaign of intimidation that the authorities have waged in recent days to silence the most prolific outpouring of petitions from intellectuals and dissidents since 1989.


The Education of George Pataki
As candidate for governor, George Pataki pledged not only to reduce spending and taxes but to eliminate the secrecy and gimmickry by which the state puts together its budget each year.
Though we disagree with his approach, he succeeded in wresting a budget from the Legislature that embodies his broad objectives.
But he abandoned his promise to open the doors to the back-room horse trading and reject fiscal gimmickry.
The failure to change Albany's secretive budget process undermines Mr.
Pataki's aspirations to be a reform governor who corrected the abuses that offended him as a legislator.


State Seeks Takeover Of L.I. School District
The New York State Education Department is seeking last-minute legislation that would allow it for the first time to seize "immediate control" of a crisis-ridden school district, state officials said yesterday.


A Subdued Anniversary in Beijing


INSIDE
Broadway Celebrates Itself
The American Theater Wing presented its 49th annual Tony Awards last night, honoring the year's achievements on New York City's major stages.
Cherry Jones, above, Ralph Fiennes, Glenn Close and Matthew Broderick won top acting honors.
"Sunset Boulevard" was named best musical and "Love! Valour! Compassion!" the best play of the year.
Page C11.
Magic in N.B.A.
Final
Orlando routed Indiana, 105-81, to win their playoff series.
Orlando will face Houston for the title, as Shaquille O'Neal and Hakeem Olajuwon go head to head.
SportsMonday, C1.
Tremors in Hollywood
Michael Ovitz, head of the Creative Artists Agency and a powerhouse in the film industry, is expected to be named this week to take over MCA, the entertainment giant.
Page D1.


Chevy to Sponsor U.S. Ski Team
The Chevrolet division of General Motors plans to announce this week in Denver that it will become a sponsor of the United States Ski Team with a comprehensive marketing, advertising and public relations program.
In April, Subaru of America -- a company whose cars have long been synonymous with skiing and Colorado -- said it planned to end its sponsorship, which began in 1976.
A Subaru spokesman, Richard Marshall, said last week that the auto company, which emphasizes all-wheel-drive vehicles and station wagons, had decided to focus more on grass-roots skiing than on championship venues.
He said that while the partnership had been effective at promoting the image of Subaru, a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries of Japan, it did not particularly help sales.


Medical Care Can Never Be Purely a Business; Consumer Protection
To the Editor:
Anyone familiar with the "Health Care Bill of Rights" might fail to recognize it as the same legislation you assail in "An Anti-Patient Act" (editorial, May 31).
The legislation proposes to protect both consumers and health care providers.


Virtual Reality and Virtual Spaces Find a Niche in Real Medicine; Simulated Surgery On a Computer -- This Won't Hurt
In medicine, there is not a lot of opportunity for practice, nor room for error.
But computerized virtual reality systems are starting to let doctors and nurses learn by doing -- without doing it to a live patient.
Nursing students at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh, for example, practice inserting an IV into an arm that feels no pain, because it is attached to a simulated human body on a computer screen.


A Call for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms


U.N. Bosnia Force to Get U.S. Spy Planes
The Clinton Administration promised today to step up efforts to share intelligence with United Nations commanders in Bosnia and to provide them with unmanned spy planes, a move that would increase their surveillance ability without running the risk of having other American pilots shot down.
Defense Secretary William Perry said the United States would set up an intelligence network for the United Nations commanders in Bosnia similar to one that United States forces used successfully in the Persian Gulf war.


You Say 'Internet'; the Spell-Checker Says 'Interment'
It is a world blissfully ignorant of cyberspace, telecommuters, Pentiums and infotainment.
It is a realm apparently so technologically indifferent that it concedes the existence of neither technophobes nor technophiles.
This is no post-industrial commune we're talking about, but the vocabulary of the two leading word-processing programs: the Microsoft Corporation's Word and Novell Inc.'s Wordperfect.
A test of the spell-checkers offered by these two high-tech companies shows an occasionally low-tech lexicon that includes none of the italicized words in the preceding paragraph.


Bronx Man Is Shot Dead
A 30-year-old Bronx man was found dead on the front steps of his home in the Bedford Park section early yesterday, shot three times in the head.


Dividend Meetings


State Seeks to Take Over Roosevelt School District
The New York State Education Department is seeking last-minute legislation that would allow it for the first time to seize "immediate control" of a crisis-ridden school district, state officials said yesterday.
The state proposal, which would wrest control of the Roosevelt school district on Long Island from the local elected school board, follows a series of inspections revealing many problems at the 1,050-student Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School.


METRO DIGEST
IN CONSTRUCTION, ILLEGALLY LOW WAGES
Hard pressed by the deep recession in the construction industry, dozens of New York City contractors are increasing profits by illegally underpaying hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of their nonunion workers.
City officials say there has been a threefold increase in the last six years in the number of formal complaints by laborers contending that construction companies are shortchanging them.  [ Page A1. ] IS BUDGET A BLUEPRINT FOR FUTURE ILLS?
Having just ended one of the longest and most bitter budget fights in state history, Governor Pataki and the Legislature have now embarked on a course toward an even more caustic and protracted conflict next year.
The reasons lie buried in the budget agreed to by the Republican Governor and legislative leaders.
By many accounts, the spending plan fails to address many of the state's long-term financial problems and has created new pitfalls that could worsen future budget shortfalls.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  SCHOOL POLICING: CONTROL AT ISSUE
In Los Angeles, school security officers are armed and receive as much training as regular police officers.
In many other large cities, school systems are working more closely with police departments as parents and educators become alarmed by rising school violence.
With school violence in New York City having risen sharply, Mayor Giuliani has called for the Police Department to take over school security.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines fiercely opposes that plan.  [ B3. ] WAITING . . .
AND WAITING . . .
FOR THE TRAIN
It may be small consolation to people who found that their subway trains were more crowded than usual, made more stops than usual or did not run at all.
But if the riders thought that something was amiss, they were right.
The replacement of a major crossover switch in Queens forced changes in service on F, E, G and R trains through much of that borough and between Queens and Manhattan.  [ B3. ] A SUBURBAN ETHOS SCUTTLED RAIL PLAN
Cost alone is rarely the entire reason something fails to happen in New York.
The airport railway will not be built because not enough of the political establishment in New York and New Jersey wants to build it.
The politics of the time mitigate against it -- a politics of shrinking government, reducing taxes and embracing policies that smile on the suburbs and their mostly Republican voters, not on Democratic cities.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B3. ] REGION  MANAGED CARE DELAYED A YEAR
In the new state budget, Governor Pataki left undone one of his most sweeping proposals to cut the cost of government: to require nearly three million poor and disabled people to receive their medical care from managed-care plans.
While that might initially seem to be a major setback for the Governor, Mr.
Pataki ultimately neither wanted nor needed to pick a fight with the Democrats this year on mandating managed care.  [ B4. ] A REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR SETTLES FOR LESS
Even as other Republican governors are pushing through ideologically charged laws to reduce welfare benefits and strictly limit how long people can stay on the welfare rolls, New York's Democratic-controlled State Assembly has defended the state's liberal tradition and forced Governor Pataki to settle for incremental change.  [ B4. ] CHALLENGING NEW YORK'S ADOPTION LAW
One couple appearing before the state's highest court is heterosexual, the other lesbian.
But they have an issue in common: because they are not married, one partner cannot adopt the other's biological child.
New York is the fourth state in the country to address the question of adoption by an unmarried mate.
And by requesting that the cases of unmarried heterosexual and lesbian couples be heard in tandem, the Court of Appeals has shifted its focus away from sexual orientation and toward the state law's requirement that an adoptive couple be married.  [ B5. ] RAIL OFFICIALS REJECT RUMOR OF WALKOUT
For the second time in 10 days, rumors of a wildcat walkout by Long Island Rail Road engineers raced among commuters and transportation officials.
But union leaders and transportation officials insisted that this time there would not be one.  [ B2. ]
Parking rules B2


Jean Marin, 86; Led News Agency And Aided de Gaulle
Jean Marin, who was the head of the French news agency Agence France-Presse for 21 years and who worked closely with Gen.
Charles de Gaulle during World War II, died on Saturday at his home in Paris.
He was 86.
Mr.
Marin, whose memoirs were published last year, was the news agency's director general from 1954 until 1975, after serving on the Paris city council from 1945 until 1952.


Essay; Reading Boris's Mind
So they think I am a drunken bumpkin, manipulated by Korzhakov and my palace guard.
No popularity, no future, no political strategy.
It's true that I drink, I take medicine, I stumble, I pass out.
But I know how to use what seems like the democratic process to maintain my power.


Devils Are Taking It One Game at a Time, and Winning Them All
They appear to be so focused on the task at hand that it's scary.
Their discipline, even in the heat of battle, is lauded by supporters and adversaries alike.
After last spring's awful experience of falling a goal short in double overtime in the Stanley Cup semifinals, the Devils have all the makings of a team on a mission.
The Devils have now played 11 games in this year's playoffs, winning nine of them, including the last five.
They have given up only 14 goals and, with goalie Martin Brodeur leading the way, often appear impossible to score upon.
After a mediocre regular season in which the Devils sometimes won, sometimes lost and rarely inspired, they have transformed themselves into an imposing force.


Remembering the Katyn Victims, in a New Era


Technology; DIGITAL COMMERCE
On-line browsing got you down?
Don't get mad, get cable.
INTERACTIVE television has been trumpeted as the revolution of the decade, if not the century.
As the hype peaked last year, more than 40 North American trials had been announced by the biggest players in cable, telecommunications and computer technology.
But as pragmatists predicted, rewiring the nation to create an interactive TV network proved to be fraught with difficulties.
Worse yet, in numerous surveys, consumers yawned in the face of its most hotly promoted applications -- movies-on-demand and interactive home shopping.


Well-Rested Norman Breaks Out at the Memorial
If Greg Norman was going to lose the Memorial Tournament today -- and the only way anyone else could win it was with Norman's cooperation -- this would be the moment.
He stood in the deep woods to the right of the 15th fairway, staring collapse right in the face.
His lead was one thin stroke, and a mistake now could be lethal.
Already on this cloudy, muggy day, he had pulled one miracle escape, getting up and down from the high grass on the knoll behind the 12th green.
Now, 20 yards in front of him were two trees, like the brown bars of a cell, four feet apart.
To get where he needed to go, which was to the green some 127 yards away, he would have to thread his ball through those trees, under overhanging branches, over the creek and past the bunker.


New York Builders Flouting Wage Law To Increase Profits
Hard pressed by the deep recession in the construction industry, dozens of New York City contractors are increasing profits by illegally underpaying hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of their nonunion workers.
City officials say there has been a threefold increase in the last six years in the number of formal complaints by laborers contending that construction companies are shortchanging them.


Cruelty's Always With Us, in 1924 or '95
To the Editor:
I am a professional genealogist and read with interest the May 31 About New York column by Michael T. Kaufman describing research that provided a criminal profile of the residents of a Lower East Side building from 1899 to 1930.


Muti Had Charms to Soothe the Savage Audience


For These Americans, It's Just 30 Minutes to Bosnia
The war in Bosnia -- so far away for most Americans -- hit home last week at this air base, which is Italian in name but American in every other way, from its Burger King hamburgers to its roadside signs urging drivers to "buckle up."
United States Air Force officials, operating under NATO command, will not reveal any details about the American pilot based here who was shot down over Bosnia last Friday when a missile struck his F-16 fighter plane.
Until his fate is known, his name will be kept secret, together with the details of the missions he and his fellow pilots were flying.


Choral Remembrance Of a Birth and a Death
The centennial of Hindemith's birth and the tricentennial of Purcell's death are to be celebrated by the Central City Chorus in a concert tomorrow night at 8 P.M. at the Central Presbyterian Church, Park Avenue at 64th Street.
Charles Pilling is to conduct six singers and a Baroque orchestra in Hindemith's "Six Chansons," based on poems by Rainer Maria Rilke; "Frau Musica," set to a tribute to music by the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and Purcell's "Hail! Bright Cecilia." Admission is $15, $12 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 838-0808.


No Rail Walkout, Officials Say
For the second time in 10 days, there were rumors of a wildcat walkout by Long Island Rail Road engineers over the weekend.
But union leaders and transportation officials insisted that this time the circumstances were different and that there would not be a walkout today.
On May 26, the railroad was roundly criticized for failing to alert riders to reports of a possible walkout by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers.
That day, the threat turned out to be real, and the nation's largest commuter railroad ran only skeletal service before a Federal court order forced the engineers back to work.


Nominee Will Be Approved If a Vote Is Held, Dole Says
Senator Bob Dole said today that there were enough votes in the Senate to approve Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General if he could clear the expected filibuster intended to hold up the nomination.
Senator Dole, the majority leader who is also a Presidential aspirant, said last month that he might not bring Dr.
Foster's nomination up for floor debate at all.
And while he avoided making any commitment today, saying that he still needed to speak with the nominee, his comment, on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," that a majority of the Senate supported Dr.
Foster might make it more difficult for the Kansas Republican to avoid holding the debate.


That Moldy Song From the 1970's Isn't Disco
Yesterday was Turn Back the Clock Day, Part Deux, at Yankee Stadium.
Only the giveaways weren't turn-of-the-century caps or photos of Ruth and Gehrig.
Rather they were a passel of bromides and quotable quotes from George Steinbrenner.
Two years after ending a forced leave of absence from the game that was initially supposed to last a lifetime, Steinbrenner seems prepared to hit stride again as the quickest quip, tartest tongue and toughest baseball owner in the game.


Why Not Israel?
To the Editor:
According to "The Arabs in Zion: What Symbols for Them?" (Jerusalem Journal, June 1), the use of the Star of David in Israel's flag has become an issue.
Nations displaying the religious symbol of their majority population in their flags include Switzerland, Britain, Greece, Norway, Denmark, Finland, Sweden and New Zealand, as well as several predominantly Muslim countries.
Why not Israel?
GEORGE R. BERMAN  Yonkers, N.Y., June 1, 1995


Bridge
The final of the Reisinger Knockout Team Championships began yesterday at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street, between teams captained by George Tornay of Manhattan and Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens.
At the midpoint, the Schwartz team led by 34 imps.
In semifinal play Saturday, Tornay, August Boehm, John Roberts, Saul Bronstein, all of Manhattan, and Robert Sartorius of Lake Hiawatha, N.J., won by 4 against a team led by Michael Kopera of Brooklyn.
Schwartz, with Brian Glubok of Manhattan, Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Ravindra Murthy of Berkeley, Calif., won by 13 against Gerald Sosler of Purchase, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Magic Is Simply Better, In Talent and Ratings
AT LEAST the execution was swift and complete, leaving no room for denial, no room for the Indiana Pacers to wonder "what if" or scream "no way." The most talented team, as well as the most marketable, has come out of the East, and that should dull the ache this morning in the plains of Indiana.
And maybe in the bars of New York City, too.
"It hurts when you get it so close, to a seventh game, but the best team won," Larry Brown said last night after his Pacers were crushed, 105-81, by the gifted and talented Orlando Magic.


Parking Rules
Because of the second day of Shabuoth, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.


Shortest Of Hits Gives Mets Long Faces
Mike Piazza is the type of player who can carry an entire team, according to Tommy Lasorda, his manager, and so it was no surprise when the crowd at Dodger Stadium rose to its feet when Piazza came to the plate in the eighth inning this afternoon.
Back in the Dodgers' lineup after a three-week visit to the disabled list, Piazza already had hit a two-run homer off Pete Harnisch, the Mets' starter, and his mere presence had brought new life to Los Angeles.
And so with the game tied with one out and Raul Mondesi at second, Jerry DiPoto, the Mets' reliever, did the smart thing -- he walked Piazza intentionally, even though it meant facing Eric Karros, who is hitting .347 this year.
Then DiPoto smartly pitched around Karros, who walked to load the bases.
And then he struck out Tim Wallach, a .327 hitter, on a delicious 1-2 fastball for the second out.


Changes Loom For Hollywood If Ovitz Switches
In a deal that will profoundly alter the landscape of Hollywood, the Seagram Corporation expects to announce this week that at least six top executives of the Creative Artists Agency -- including its chairman, Michael Ovitz, and its president, Ron Meyer -- will take over the management of MCA Inc., the parent company of Universal Pictures, Universal Television, Universal Studios theme parks and MCA Records.
The sweeping changes would raise questions about the direction of two of Hollywood's most powerful entities -- Creative Artists, a firm of agents that has set the pace in selling stars to movie studios, and Universal, a studio that had languished under Japanese ownership.
The changes would be coming at a time when a technological revolution is already reshaping the entertainment industry.


A Drive to Build Playgrounds
New Jersey is several playgrounds richer today, thanks to the Saturn car company.
As part of a campaign to show the company's commitment to local communities, owners of Saturn cars spent the weekend building new playgrounds in six locations in the state.
Saturn dealers donated the materials.


Pataki's Visions for Medicaid and Welfare Run Into Albany's Hard Knocks; A Year's Delay In the Campaign For Managed Care
In the new state budget, Gov.
George E. Pataki left undone one of his most sweeping proposals to cut the cost of government: to require nearly three million poor and disabled people to receive their medical care from managed-care plans.
While that might initially seem to be a major setback for the Governor, Mr.
Pataki ultimately neither wanted nor needed to pick a fight with the Democrats this year on mandating managed care.


Blaze Destroys a Lumberyard
The fierce thunderstorms that barrelled through central and northern New Jersey over the weekend left some damage in their wake.
Lightning from the storms ignited a fire at Rahway Lumber that burned for more than five hours and destroyed the lumberyard's main building.


High Grades, Hoop Dreams; School Trains Champions
Gregory McCall entered St.
Anthony High School four years ago absolutely certain that his basketball skills, sharpened by the competition around the projects, assured him a spot on the championship basketball team.
They didn't.


Pataki's Visions for Medicaid and Welfare Run Into Albany's Hard Knocks; Assembly Democrats Took On the Governor Over Benefits
Even as other Republican governors are pushing through ideologically charged laws to reduce welfare benefits and strictly limit how long people can stay on the welfare rolls, New York's Democratic-controlled State Assembly has defended the state's liberal tradition and forced Gov.
George E. Pataki to settle for incremental change.
To win the Assembly's support for a deep income tax cut, Mr.
Pataki abandoned both benefit reductions and time limits.


Red Wings Go Up On Hawks By 2-0
As they head back to Chicago, down by 2-0 in the Western Conference finals, the Blackhawks are upset about many things, not including the two-dozen octopuses that hit the ice during the game today, or the giant, purple, inflated octopus that looms over their heads during pre-game warm-ups at Joe Louis Arena.
After the Detroit Red Wings beat them by 3-2, the Chicago star Jeremy Roenick had blunt comments about his coach, Darryl Sutter, and how Sutter has ordered Roenick to concentrate on defense in this low-scoring series.


More Tears in Sri Lanka
For a dozen years, Sri Lanka has been afflicted by savage and intractable ethnic warfare.
Prospects for a settlement were crushed recently when the Tamil guerrillas ended their cease-fire and resumed their insurgency.
The setback was disappointing, but the Government in Colombo has reacted with remarkable restraint.
While defending itself against armed attacks, it must try all the more to resolve peacefully a conflict that has cost tens of thousands of lives.
Most of the ethnic conflicts in the world today are difficult to follow for outsiders.
But it has seemed especially incomprehensible that the two sides in Sri Lanka could not overcome their linguistic, religious and cultural differences and live together on their tiny teardrop-shaped island off the southern coast of India.
Indeed, until the warfare of the last dozen years, Sri Lanka was widely considered a model for harmony and development among poor nations.
One of the lessons of Sri Lanka applies to all multi-ethnic democracies, namely that a society can be destroyed by ambitious politicians determined to exploit ancient and modern grievances for their own ends.


Shifting Public Opinion by the Turn of a Phrase
Advice to Republicans: Don't talk about "cuts" in Medicare spending.
Talk instead about reducing the rate of increase.
Emphasize the moral imperative of balancing the budget for "future generations." Stress that Federal budget cuts will spare no one and will be felt across-the-board.
Advice to Democrats: Do talk about "cuts" in Medicare spending, and do it often.
Emphasize the pain that balancing the budget will cause to "real people" right now.
Stress that the wealthy will be getting tax cuts, while children and the elderly will pay.


Media: TELEVISION; CBS and it affiliates count on the Ferris wheel theory: what goes down must rise again.
THE CBS television network is in bad, perhaps desperate, shape.
This was passing as good news last week at the 41st annual CBS affiliates meeting here.
According to a clear majority of the stations' executives, the mother network has nowhere to go but up.
This belief grows out of a fierce certainty that an almost automatic rescue mechanism -- set off when a network gets into truly dire straits -- has just been deployed, and will eventually lift CBS back into contention.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S. PONDERS BOSNIA DILEMMA
Two speeches by President Clinton, just three days apart, highlight the contradictions at the center of U.S. policy toward Bosnia that has troubled two Presidents -- a desire to avoid the conflict and a contradictory desire to limit it.
A1  BOSNIAN SERBS TAKE HARD LINE
The Bosnian Serbs insisted that they will not give any information on an American pilot whose F-16 jet was downed on Friday until NATO renounces the use of air strikes, the U.N. said.
The Serbs also increased pressure on Sarajevo.
A9  U.S.
TO SHARE BOSNIA INTELLIGENCE
The U.S. promised to step up efforts to share intelligence with U.N. commanders in Bosnia and to provide them with unmanned spy planes, a move that would eliminate the risk of losing pilots.
A9  CHINESE DISSIDENT SPEAKS OUT
On the sixth anniversary of Beijing's crackdown at Tiananmen Square, a leader of China's democracy movement demanded the release of political prisoners.
A3  JAPAN CULTISTS' UNCERTAIN FUTURE
As the guru of the Aum Shinrikyo cult faces trial for the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system, Japan ponders whether to disband the cult and how to bring its members back into society.
A3  EUROPE'S GROWING DRUG TRADE
Police officials in Poland and other countries in Eastern and Central Europe have scored a few victories in their war against drugs.
But it is a war that the former Communist countries say they are losing.
A2  Nicaragua is plunged into a constitutional crisis.
A7  Ethnic violence continued in Burundi's capital.
A6  Mandaue Journal: A seaweed empire grows in the Philippines.
A4  National A10-12, B6-7  MOVES ON LEGAL ALIENS
A Federal commission will soon recommend speeding up the admission of the spouses and young children of legal aliens, while also recommending gradually reducing legal immigration by one-third.
A1  KEY WORDS RULE BUDGET DEBATE
Analysts for both parties say that the outcome of the current budget debate will depend largely on which party manages to define the fight in its own words.
A1  A BANKING SURPRISE
After two years of studies, bankers find surprising losses.
And their slogan might be: An educated consumer is their worst customer.
A1  GANGSTA RAP DEBATE
Time Warner executives are debating how to respond to the criticism of gantsta rap music produced by its music division.
A1  SOUTHEAST LOOKS FOR WORKERS
As urban areas in the Southeast outpaced the national economic and employment growth rates in recent years, the price has been a shortage of low-paid workers.
A10  SIMPSON CASE RUNS A BILL
Reporter's Notebook: The O.J.
Simpson trial is running up a huge bill and attracting followers from around the globe.
A10  A prosecutor said he was ashamed to be part of the trial.
A10  LITTLE IN POLLUTION MARKET
Five years after the Clean Air Act, trading in pollution rights is slow, and the price for the right to put a ton of acid-rain pollutants into the atmosphere has collapsed.
A11  FEW CLUES IN HARVARD DEATHS
Interviews with students and faculty members at Harvard University indicate that the key to last weekend's murder-suicide has thus far eluded everyone.
A12  MONEY DOUBTS IN WASHINGTON
For decades, lawmakers in Washington, D.C., sent money to Washington State to build planes and finance research.
But now the future of those enterprises is in doubt.
B6  DOLE SEES SUPPORT FOR FOSTER
Senator Bob Dole said that there were enough votes in the Senate to approve Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General if he could clear the expected filibuster.
B7  Metro Digest B1  BUDGET BATTLE IS JUST BEGINNING
Having just ended one of the most bitter budget fights in state history, Governor Pataki and the Legislature have now embarked on a course toward an even more caustic conflict next year.
A1  ILLEGAL HIRING INCREASES
Hard pressed by the recession in the construction industry, dozens of New York City contractors are increasing profits by illegally underpaying hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of their workers.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  The Tony Awards.
C11  Dance: School of American Ballet performances.
C13  Celebrating Bujones and Tcherkassky.
C14  An Eleo Pomare program.
C13  Music: Young musicians' workshops.
C11  Books: Into Arcadia with the author Simon Schama.
C11  Examining the U.F.O. controversy.
C14  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Yankees win after a visit from the owner.
C1  Dodgers beat Mets.
C7  A perfect game that wasn't.
C5  Basketball: Magic disposes of Pacers to reach N.B.A. finals.
C1  Cycling: Mud is the enemy in mountain-bike race.
C2  Columns: Araton on N.B.A.
C9  On Baseball.
C7  Golf: Norman comes through.
C3  Hockey: Devils have the look.
C1  Wings go 2-up.
C4  Nashville plays it cool.
C4  Racing: Bigger parimutuel bite angers fans.
C9  Tennis: Becker, Pierce fall.
C3  Obituaries D10  Harry Rosenfield, helped create school lunch program.
Charles J. Bensley, served on the New York City Board of Education.
Alexandre de Marenches, former head of the French secret service.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  The education of George Pataki.
Time to examine the militias.
More tears in Sri Lanka.
Letters  William Safire: Reading Boris's mind.
Anthony Lewis: No more illusions.
Elliot L. Richardson: Special counsels, petty cases.
Bridge C14  Chronicle A16  Crossword C10


Becker Exits Complaining While Pierce Exits Crying
Boris Becker, foiled yet again by the French Open's clay, went out with a cry of foul play.
Mary Pierce, last year's French Open runner-up and this year's Australian Open champion, went out crying after playing foully.
Becker's problems were, like the man himself, complex.
His third-round match against 128th-ranked Adrian Voinea, a qualifier, took two days to complete because of bad weather, and he felt persecuted and compromised by the referee's decision to have him play under conditions so abysmal he looked like an average hacker on his least favorite surface en route to a four-set loss.


Virtual Reality and Virtual Spaces Find a Niche in Real Medicine; Ill Children to Get A 3-D Playground Out in Cyberspace
In an unusual collaboration, leaders in the medical, high-technology and entertainment industries are working to create a computer network that allows children who are seriously ill to communicate and play in three-dimensional cyberspace -- and to heal more quickly in the process.
The experimental, broadband network, called Starbright World, is scheduled to be demonstrated for the first time today, with links in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle.
If all goes as planned, by the end of this year the network will connect five of the leading pediatric hospitals in the United States, including Mount Sinai in New York City.


With Talk Of Change, Yanks Do: They Win
After meeting with his manager and coaches Saturday night, following the Yankees' fifth straight defeat, George Steinbrenner sat in the middle of the Yankee clubhouse before yesterday afternoon's game and made a prediction: "I think you're going to see some changes. I made that clear to the coaches."
No one was exactly sure what Steinbrenner was talking about.
The team's owner mentioned something about more discipline and added, "We've got to get out the attitude of feeling sorry for ourselves."


Police Plan More Training In 9-mm. Gun
After a two-month study of the Police Department's new rapid-firing 9-millimeter semiautomatic handguns, senior police officials have decided to increase training in the use of the weapon.
But department figures show no dramatic upsurge in shooting, and the officials say there is no reason to stop issuing the guns.
The powerful handguns have become standard issue among police forces throughout the country, including in the low-crime national park system.
But they have been the source of controversy in New York City since the Police Department first began allowing officers, who felt outgunned by criminals, to use the weapons three years ago.


Acid-Rain Pollution Credits Are Not Enticing Utilities
What do you get when you cross a free-market economist with an environmentalist?
First, a Federal law that allows companies to buy and sell the right to pollute.
Next, a market for the right to pollute -- and a price tag on the value of that right.


A Seesaw Week for U.S. Policy in the Balkans
On Wednesday morning, a few hours before President Clinton's speech to the Air Force Academy, his national security adviser was aboard Air Force One refining the key phrases that would spell out the Administration's response to the seizure of hundreds of United Nations peacekeepers by Bosnian Serbs.
Earlier that morning Mr.
Clinton -- his voice intense, his jaw clenched -- had made clear that he intended to make no permanent commitment of American troops to Bosnia, his aides say.


Reporter's Notebook; Trying O. J. Simpson: $4,986,167 and Counting . . .
The O. J. Simpson case, a drama with its own cast of gladiators, chroniclers and commentators, also has its own accountant: Michael D. Antonovich, a member of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors.
About the 20th of every month Mr.
Antonovich calculates just how much the Simpson case has set back local taxpayers.
Then, in what has become as much a ritual in the case as Judge Lance A. Ito's scoldings or Mr.
Simpson's amiable entrances into court, Mr.
Antonovich's spokesman, Steven Herbert, arrives at the courthouse press room bearing turquoise news releases with the latest numbers.


Correction
An editorial on May 30 (" 'Tags' to Help Catch Bombers") faulted the Clinton Administration for simply calling for a study of putting chemical taggants into explosives and failing to offer legislation to require such taggants.
In fact, a bill sponsored by the Administration would require explosives to be tagged.


CHRONICLE
MIA FARROW is one of several well-known parents who are planning to take their children to a screening this evening at Alice Tully Hall of the documentary "Anne Frank Remembered." It will be shown on the Disney Channel on Thursday at 9 P.M.
The film is a compilation of first- person accounts by people who knew Anne Frank, and some who accompanied her to Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen, where she died in 1945.
Miep Gies, who helped conceal the family during the war and took food to them every day, conducts a tour of the cramped hideaway in Amsterdam.
Anne's only living blood relative, Berndt Elias, a first cousin, is also in the film, and both will be at the screening.


Goodby, Silverstein Wins Top Awards
Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco took top honors last week in two award competitions.
For the second consecutive year, Goodby, Silverstein won the most awards at the annual National Addy Awards sponsored by the American Advertising Federation.
At a presentation on Saturday, during the federation's national conference in Tampa, Fla., Goodby, Silverstein, a unit of the Omnicom Group, won nine Addys for work for clients like the California Fluid Milk Processor Advisory Board, the Haggar Clothing Company and Norwegian Cruise Line.


A Kick, Then a Heart Attack
A preliminary autopsy has found that a local police officer died of a heart attack after a suspect kicked him in the head on Friday morning.
The officer, Eugene J. Miglio III, 42, responded to back up another officer who was arresting two suspects on charges of erratic driving.
Janet Hicks, 35, of Middle Township, kicked him as he was trying to force her into a patrol car, the police said.


An Agenda for the Beaches
The season's first Tropical Storm is brewing off the Florida coast, and while there is no indication yet that New Jersey is in its path, the storm season puts everyone on a heightened alert along the Jersey coast.
This week, public officials from the state's beach areas will hold a "New Jersey Shore Summit" to discuss how to rebuild the beaches destroyed by past storms, and how to reinvigorate businesses near the beach.


Cable Picks Up Viewers the Networks Cast Adrift
Network television has come to be dominated by a young brand of romantic comedy typified in shows like "Mad About You" and "Friends." So where does that leave women in their 50's, or veterans of World War II?
More and more, it leaves them clicking the remote-control devices in their hands, flashing through cable channels looking for old, familiar movies on American Movie Classics or documentaries about submarines and aircraft carriers on the Discovery Channel.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Eggeling Takes L.P.G.A. Event
Dale Eggeling shot a one-under-par 71 yesterday to win the Oldsmobile Classic in East Lansing, Mich., earning more than she had in 15 of her 19 years on the L.P.G.A.
Tour.
Eggeling, who led all three rounds after opening with a 63, won for the first time in 15 years and took home $90,000.
She finished at 274, 14 under par at Walnut Hills Country Club.
Meg Mallon, Elaine Crosby and Annika Sorenstam were two strokes back. (AP)


Listen Up! Quincy Jones Has a New Gig
It was late afternoon, and Quincy Jones was gazing at the screen of a computer, talking about Depression-era juke joints.
"The juke joint was the only place that black people could go for food and music and dancing," he said.
"It was the place everyone went, and pioneers like Bessie Smith would perform."


Pushing Books by Chat and Pleading
The morning began with an embrace and negotiations involving Pat Conroy and his latest novel, "Beach Music."
"We would love to have him read at our store," urged Roxanne Coady, owner of R. J. Julia Booksellers in Madison, Conn., as she stood amid a crowd of booksellers.
"Can you help set that up?"


'Sunset' and 'Love! Valour!' Win the Top Tony Awards
Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber's gilded Gothic remake of a Hollywood classic, "Sunset Boulevard," as expected, won the Tony Award as best musical last night, while "Love! Valour! Compassion!," Terrence McNally's bittersweet comedy about eight gay men in a summer house, was named best play.
Most of the Tonys were divided among three shows, with "Sunset" winning seven, "Show Boat" five and "The Heiress" four.


Battle for the Stars Shapes Up at Talent Agencies
Even as Michael Ovitz clears the way for his expected departure from the Creative Artists Agency to take over MCA Inc., rival talent agencies are preparing for a free-for-all over actors and directors now represented by Creative Artists.
The competition could have a seismic impact on the Hollywood landscape.
For a decade Creative Artists dominated the movie business through its top actors and directors, outmaneuvering and outflanking agencies like International Creative Management, William Morris and United Talent.


One Rider's Misfortune Is Another's Good Luck
Norm Alvis is one of America's best international bicycle riders.
From 1988 to 1994, he rode for the 7-Eleven team and its successor, Motorola, and in 1990 he helped his teammate, Steve Bauer of Canada, keep the leader's yellow jersey in the Tour de France for 10 days even though Alvis finished only 134th.
Today, in the 11th annual Core States United States professional championship, Bauer unintentionally repaid the favor to Alvis, who now rides for the Saturn team.
With 19 miles remaining in the 156-mile race, Bauer slammed his brakes to avoid what might have been a recreational rider and went flying over the handlebars.


Nuclear Waste Plan Offers Phony Savings
To the Editor:
The proposal to change the nation's program for dealing with nuclear waste by abandoning the Yucca Mountain facility (news article, May 27) omits the fact that the money to be "saved" is not the Government's but yours and mine, and that it won't be saved at all.


Giving the U.F.O. Group A Shot at Persuasion
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE FOURTH KIND Alien Abduction, U.F.O.'s and the Conference at M.I.T.
By C. D. B. Bryan  476 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Alfred A. Knopf, the publisher of "Close Encounters of the Fourth Kind," is about as mainstream and respectable as a publisher can be.
The author, C. D. B. Bryan, has written estimable histories of the National Air and Space Museum and the National Geographic Society.
The book's main event is the so-called abduction study conference from June 13-17, 1992, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the direction of David E. Pritchard, a physicist there, and John E. Mack, the Harvard psychiatrist.


Queens Riders Do the Subway Shuffle
It may be small consolation to people who found that their subway trains were more crowded than usual, made more stops than usual or did not run at all.
But if the riders thought that something was amiss over the weekend, they were right.
The replacement of a major crossover switch in Queens forced changes in service on E, F, G and R trains through much of that borough and between Queens and Manhattan.


Jean-Louis Morin, Dancer, Dies at 42
Jean-Louis Morin, a former principal dancer with the Martha Graham Dance Company and a choreographer, died on May 24 at Montreal General Hospital in Montreal.
He was 42 and lived in Montreal.
The cause was AIDS, said Doneley Meris, a friend.


Kenya Regime Owes Birth to Cold War
To the Editor:
Criticism of President Daniel Arap Moi's regime in Kenya in "New Kenya Opposition Party Draws Fierce Response" (news article, May 27) and "Message to Mr. Moi" (editorial, May 31) seems to overlook the context within which the status quo developed.


Mandaue Journal; They Plow the Waves for the Squire of Seaweed
Benson U. Dakay hefted a tangled, soggy gray-green clump and shook it slightly.
"This is what it's all about," he said. "Seaweed."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Esquire, Men's Health and Rolling Stone find rare common ground in a promotion for Haggar.
IMAGINE Coca-Cola, Pepsi-Cola and Royal Crown teaming up to plug colas among iced-tea drinkers.
Or McDonald's, Burger King and Wendy's joining forces to assert that hamburgers are better than pizza.
In almost as unlikely a coalition of competitors, three magazines that are typically bitter rivals for advertising pages and dollars -- Esquire, Men's Health and Rolling Stone -- are cooperating for the first time to produce a promotional program for the Haggar Clothing Company.


Bones May Be Those Of Powerful Maya Ruler
NEW excavations at a royal Maya tomb in Honduras have uncovered a red-stained skeleton, surrounded by jade offerings, that archeologists think is the remains of Kinich Ah Pop, the second ruler of the powerful Copan dynasty in the fifth century A.D.
The Honduran Government recently announced the discovery of the skeleton and also of a second tomb nearby.
Culture Minister Rodolfo Pastor Fasquelle said the two finds constituted "a discovery of world importance."


Attack of the Aliens: Florida Tangles With Invasive Species
IT is a typical day on the Wacissa River near Tallahassee: crisp blue sky, herons stalking the shallows -- and, for the third time in an hour, Don Schmitz disentangling his outboard motor from the tendrils of an alien aquatic vine.
"Ah, the joys of hydrilla," he said.


Corrections
A brief report yesterday about a Hindemith and Purcell concert by the Central City Chorus at the Central Presbyterian Church in Manhattan misstated the date of the concert.
It was last night; it is not tonight.


Winners in Lotus Deal Enjoy a Return of 37 to 1
Every bidding war for large companies has its winners and losers, but there seem to be especially big ones in the $3.3 billion offer by I.B.M. for Lotus Development.
Chief among the apparent winners are the people who bought Lotus stock -- or better still, options to buy Lotus stock -- on Friday, when apparently no one, aside from I.B.M. insiders, knew that a deal was in the works.


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Impressionable Minds
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Dole's Entertainment Guide" (editorial, June 2): Although your comments concerning Senator Bob Dole's motivation are probably correct, it is unsubstantiated to state categorically: "no one has ever dropped dead from viewing 'Natural Born Killers,' or listening to gangster rap records."


East Germany's Old Spymaster Talks: He Has Regrets, but Is Uncontrite
The old spymaster is thinking.
He is thinking of the agents he sent over there, into the badlands, who languish now in jail while he is free; he is thinking of the loveless secretaries he sent his Romeos to seduce into betrayal and wrecked lives; he is thinking how he brought down a whole government and maybe changed history.
And, as the barges nudge by on the River Spree below his apartment window, he is thinking that, on balance, he can live with all of that.


How to Solve Air Traffic Crisis
To the Editor:
"Triple Trouble in the Air" (editorial, June 1) calls attention to equipment problems that have plagued the Federal Aviation Administration facilities in New York.
Unfortunately, these recent events are not unique to New York facilities but are representative of systemic problems facing the agency nationwide.


Only a Mirror
To the Editor:
I agree with William J. Bennett and C. DeLores Tucker (Op-Ed, June 2) that there is much vulgar music being played, and also wish that record labels would show self-restraint.
Rather than causing violence by glorifying it, is it not possible that this music is only representing the feeling of many young people in today's urban environment?


Moscow Journal; Lifting the Spirit (and Face) in Russia
In the bad old days of Soviet totalitarianism, the worker's paradise did deliver on at least one promise of equality for all.
Anyone who wanted it could get an affordable face lift.


BUSINESS DIGEST
I.B.M. in Hostile Bid Of $3.3 Billion for Lotus I.B.M. made a surprise $3.3 billion hostile bid for Lotus Development in what would be the largest amount ever paid for a computer software company.
Lotus stock surged $28.9375, to close at $61.4375.


Who's an Isolationist?
Democrats are complaining about Republican "isolationism" and Congressional involvement in foreign policy.
How strange.
Apparently the liberal establishment is surprised that a Republican Congress would actually propose measures that reflect the thinking of Republican members and the American people.
Rather than working with Congress, President Clinton has resorted to sloganeering, calling a Republican foreign aid bill isolationist.


Sergi Bruguera and the Blustery Day
There was another contentious afternoon of rain-wracked tennis at soggy Roland Garros, where the bluster today came from an unlikely source, the two-time defending champion Sergi Bruguera, a low-profile type who usually reserves his high intensity for his topspin.
Today the seventh-seeded Bruguera almost got angry enough to abandon his bid to become the first man to collect three consecutive French Open titles since Bjorn Borg (1978-81) became the only man to accomplish that feat here.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
The Nippon Data Kiki Company, once a favorite of Japanese and foreign stock market investors, said yesterday that it had gone bankrupt, with accumulated debt of $595 million.
The company, which specializes in office automation equipment and hotel room refrigerator billing systems, filed a declaration of bankruptcy with the Tokyo District Court.
*
The United States Banknote Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to exchange a 22.5 percent stake in its Brazilian subsidiary, ABN-Brazil, for the printing operations of Banco Bradesco S.A., a leading Brazilian bank.
The company did not disclose the value of the ABN-Brazil stake, but said the unit had annual revenues of about $75 million.
United States Banknote, based in New York, said the printing operation it was acquiring had 1994 sales of about $40 million.


Learning to Live With Alzheimer's
Alzheimer's disease is anything but a joke, yet jokes about Alzheimer's can be very funny.
"Complaints of a Dutiful Daughter" is Deborah Hoffmann's funny, sad, loving, exasperated, wry and resigned account of trying to come to terms with her mother's vagrant mind.
When we meet the two women, Deborah is Doris Hoffmann's only link to a muddled present and a dim past that grows darker by the hour.
Doris and Deborah always seem to enjoy each other's company, but for months this dutiful daughter has found herself trying with increasing frustration to keep her mother in the present, insisting on accuracy about dates and relationships.
Sitting at a desk, fiddling with a pencil, Deborah tells the camera of her wearing compulsion to be "the overseer" of a woman who didn't quite recall that Deborah was her daughter or that she had ever been married.


Ross Perot, Yet Again
Ross Perot says his audition for Presidential candidates will be about "issues, issues, issues." But of course it will really be about Ross, Ross, Ross.
What better way for Mr.
Perot to soothe inner doubts about his importance than to decree that the most powerful politicians in America must, on his whim, experience August in Dallas?
Counting sunstroke a small price to pay for the White House, the Republican hopefuls are booking tickets.


Green Shakes, Giants Rattle and Mets Roll
Maybe Barry Bonds and his teammates should have stood behind the batting cage at Candlestick Park and listened to Dallas Green speak prior to the Giants-Mets game this afternoon.
Disgusted with the state of his team, the Mets' manager suggested that he might get fired for the club's poor play, hinted that the departure of reliever Josias Manzanillo -- who was claimed on waivers by the Yankees today -- was only the first step in a housecleaning and criticized team attitude.
Mostly, though, Green bemoaned the fact that so many players seem willing to "walk the major league walk" without providing a major league-quality performance on the field.


After All the Talk, MCA's New Owner Fails to Lure Ovitz
Hollywood's most closely watched deal has collapsed.
Negotiations for Michael Ovitz, the chairman of Creative Artists Agency, to head MCA Inc. broke down even though a deal had been close to completion as recently as Sunday.
Seagram, which completed its $5.7 billion purchase of 80 percent of MCA yesterday, wanted to give the reins of the entertainment giant to Mr.
Ovitz, Hollywood's top deal maker.
In turn, people involved in the talks said, Mr.
Ovitz wanted about $250 million.


Scientists Deplore Flight From Reason
SINCE at least the time of Archimedes, the third-century B.C.
Greek physicist who was slain by a Roman soldier, scientists have occasionally had to defend themselves from forces anathema to rational thought.
Once again many scientists believe their backs are to the wall, and participants at a meeting last week in New York resolved to start fighting back.
There is growing danger, many said, that the fabric of reason is being ripped asunder, and that if scientists and other thinkers continue to acquiesce in the process, the hobbling of science and its hand-maidens -- medicine and technology among them -- seems assured.
Moreover, many participants argued, the same cognitive disease afflicting science in the United States and many other countries could eventually even unravel democracy, which depends on the capacity of citizens to reach rational estimates.


2 Subway Trains Crash on Williamsburg Bridge
A Manhattan-bound subway train driven by a motorman on his final run of an overnight shift slammed into the rear of another train stopped on the Williamsburg Bridge yesterday morning, killing the motorman, injuring more than 50 passengers and crumpling tons of steel like so much wadded paper.
It was the fourth time in less than two years that a subway train has run into the back of another, raising questions about whether the safeguards built into the aging system are sufficient.


Girl, 4, Killed in a Brooklyn Fire


Patterns
All Together Now
When Tracy Reese left her design position at Magaschoni earlier this year and began making plans to start her own company, she got some valuable advice from two potential competitors, Anna Sui and Cynthia Rowley.
And in a similar cooperative spirit, Kate Spade's trendy handbags and Susan Lazar's up-to-the-minute nylon trench coats were cut from the same fabric because the designers combined their fabric purchases.


Abbott Is Remembered in the Colorful Spirit of Broadway
In the last year of his life, George Abbott, at the age of 107, was asked what was the biggest change he had seen on Broadway.
He paused, then replied, "Electricity."
This story was told by Natalia Makarova at a memorial celebration yesterday at the Majestic Theater.
Abbott died on Jan. 31, and friends and associates gathered to honor the man known as Mr.
Broadway, a director and playwright who had deeply influenced their lives.
Ms.
Makarova, who starred in his 1983 revival of "On Your Toes," began her remarks by saying that when she first met Abbott he was a very active 95.
He told her he had a pacemaker because "his heart couldn't keep up with him." Later, the audience heard from Edward Colton, who had been Abbott's lawyer since 1928.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Chris Green, safety, to a one-year contract.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Dante Jones and Dave Garnett, linebackers.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Claimed Charles Swann, defensive back, off waivers from the Carolina Panthers.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Released Browning Nagle, quarterback.
ST.
LOUIS RAMS -- Signed Carl Tremble, running back, and Paschall Davis, linebacker.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  BALTIMORE SPIRIT -- Acquired Jeff Rogers, midfielder, from the Kansas City Attack for leaving Jon Parry, midfielder, on the unprotected list.


Gingrich Speech Disrupted
Protesters interrupted a luncheon speech today by Speaker Newt Gingrich, who was promoting his book "To Renew America" at the annual convention of the American Booksellers Association.
At least 3 of the 200 or so protesters, including one book distributor, were arrested.


Back to You, Mr. Mayor
Now that New York State's Governor and Legislature have agreed on a budget, the fiscal drama shifts to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the question of how he will play the cards dealt by Albany.
It is one of the worst hands any mayor has ever had.
Mr.
Giuliani appears to have ended up with maybe half the $1 billion in savings he had sought from the state to close a $3 billion budget gap.
He has little time to scramble for alternatives beyond the painful service cuts he has already warned might be needed.
While he was pushing the Governor and Legislature for budgetary help, Mr.
Giuliani said that any shortfall in his wish list from Albany would force him to cut such vital New York City services as libraries, schools and arts programs.
His purpose was to dramatize his contention that welfare and Medicaid were far better places to cut.
But now that the Republican assault on the social and health care safety net for the poor has been blunted in Albany, the Mayor can drop his tactical posturing.
He need not inflict all the painful service cuts he has envisioned.
His choices are more subtle than that.


U.S. Charges Ex-Prosecutors In a Drug Case
In what officials said was a striking demonstration of the corrupting influence of drugs on the legal system, a former senior Justice Department official who once led efforts to extradite leaders of the Cali cocaine cartel in Colombia was indicted today on charges of helping the cartel in a criminal conspiracy.
Michael Abbell, who was one of 62 people accused in a Miami indictment of participating in a cocaine-smuggling conspiracy, was a section chief in the Justice Department's criminal division during the Reagan Administration's war on drugs in the early 1980's.
Five other lawyers, including two other former Justice Department officials, were named in the indictment.


Caseload Is Nearing Gridlock as Current Term Winds Down
The Supreme Court's 1994-95 term almost certainly has less than a month to run, but with only one opinion announced today, and no more scheduled until next week, the familiar signs of June gridlock are settling on the Court.
The number of cases that have been argued but not yet decided, 26, is not particularly big for this time of year.
But not only does that number represent nearly one-third of about 80 cases that are to be decided with full opinions during the nine-month term, it also includes nearly all of the term's most important cases.


On My Mind; How to Succeed In Bosnia
It is not true that the Clinton Administration has no firm policy about Bosnia.
In the space of six days last week, it had three of them just about committing troops, and another may be in the oven.
On Tuesday, the policy was still that the U.S. would send troops into the war only to help in the emergency of a U.N. withdrawal from Bosnia.
That itself was a switch from the Clinton policy of no troops.
But that "no never" policy was around after Mr.
Clinton's inauguration.
That is long past the expiration date for American foreign policies these days.
So it doesn't count, except for naives with memories.


Lind Back Home With Future in Doubt
JOSE LIND, who left the Kansas City Royals last week, has returned to Puerto Rico to be with his family and deal with personal problems, his local agent said from San Juan yesterday.
HERK ROBINSON, the Royals' general manager, said Lind told the Royals that he was "not totally sure he wanted to continue playing major league baseball" in a phone call Sunday.
"Obviously, something is bothering him a great deal," Robinson said.


CHRONICLE
ALLAN R. DRAGONE, the chairman of the New York Racing Association, the nonprofit corporation that runs Aqueduct, Belmont Park and Saratoga race tracks, now has a track of his own, so to speak.
It will have humans, not horses, going through their paces on it.
On Saturday, the Dragone Track was dedicated at his alma mater, Middlebury College in Middlebury, Vt., while Mr.
Dragone was there for his class's 40th reunion.


A Specialist In Rebounds To Run Kmart
The Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it had hired Floyd Hall, a specialist in pumping new life into sagging retailers, as its new chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Hall, who is 56, replaces Joseph E. Antonini, who resigned under pressure in March as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Antonini, who had resigned earlier as chairman, was forced out by disgruntled shareholders and a board that could no longer give him its undivided support.


You're Kidding, McEnroe Is Blunt?
If I were a tennis player, I wouldn't want John McEnroe calling my match.
He's tough and blunt and can blister your game.
"Abysmal" is one of McEnroe's favorite words.
There is no governor on his candor.
All of which makes him eminently delightful as a French Open analyst for NBC and USA Network.
You may not want to invite him to your next National Organization for Women meeting.
He has espoused the oddball belief that women, like CBS's Mary Carillo, should not call men's tennis because of their chromosomal makeup.
He recently softened that view regarding Carillo and Martina Navratilova -- who will call Wimbledon for HBO -- a reversal that may have been driven by political correctness, or a fundamental reconsideration of a stupid position.


Nagle, Former Jet, Cut by Colts
Quarterback Browning Nagle, who played only part of one game for Indianapolis last season, was released yesterday.


Hitchcock Is No Mystery to Athletics
Baseballs ricocheted off the outfield fence, barely falling shy of disappearing for homers and barely keeping some of the more ornery Yankee fans from drifting asleep or drifting out of Yankee Stadium.
Sterling Hitchcock fooled none of the Oakland batters last night, and the results were disastrous and too commonplace in this sloppy season.
The Yankees needed a substantive performance from Hitchcock to push their winning streak into a second day and perhaps turn their homestand into a wake-up call.
But Hitchcock was blitzed for the second straight start, this time, 11-5.


Elected to Unite, Councilman Divides
When the Rev.
Lloyd Henry was elected to the New York City Council 17 months ago, Democratic Party officials heralded the quiet, friendly Episcopal minister as their best hope of bringing together the Caribbean and Jewish constituencies in the district in Flatbush, Brooklyn.


A World-Class Sun Reflector


The Quake That Hurt Kobe Helps Its Criminals
When an earthquake toppled entire neighborhoods here in January, the most striking and impressive thing for many Americans was the almost complete lack of looting.
These days, the looting has arrived -- on a huge scale, but in a very orderly and Japanese way.
There are no hoodlums smashing windows, but criminal gangs known as yakuza are muscling their way into the demolition and construction business: knocking down damaged buildings, putting up new ones and hauling their profits to the banks.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.02
4.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.48
5.40
4.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.31
4.53
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.06
6.08
6.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.52
6.53
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.52
7.53
8.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.87
5.92
6.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


S.E.C. Said to Prepare Inside-Trading Case
The enforcement staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission is planning to recommend bringing charges against an analyst at Salomon Brothers and his father, who owns a brokerage firm, contending that they violated insider-trading laws during failed merger talks between the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc.
The S.E.C. is investigating the purchase of shares of Tele-Communications and of the Liberty Media Corporation by Moran Asset Management, a money-management and securities research firm that specializes in telecommunications, cable and other media stocks, in the two weeks before announcement of the merger talks on Oct. 13, 1993, Frederick A. Moran, the owner of the firm, said yesterday.
He denied any wrongdoing.


Husband Dumps Wife. She's Angry. Watch Out.
SPLITTING  By Fay Weldon  246 pages. The Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.
"Splitting," Fay Weldon's latest satire, is actually a recycled version of several earlier portraits she has done about the battle between the sexes.
Like "The Life and Loves of a She-Devil" -- the sour 1984 novel that was made into a big, noisy movie pitting Roseanne Barr against Meryl Streep -- "Splitting" features an unhappy heroine who has been dumped by her husband for another woman and who determines to get revenge.
Like "The Heart of the Country" (1988), it centers on a woman whose husband has left her penniless and embittered.
And like "The Cloning of Joanna May" (1990), it features a put-upon heroine who is split several ways, this time not by the latest in cloning technology, but by the magic of multiple personality.


About Drugs and the Happiness High
Calling the town of Wenatchee, Wash., "happy valley" is less a comment on the townsfolk -- who reportedly swallow no more Prozac than the rest of the nation -- than a tribute to Jim Goodwin, a local psychologist who has evidently never met a client he didn't think needed the hottest selling antidepressant drug in the land.
On tonight's "Welcome to Happy Valley," Dr.
Goodwin is running on high as he tells how Prozac lifted him from the verge of suicide to flights of enlightenment.
"I'm a 20th-century man," he says.
"And if my brain needs something to help me function better, why not use it?"


Vending Laws and the Veterans' Lobby
Four years ago the State Legislature passed a much-needed law that confirmed New York City's right to regulate sidewalk vending in severely congested business districts -- even if the vending is conducted by disabled veterans.
Now that sensible law is expiring, and its continuation is up for consideration today in the Cities Committee of the Democratic-led State Assembly.
The city needs the power it holds under the expiring law to enforce reasonable restrictions on peddling.
It had been inundated with an influx of peddlers after a 1990 state court ruling upheld an 1894 statute granting disabled vets the right to peddle goods on any city street.
Shopping areas that had previously been off limits to vendors, like the elegant stretch of Manhattan's Fifth Avenue south of Central Park, became densely packed flea markets.
Disabled veterans -- many recruited by merchandisers of cheap ties, scarves and counterfeit designer watches who rushed to take advantage of their special peddling status -- hawked wares from large folding tables and cardboard boxes set up on sidewalks already jammed with pedestrians.


Why Student Aid Matters
Two years ago, Gregory McCall almost became a dropout when he failed to make the state championship basketball team at St.
Anthony High School in Jersey City.
As he told Neil MacFarquhar of The Times: "I had no hope of going to college because my family was so poor. I thought I would end up in Jersey City working at Kmart in a minimum-wage job."
Instead, with prodding from teachers and counselors, Mr.
McCall graduated from St.
Anthony this week, receiving an award for outstanding educational improvement and earning a full $20,000 scholarship to Monmouth University in New Jersey.


America Online Seeks an Agency
America Online Inc. said yesterday that it was seeking an agency to help develop a corporate branding campaign, now handled in-house.
The billings were not disclosed, but Adweek estimated they could total as much as $30 million.


Prices of Long Bonds Gain, But Short-Term Issues Slip
Prices of long-term Treasury issues rose yesterday, but without the furor of the previous two sessions as activity seemed to stall and the overall market finished mixed.
The 30-year bond rose 4/32 , to 11415/32 ; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, slipped to 6.52 percent from 6.53 percent on Friday.
Much of the day's strength was focused on the longer maturities.


Old Coach Eyeing New Cup Conquest
Six victories short of yet another Stanley Cup championship with yet another team, Coach Scotty Bowman of Detroit is like a man holding aces in a poker hand while waiting to draw more cards.
What's next for this sometimes perplexing master of his profession?
Won't Bowman be a free agent after the current playoffs?


Admitting Women to V.M.I. Shortchanges All
To the Editor:
Re "V.M.I., a Constitutional Throwback" (editorial, June 1):


Free-Market Failure
To the Editor:
It's ironic to watch a party that proclaims the need to eliminate Federal funding of public television because the free market works best give impassioned speeches protesting the free-market products of Hollywood (front page, June 1).
Senator Bob Dole's concerns about what Hollywood produces only serve to underscore the need to support at least one television programming source that is not dependent on free-market forces.
SAM NEWBURY  Pittsburgh, June 2, 1995


I.B.M.'s BIG MOVE: THE BIDDER; I.B.M. SEEKS TO BUY SOFTWARE MAKER IN $3.3 BILLION BID
Stunning other computer companies as well as its prey, I.B.M. made a surprise $3.3 billion bid yesterday to acquire the Lotus Development Corporation for what would be the largest amount ever paid for a computer software company.
If the hostile takeover succeeds, Lotus could aid the International Business Machines Corporation's effort to regain momentum in the personal computer field, a market it helped create in the early 1980's with the I.B.M.
PC but one in which it has subsequently stumbled.


A Top Executive Is Resigning From American International Group
American International Group said yesterday that Jeffrey W. Greenberg, an executive vice president and a son of its chairman and chief executive, Maurice R. Greenberg, was resigning after 17 years with the insurance company.
The company, the country's largest underwriter of commercial and industrial insurance, attributed the resignation of Mr.
Greenberg, who is 43, to personal reasons.
It offered no further explanation.


We Can Afford Research
To the Editor:
Your May 30 front-page article on the shortage of funds for biomedical research errs in ascribing the problem to, among others, "legislators intent on balancing budgets."
Whether or not to fund such research is a matter of choice by legislators and is wholly compatible with balancing budgets.


Not Forced to Watch
To the Editor:
Notwithstanding Senator Bob Dole's opposition to gun control and the ready availability of handguns in this country, I have not heard of a single instance where one of those guns has been held to anyone's head to force that person to see any movie, or listen to music, that he or she finds offensive (front page, June 1).


Love in the Ruins; Preservationists Fight to Save Crumbling Queens Aquacade
The Aquacade sits on the edge of a glistening lake in the heart of Queens, a remnant of the 1939 World's Fair.
To the few who know, the amphitheater in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park recalls a more innocent time in the city's history, when thousands of eager spectators crammed the wooden seats to watch swimmers fashion pinwheels and starbursts in a shimmering pool behind a lighted water curtain.


Multimedia Games Without Gore
IT is never too early to think about Christmas.
The year's biggest preview of coming attractions for the multimedia industry is the Electronic Entertainment Expo, held last month in Los Angeles.
On the evidence of two days of mind-numbing demonstrations, it seems only a matter of moments until some Newton Minow of our time tars multimedia with a phrase as catchy and appropriate as the "vast wasteland" he hung on television.
The much-touted new game machines are faster than the old ones and more "realistic," which means they are still a far cry from real.
But most games still come in just four numbing categories: shoot 'em up, kick 'em down, scroll and jump and simulated sports.


Upstart Wins A Ballot Slot, Embarrassing Democrats
For the second time in as many years, John L. Kucek, a Holocaust revisionist, has embarrassed the Democratic Party by getting his name on the primary election ballot unopposed.
In 1994, he went after the nomination for Congress.
This year, he is seeking one of two Assembly seats in the 22d Legislative District, which includes parts of Middlesex, Morris, Somerset and Union counties.
The Democratic Party's response is the same as it was last year: to support a write-in campaign to deny Mr.
Kucek the opportunity to be the party's candidate in November.


I.B.M.'S BIG MOVE: THE TREND -- From Calculator to Communications Tool; As the Role of the Computer Changes, Companies Try to Keep Pace
In his "Dear Colleague" letter to I.B.M. workers yesterday, Louis V. Gerstner Jr. explained his company's $3.3-billion bid for Lotus Development Corporation as a vital step toward the high-tech workplace of the future.
The two companies, the International Business Machines Corporation chairman wrote, were an ideal match.
Together, Mr.
Gerstner declared, I.B.M. and Lotus Development could hurry the arrival of a better world for workers everywhere by creating "a collaborative computing environment so people can work and communicate across corporate and national borders -- without worrying about things like incompatible hardware and software."


Risks to Spine Seen in Scuba Diving
MOST amateur divers are aware of the obvious dangers of scuba diving like decompression sickness or running out of air.
Now doctors at Technical University in Aachen, Germany, say divers, particularly amateurs, may be unwittingly experiencing damage to the central nervous system.
Using magnetic resonance imaging, the researchers have found evidence that tiny gas bubbles released in the blood during diving could cause lesions to form on the brain and spinal cord and could damage the disks that separate spinal vertebrae.
Their findings are reported in the current issue of The Lancet, an international medical journal published in Britain.


After Dismissing Police Force, a Village Finds No Peace or Order
JUST about everyone in this quiet boating haven agreed that it sure paid to dump the police force.
The village saved about $600,000 when it voted the scandal-plagued department out of its misery last fall.
Residents were handed checks of $200 to $300 each from the savings.
And the Town of Southold picked up Greenport's policing duties without a hitch.
But now the tourists are back.
Weekend traffic is a long, ludicrous snake.
Southold, which includes Greenport and six other hamlets on the island's North Fork, triples in size, to 60,000 hot, restless souls.
The town has 23 active patrol officers.
It could use more.


Clinton Rejects Invitation To Candidate Conference
Side by side on a television talk show, President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore tonight made what looked like their first joint appearance of the 1996 Presidential campaign.
But they were careful to keep some distance from the fray, ruling out attending a conference of Presidential contenders called by Ross Perot in Dallas for this summer.
"I don't think the President should start politicking too soon," Mr.
Clinton said, rejecting an invitation to a forum that Mr.
Perot has said all the Republican Presidential contenders as well as the Democratic and Republican Party leaders had agreed to attend in August.


CHRONICLE
ROY LICHTENSTEIN is accustomed to seeing his artwork on display in all sorts of places and locales.
Now, he has donated a limited-edition silkscreen print to the 175 United States embassies around the world.


Marketing Falls Short, Not Software
The Lotus Development Corporation has a history of developing the "killer app" -- a software application that creates such a fundamentally new and different use for the personal computer that it spawns a new market.
Unfortunately for Lotus, the company also has a history of failing to fully capitalize on the markets it helps create.
That's what happened after Lotus helped popularize the personal computer with its introduction in 1983 of the 1-2-3 spreadsheet, but then eventually fell behind Microsoft in the spreadsheet market.


Corrections
Two entries in the listing of new equity issues in Business Day yesterday, for offerings by the Sinclair Broadcast Group and Titan Wheel International, misidentified the lead underwriter.
In both cases, the lead underwriter was Smith Barney, a unit of Travelers Inc., not Salomon Brothers.


For CS First Boston, Yesterday Was a Return to the 80's
Yesterday was a red-letter day for the takeover specialists at CS First Boston Inc.
One of the Wall Street firm's clients, I.B.M., announced a $3.3 billion hostile bid for the Lotus Development Corporation.
Another client, the Seagram Corporation, completed its $5.7 billion acquisition of an 80 percent interest in MCA Inc. from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.


Observer; Some Vision Things
So many persons are now running for President that it makes your head shpin.
Republicans have candidates you've never heard of.
Every time the newspapers print another list of Republican candidates I examine it warily to make sure I'm not on it.
Democrats so far have only President Clinton.
Amazingly, he is trying hard to keep other Democrats from running.


New Tests on Rosi Also Positive
The World Boxing Organization junior-middleweight champion, GIANFRANCO ROSI of Italy, faced a two-year suspension and the loss of his crown as another round of tests yesterday confirmed that he took amphetamines before his winning title fight against the American VERNON PHILLIPS.
"Second tests confirmed the results of the first test," CARLO MARAFIOTI, secretary of the Italian Boxing Federation, said yesterday in Rome. (AP)


Signals From Another Era Leave Room for Human Error
Facing the fourth major subway crash in less than four years, Transit Authority officials and Federal investigators said yesterday that they would conduct a broad inquiry into the safety of the New York City subway system but would focus especially on the 75-year-old signal system.
Cities with newer subways have more advanced signal systems that would probably have prevented an accident like the one that occurred on the Williamsburg Bridge yesterday, officials said.
New York's signal system gives motormen more control, which makes the subways more vulnerable to human error.
The signal system was involved in an accident in February, also a rear-end crash.


Diagnostek Inc.(DXK,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Vaughn Powers Red Sox to 7th Straight
Red Sox 3, Angels 2
Mo Vaughn's 13th home run snapped a tie and boosted Erik Hanson's record to 6-0 last night as Boston won its seventh consecutive game, a 3-2 victory over California at Fenway Park.


The Specter of Perots Haunts Major Parties
They are obstacles in the political parties' carefully plotted paths to the White House next year.
They threaten to upset the ways that Presidential campaigns have traditionally been waged in this country.
And they terrify Republicans and Democrats alike.
They are the independent and third-party candidates, and they are the wild cards, the Ross Perots of the 1996 Presidential campaign.


Ovitz Won't Head MCA as Big Hollywood Deal Collapses
Hollywood's most closely watched deal ended up on the cutting-room floor yesterday as negotiations for Michael Ovitz to become head of the entertainment giant MCA Inc. unexpectedly collapsed.
The end of the talks scuttled plans by the president of the Seagram Company, Edgar Bronfman Jr., to give Mr.
Ovitz, chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, the reins of MCA, which Seagram now controls.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Ethiopian Sets World Mark in 10,000
Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia set a world record for 10,000 meters yesterday, clocking a time of 26 minutes 43.53 seconds that shattered the previous mark by nearly 9 seconds in a meet at Hengelo, the Netherlands.
Gebrselassie, 21, raced through the first half of the race in 13:21.71, 11 seconds ahead of schedule in lowering the mark of 26:52.23 set by William Sigei of Kenya in Oslo on July 22, 1994. (AP) RUSSIAN WOMAN REGAINS HAMMER RECORD: Almost no one saw her do it, but Olga Kuzenkova of Russia regained her title as world- record holder in the women's hammer throw yesterday at the Znamensky Memorial competition in Moscow.
Kuzenkova, performing on a breezy, warm night at Lokomotiv Stadium, had a throw of 223 feet 6 1/2 inches, breaking the previous mark by more than 4 feet.
She did it on a reserve field with virtually no spectators present.
Kuzenkova was the first officially recognized world-record holder in the event until Romania's Mihaela Melinte edged past her in March with a toss of 219-4 in Bucharest, Romania. (AP) SOCCER Brazil Is Too Much for Sweden Again
Sweden just can't handle Brazil in soccer. It doesn't matter if it's men or women.
One day after the men won by 1-0 in an English tournament, the Brazilian women capitalized on their only chance in the first half and hung on for a 1-0 upset over Sweden in their women's World Cup opener yesterday at Helsingborg, Sweden.
Brazil also beat Sweden by 1-0 in the semifinals of last year's men's World Cup in the United States. (AP) GOLF Beck Among Qualifiers for U.S.
Open
The former United States Open runner-up Chip Beck was among 47 golfers at 11 sites who earned places yesterday in the Open championship.
Chris Tidland, an amateur, led Beck and 14 other qualifiers at the Columbus, Ohio, site.
Thirty-seven more golfers will advance through sectional qualifying today to complete the 156-player field.
Seventy-two players were fully exempt from qualifying for this year's tournament, which will be held June 15-18 at Shinnecock Hills in Southampton, L.I.
Others who qualified at Columbus include Bob Tway and Larry Mize. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL Fullerton State Romps Over Tennessee
Fullerton State scored an 11-1 victory over Tennessee yesterday at the College World Series in Omaha.
Mark Kotsay went 4 for 4, including a grand slam, and Jon Ward allowed four hits in seven innings to lead the top-seeded Titans in the Bracket Two winners' final.
The victory gives Fullerton (55-9) a few days off.
The Titans will play Thursday against the survivor of today's losers' bracket final.
Tennessee (53-15) fell to the elimination bracket, where it will face Stanford.
The Cardinal eliminated Clemson, 8-3, last night. (AP)


Ellen Garrison, 96; Acted in Film 'Zelig'
Ellen Jay Garrison, the widow of the Manhattan attorney Lloyd K. Garrison and a featured performer in the Woody Allen film "Zelig" at the age of 83, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 96.
Mrs.
Garrison was born in Boston and attended the Brearley School.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College in 1920.
In the 1950's she served as president of Women United for the United Nations.
A direct descendant of John Jay, she was a longtime trustee of the John Jay Homestead in Bedford, N.Y.


Arthur Shapiro, 72; Led Research of Tourette's
Arthur K. Shapiro, a psychiatrist whose work at Mount Sinai Medical School advanced the knowledge and treatment of Tourette's Syndrome, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 72 and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


METRO DIGEST
CRASH ON THE SUBWAY: ONE TRAIN SLAMS INTO ANOTHER ON BRIDGE
A Manhattan-bound subway train driven by a motorman on his final run of an overnight shift slammed into the rear of another train stopped on the Williamsburg Bridge, killing the motorman, injuring more than 50 passengers and crumpling tons of steel like so much wadded paper.  [ Page A1. ]
They were the dawn patrol, the early risers from Brooklyn and Queens who turn on the lights, open the mailrooms and do the grunt work of the Manhattan law offices and brokerage houses and restaurants.  [ B4. ]
People called out, asking for help; asking, with tears and a deadly seriousness, if the bridge was going to tumble into the East River.  [ B4. ]
Facing the fourth major subway crash in less than four years, Transit Authority officials and Federal investigators said they would conduct a broad inquiry into the safety of the New York City subway system but would focus especially on the 75-year-old signal system.  [ B5. ]
To one fellow worker, Layton Gibson was a motorman who could be counted on to "hit the board," or bring the train to a stop so it was perfectly aligned with the platform.  [ B5. ] NEW YORK CITY  VETERANS FIGHT TO PEDDLE IN MIDTOWN
Robert Smith, a World War II veteran, remembers making hundreds of dollars a day selling clothing on Fifth Avenue.
But lucrative Fifth Avenue is off-limits to him, and merchants would prefer to keep it that way.
Now an escalating war is being waged over control of the city's most famous sidewalks.  [ B3. ] JUDGE PUTS POLICE PANEL IN CITY HANDS
The dispute between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council over how to monitor police corruption moved to State Supreme Court as the two sides argued before a judge who ultimately urged them to try again to resolve their differences.  [ B3. ] WOMAN TELLS OF WEEKS HELD IN BROTHEL
A young Thai woman said that Federal prison was "a lovely place" compared with the Chinatown brothel where she and 30 other women had been virtually imprisoned.  [ B2. ] REGION  F.D.R.'S ICEBOAT MAY SAIL AGAIN
The Icicle, a century-old, 48-foot-long iceboat that once outpaced express trains as it hissed along the frozen Hudson for the Roosevelts of Hyde Park, may sail once again.  [ B6. ] AN EMBARRASSMENT FOR THE DEMOCRATS
For the second time in as many years, John L. Kucek, a Holocaust revisionist, has embarrassed the Democratic Party in New Jersey by getting his name on the primary election ballot unopposed.  [ B6. ] PENSION FUND INQUIRY UNDER WAY
The Whitman administration is keeping a lid on reports that the Internal Revenue Service is poised to demand that New Jersey pay back nearly $800 million in pension funds used by Gov.
Jim Florio to pay for a sales tax cut.  [ B5. ] PRESERVATIONISTS FEAR FOR PARKWAY
The Bronx River Parkway, whose graceful turns and arched stone bridges keep traffic moving through central Westchester County at a Model-T pace, has been designated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation as one of the 11 most endangered historic spots in the country.  [ B2. ] Chronicle B2  Traffic Alert B4  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6


Veterans Fighting for Right to Peddle in Midtown Once Again
Robert Smith, a World War II veteran, remembers making hundreds of dollars a day selling clothing on Fifth Avenue.
These days, he is peddling in lower Manhattan and says he would be lucky to make $50.
Lucrative Fifth Avenue, however, is off-limits to him, and merchants there would prefer to keep it that way.


Charles Allen Blackwell, Dancer and Stage Manager, 66
Charles Allen Blackwell, a Broadway dancer and stage manager, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Frances.


An Early Hurricane Strikes Florida's Coast, but Fizzles
Like the early guest at a party, Hurricane Allison showed up in Florida's Gulf Coast today only five days into this year's hurricane season.
To the relief of its hosts, the storm caused only minimal damage despite tidal surges and flooding.
The storm achieved 75 mile-an-hour winds as it approached the coast southeast of Tallahassee early this morning, but fizzled as it struck land about 11 A.M.
It continued weakening as it moved northeast and was downgraded to a tropical storm by the time it reached southeastGeorgia late tonight, meteorologists with the National Hurricane Center here said.


Israelis Seize 45 From Hamas, Saying They Plotted Attacks
Israeli security forces have arrested 45 members of the militant Muslim group Hamas on suspicion of plotting to set off a car-bomb in Jerusalem and to hijack a bus to the Egyptian border as part of a series of attacks, the army said today.
The arrests were the latest in an Israeli crackdown on Hamas, whose armed wing, the Qassam Brigades, has carried out several suicide bombings in the past year in an effort to disrupt the self-rule accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Approval for Trump Stock Deal
Donald Trump is going public.
The State Casino Control Commission voted 5 to 0 yesterday to endorse his plans for a $150 million stock offering and a $140 million bond sale.
Ten million shares of stock will be sold in a new casino company that will own Trump Plaza Hotel Casino, Trump Regency and Mr.
Trump's out-of-state casino projects.
The offerings, which are scheduled for June 15, would provide money to help him create the city's biggest casino.


If Service Isn't Restored
The Transit Authority said yesterday that it expected subway service over the Williamsburg Bridge to be restored by the morning rush hour today.
Should service not return to normal, the Transit Authority said, M train riders from Ridgewood, Queens, can take the train to the Wyckoff Avenue station and change for the Manhattan-bound L train.


Mid Ocean Ltd.(MOCNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Existence of I.R.S. Pension-Fund Inquiry Is Admitted, but Details Are Not Disclosed
The Whitman administration is keeping a tight lid on reports that the Internal Revenue Service is poised to demand that the state pay back nearly $800 million in pension funds used by Gov.
Jim Florio in 1992 to pay for a sales tax cut.
Such a ruling would undo Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's precariously balanced budgets in coming years, although it is widely agreed that the Governor would be able to use the courts to postpone a final judgment for some time.
For that reason, her plans to complete her two-year, $1.3 billion income tax cut by the end of this month are not thought to be in jeopardy.


Fast-Paced Evacuation Over the East River
Working from front to back, Officer Chuck Churchill moved from car to car inside the M train that had been struck by another train on the Williamsburg Bridge.
He raced past the slightly injured, checked one man who had been knocked unconscious, and kept advancing to where the damage likely would be worst.
People called out, asking for help; asking, with tears and a deadly seriousness, if the bridge was going to tumble into the East River.
"My job," said the officer with the Emergency Services Unit of the New York City Police Department, "was to get to the point of impact."


Backers of Minister-Councilman Reassessing Their Choice
When the Rev.
Lloyd Henry was elected to the City Council 17 months ago, Democratic Party officials from throughout New York City heralded the quiet, friendly Episcopal minister as their best hope of bringing together the Caribbean and Jewish constituencies in the diverse 45th Council District in Flatbush, Brooklyn.
These days, Mr.
Henry is receiving attention once again, but for a wholly different reason: a series of ethical and legal questions have clouded his reputation, divided his huge congregation and threatened to derail his political future.


Corrections
An article in some copies yesterday about the Tony Awards referred incorrectly to the appearances of Glenn Close and Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber near the end of the ceremony.
They were not onstage at the same time.


Magna Intl.(MGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Miscellany
*
Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, has named Charles H. Stern as a consultant in the area of celebrity talent negotiations.
Mr.
Stern will continue to run his talent agency, the Charles H. Stern Agency, Hollywood. *
True North Communications, Chicago, the parent company of agencies including Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, has donated $100,000 to the United Negro College Fund for a fund-raising program, Campaign 2000: An Investment in America's Future.


No Headline
"The impact threw me back on the floor on my shoulder and arm. The next thing I know I see the M train coming through the metal right at me." -- HENRY SIMON, a passenger in the subway crash.  [ B4:3. ]


Tax Bill Advances in Assembly
Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's tax-cut plan is on track.
When she ran for governor, she promised to cut income taxes by 30 percent.
Yesterday, an Assembly committee approved a bill that would deliver the last half of that tax cut, starting next January, and cut state revenues by an estimated $593 million annually.


A 'Good' Train Operator, Faulted Once, Known for Precision Stops
To one fellow worker, Layton Gibson was a motorman who could be counted on to "hit the board," or bring the train to a stop so it was perfectly aligned with the platform.
"He was a good motorman, no doubt about that," the operator, Jaime Diaz, said yesterday after Mr.
Gibson was crushed to death when the train he was operating ran into another on the Williamsburg Bridge.


Actor Undergoes Surgery Intended to Allow Head Movement
The actor Christopher Reeve today underwent surgery that is expected to allow him to nod and shake his head, but doctors said no operation could give him movement below his neck.
The actor's chief surgeon, Dr.
John A. Jane of the University of Virginia Medical Center here, said Mr.
Reeve smiled when told that the surgery to fuse two broken neck bones would allow him to raise his head.
Dr.
Jane said the paralyzed actor, who cannot talk or breathe without a machine, will wear a collar brace when he sits up.


By Design; Snuggling Up in Terry
Anyone who has snuggled into a terry cloth robe after a shower or a swim knows how comfortable, not to mention practical, the fabric is.
Toss it on over wet skin, and it absorbs the dampness.
When it dries, it looks the same as before, with no wrinkles.
Designers have come to realize that terry cloth can be turned into good-looking beach wear that can go on to an alfresco lunch or even a shopping trip to a resort town.
Macy's has a hooded white tunic with patch pockets by DKNY ($95) to pair with shorts, leggings or jeans for chic sun protection.


Built to Meander, Parkway Fights to Keep Measured Pace
The Bronx River Parkway, whose graceful turns and arched stone bridges keep traffic moving through central Westchester County at a Model-T pace, has been designated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation as one of the 11 most endangered historic spots in the country.
The parkway twists and turns from the Kensico Dam in Valhalla to the Bronx Zoo.
But it is in danger of losing its character to highway improvement projects, said Richard Moe, president of the National Trust.


Struck by History in Dresden and Prague
Dresden is famous as the city that was destroyed.
Arriving for the Dresden Music Festival recently, a first-time visitor had the well-known catastrophic pictures in mind: the landscape photographed from above, obscured by firestorms and the lowering hulks of Allied bombers.
It is staggering now to walk through the city center and see the old buildings restored to former glory, as if the smoke had cleared and left everything unharmed.
The handsome sprawl of the Semper Opera conjures very different images, of turn-of-the-century Dresden, when Strauss's operas had triumphant premieres and special "Rosenkavalier" trains arrived from Berlin.
Dresden is a life-size replica of itself, eerily perfect.
One can forget that the original is gone.
Prague, 75 miles to the south and west, has famously survived.
All the detritus of foreign invasion has been cunningly absorbed into an omnivorous cultural fabric.
Even the hideous monuments of Communism have somehow become part of the city's stylistic crazy quilt.
General dilapidation adds authenticity.
The continuities are tremendous, in music as well as architecture: "Don Giovanni" is performed in the theater where Mozart first conducted it in 1787, and a memorial to the composer Josef Suk is presided over by his grandson, who bears his name.


Warren Sonbert, 47, Film Maker, Is Dead
Warren Sonbert, an independent film maker, died on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 47.
The cause was AIDS, said Ascension Serrano, his companion.


Sports of The Times; Stevens's Game Within The Game
NOT many hockey players would thrive on the assignment: being on the ice whenever Eric Lindros is.
The Flyers' 22-year-old center is listed at 6 feet 4 inches and 229 pounds.
When he puts on his skates and his equipment, he's about 6-7 and maybe 250, as huge and as ornery as a rodeo bull.
But the Devils' captain, Scott Stevens, smiled at the challenge.
"If they want me out there against Eric, good," the 6-2, 210-pound defenseman was saying.
"I love it. Another little game within the game."


What Ailed Toulouse-Lautrec? Scientists Zero In on a Key Gene
DOCTORS, like anyone else, cannot help being fascinated by the sorrows and afflictions of the famous, and nothing can give a rare disease more cachet than to link it to one of history's luminaries.
Perhaps the most celebrated dwarf of all times was Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, the exuberant portraitist of cabaret dancers and prostitutes and gleeful caricaturist of social pretense, as well as of his own less-than-fetching appearance.
But there are many different routes to stunted stature, and the question that has piqued scientific curiosity since the painter's death in 1901 is, what dwarfed Toulouse-Lautrec?


Milestone for a Yankee Manager
When the season began, two American Leaguers renewed their chase of records once thought to be unattainable.
Cal Ripken Jr. has to keep playing until September to reach Lou Gehrig's record of 2,130 consecutive games.
But last night, Buck Showalter tied Billy Martin's record for most consecutive games managed under George Steinbrenner.
"Obviously, it's a landmark," said Mets Manager Dallas Green, who knows about the perils of managing under Steinbrenner.
"No question about that, and deservedly so."


Futch Believes a More Humble Bowe Can Be Champion
After making excuses, Eddie Futch can finally admit that Riddick Bowe did not attain the level of greatness they had expected after one glorious night two years ago.
Bowe suffered a disaster in losing the heavyweight title, and he is scheduled to fight a man he hates, Jorge Luis Gonzalez, the angry Cuban-born giant who has taunted Bowe ever since defeating him in the Pan American Games eight years ago.


Young People Confronting AIDS
Through the 1980's and into the early 90's, prime time television virtually ignored the existence of AIDS.
The very occasional movie on the subject was considered singularly brave.
Fortunately, times and attitudes in the industry have changed.
Last Thursday, ABC broadcast "In a New Light: Sex Unplugged," with Rosie Perez and Stephen Baldwin as hosts.
The focus was on health risks young people confront in today's sexual climate.
The Centers for Disease Control estimates that 75 percent of American teen-agers are sexually active by the 12th grade and that one out of five people need treatment for a sexually transmitted disease by the age of 21.


Honors
*
Ron Fierman, executive vice president and general manager at Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York, was elected president of the Advertising Club of New York, succeeding Susan Russo, vice president for advertising sales and strategy at Hearst New Media, New York, who becomes chairwoman of the club.
R.
Jeffrey Petersen, advertising director of Architectural Digest magazine, New York, owned by Advance Publications, was elected first vice president, next in line to become president. *
Louis London, St.
Louis, was named the 1995 Promotion Agency of the Year by Promo magazine. *
Stephen G. Sullivan, chief operating officer at Clarke Goward Advertising, Boston, was named the 1995-96 chairman of the board of BPA International, New York.


Olajuwon Plays Above the Rim, in the Stratosphere
Hakeem Olajuwon acknowledges that only a few players inspire him to read a box score in the newspaper and that Shaquille O'Neal is one of them.
So as Olajuwon sat at his locker last week in Houston, brushing his hair and trying to be humble about the way he had just humbled David Robinson, it was not surprising that the brush stopped in midstroke when he was asked about O'Neal.
"My task is going to be even bigger," Olajuwon said with a smile of anticipation.
"I'm jumping from the frying pan into the fire."


The 1995 Tony Winners
Here are the winners of the 1995 Tony Awards, given on Sunday night at the Minskoff Theater in Manhattan:
Play: "Love! Valour! Compassion!," by Terrence McNally


Metrahealth Moves Account In-House
The Metrahealth Companies, a joint venture of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the Travelers Group, said yesterday that it had moved its account in-house after only six months at N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York.


Admitting Women to V.M.I. Shortchanges All; Aid From Taxpayers
To the Editor:
You know how to write acerbic prose, but nothing of the Virginia Military Institute, which would be transformed by women's admission (editorial, June 1).


Public Parks Exist for Everyone, Not Bikers or Hikers Alone
To the Editor:
Re your May 30 news article on the fight over biking and hiking in public parks like South Mountain Reservation in Millburn, N.J.: Is park use now to be governed by popularity contests, with the winner besting the loser with a show of larger numbers?


Where Justice Collides With Politics and Budgets
With the dismissal today of two more jurors cutting in half the number of alternates left, the star-crossed trial of O. J. Simpson has moved closer to the precipice.
Whether it ends up over the cliff depends largely on District Attorney Gil Garcetti, who will surely weigh public opinion polls as closely as the statutes as the case approaches the brink.
Lawyers for Mr.
Simpson have challenged Judge Lance A. Ito's decision on one of the two jurors he dismissed today.
But with an appeals court allowing the testimony to go ahead while the motion was being considered, it now seems clear that only two spare jurors may remain for a case that has already lasted nearly five months and could be only half over.
Given normal attrition and the pains of sequestration, that is not likely to suffice.


Merger May Be Free of Antitrust Hurdles
Unlike the effort by Microsoft this spring to merge with a rival software company, the unsolicited bid by I.B.M. for Lotus Development is unlikely to face a Federal antitrust challenge, antitrust experts said today.
Federal antitrust officials routinely review large mergers and acquisitions but do not always challenge them in court.
Four former Justice Department antitrust lawyers pointed out in separate interviews today that while I.B.M. might remain the nation's largest computer company, current Federal antitrust enforcement rules did not call for challenging mergers based on the sheer size of the companies involved.


Man Charged in Carjackings
A Newark man stole two cars at gunpoint Sunday night before abandoning them both and going home, the police say.
First, the authorities say, Jose Paiva commandeered a 1987 Mitsubishi from a 35-year-old man and drove it several blocks before bumping into a 1987 Mustang.


Thor Industries(THO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Serbs Signal Freeing of More Hostages
The Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Government indicated today that more United Nations hostages might soon be freed by their Bosnian Serb captors.
Jovica Stanisic, the chief of Yugoslav state security, who acted as an intermediary in the release of 121 hostages last week, traveled to the Bosnian Serbs' stronghold of Pale today amid signs that a further release was imminent.


For Riders, the Jolt of Seeing a Train Barrel Right In
They are the dawn patrol, the early risers from Brooklyn and Queens who turn on the lights, open the mailrooms and do the grunt work of the Manhattan law offices and brokerage houses and restaurants.
When they ride the subway to work, the sun is just showing its face, the cars are blissfully uncongested and everyone expects a punctual and uneventful trip.
It was a gloriously bright and steamy morning, the sun shimmering off the East River, as the M train snaked its way yesterday over the Williamsburg Bridge toward Manhattan.
The passengers had slid into the obligatory routines of their early commute.
They were digesting the paper, sipping coffee from cardboard deli cups, doing what they could to rouse minds and bodies still groggy from the indulgences of the weekend.


CHRONICLE
A triumph in court for GLORIA ESTEFAN: Four years ago, EDDIE PALMIERI, the salsa band leader and pianist, filed suit against her, claiming copyright infringement for her use of the line "Oye Mi Canto" at the end of a song with that name.
He claimed she had lifted it from his song "Pagines de Mujer."
Yesterday, the plagiarism suit was dismissed following a decision issued on Friday by Judge RICHARD OWEN of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York to bar some of the evidence Mr.
Palmieri's lawyers planned to show the jury.
The evidence: proof that people close to Ms.
Estefan owned copies of Mr.
Palmieri's album containing his song.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Watery Grave of the Azores To Yield Shipwrecked Riches
THE Azores in the age of exploration were an obligatory last stop for ships returning to Europe with the wealth of the Americas and the Orient, full of gold and silver, silks and spices, gems and diamonds, porcelains and fine steels.
Over the centuries, thousands of galleons and other ships stopped at the lush volcanic isles for rest and refreshment, bracing for the final push home -- often to no avail.
Attacked by pirates, destroyed in battle, ravaged by storms, many hundreds of vessels sank to form a hidden museum off-limits to even the deepest divers.


INSIDE
Japan's Big-Time Looters  There was no looting when an earthquake hit Kobe, Japan, but now gangs are muscling their way into the reconstruction effort.
Page A3.
For Algerians, Life Goes On
Algeria's political violence has created a state of siege for some, but most Algerians appear to have more mundane concerns.
Page A8.
Devils Overpower Flyers
Three power-play goals helped New Jersey beat Philadelphia, 5-2, and take a 2-0 lead back home in the Stanley Cup seminfinals.
Page B7.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LSI LOGIC CORP., Milpitas, Calif., a supplier of high-performance semiconductors, said it was getting in contact with the shareholders of its Canadian unit, LSC, to buy the 45 percent of the company that it does not already own for $44 million (Canadian).
MODINE MANUFACTURING CO., Racine, Wis., which makes heat-transfer products for vehicles and for the industrial and building markets, signed a definitive agreement to acquire the Signet Systems division of Equion Corp., another auto parts maker, for about $54 million and the assumption of certain liabilities.
TYCO INTERNATIONAL LTD., Exeter, N.H., a maker and provider of fire protection systems, said its subsidiary Grinnell Flow Control had acquired Unistrut International Corp., Ann Arbor, Mich., a manufacturer of metal framing systems, for an undisclosed amount.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  STRIKING BACK AT THE SERBS  Nine days ago in central Sarajevo, United Nations peacekeepers showed that they can fight back against the humiliation that has so often been their lot -- if they are willing to pay the price.
A1


Frank Waters, Novelist, Dies; Chronicler of Southwest Was 92
Frank Waters, a prolific novelist and chronicler of the Southwest and its Pueblo country, died on Saturday at his home in Taos, N.M.
He was 92.
Many of his books are still in print, including his best-selling "Book of the Hopi" (1963), which developed something of a cult following among the seekers of spirituality in the 1960's.
Mr.
Waters lived among the Hopi for three years, studying their legends and religious rituals.


A Poke Check Puts a Big Dent in Flyer Hopes
Coach Jacques Lemaire has always preached discipline to the Devils.
That philosophy has helped the Devils win 10 of 12 playoff games this spring, including the last 6.
Yet tonight at the Spectrum, the Devils were caught out of position on one critical sequence, and turned the mishap into the game's turning point.


Market Place; Laura Ashley is spurning offers and hopes to revive itself.
OVER the last few years, Sir Bernard Ashley has received a procession of callers asking if he wanted to sell his controlling stake in Laura Ashley Ltd., the retail and fashion company he founded with his wife.
Last week was the turn of Georgette Mosbacher, the New York socialite and beauty products entrepreneur, who saw in Laura Ashley what other potential bidders had seen: a strong but mismanaged brand name and a depressed stock.


Rebuilding 'Bridges' Without Leaving The Novel Behind
Richard LaGravenese paused for a long moment after being asked what he thought of Robert James Waller's best-selling novel "The Bridges of Madison County."
Squirming a bit, the screenwriter finally said of the book, which he adapted for the screen: "The writing wasn't to my taste. But something in it clearly appealed to women. One of my older sisters loved it. Who am I to judge? I thought maybe I was being an artistic snob."


3,500 G.I.'s Going to Italy In Case U.N. Force Needs Aid
The United States today ordered 3,500 troops plus attack and transport helicopters to move from Germany to Italy for use in a possible evacuation or relocation of United Nations peacekeepers in Bosnia, senior Pentagon officials said.
The American force will position itself and conduct exercises in Italy in preparation for a potential deployment into Bosnia, although no country contributing troops to the United Nations force has requested withdrawal or relocation.


Giving Up One Public Station to Save Two
Facing sale to a commercial buyer, New York City's public television station is doing a slow fade as part of a Darwinian bargain to assure the future of other public broadcasting outlets deemed fitter to survive: the city's two radio stations.
Some dozen prospective buyers are to submit their final bids next month for the purchase of the television station, WNYC-TV, Channel 31, in a sale that could net the hard-pressed city as much as $90 million by some accounts.
But although any transfer of ownership could be a year away, the station has already begun paring staff and local programming, to the anguish of some fans and employees.


JUDGE DISMISSES 2 MORE MEMBERS OF SIMPSON JURY
The judge in the murder trial of O. J. Simpson dismissed two more jurors today, leaving just two alternates in a case that is not even close to being concluded.
The defense promptly appealed one of the dismissals, that of a black man, saying in court papers that the prosecution was "systematically attempting to target African-American jurors for dismissal." Mr.
Simpson's lawyers also argued that prosecutors hoped to force a mistrial by "reducing the jury panel to less than 12."


Broad Coalition Fights Insurer Limits on Hospital Maternity Stays
"Mothers of America are in jeopardy!" said Assemblywoman Rose Heck, her voice rising as she told five male members of the Senate Health Committee that insurance companies were imperiling women and their newborn babies.
The Lodi Republican used the words "atrocity" and "horrified" at a hearing last week to describe the way exhausted mothers and babies are routinely discharged from hospitals 12 to 24 hours after the birth because insurance companies now refuse to pay for more than a one-day stay in most cases.


Trooper Is Hurt in Crash
A state trooper checking for speeders on the New Jersey Turnpike was critically injured yesterday morning when a car smashed into his parked patrol car.
The trooper, Marvin R. McCloud, 31, was unconscious and on life support last night at Cooper Medical Center.
David Whigham, 26, of Belleville, has been charged with careless driving.
He was not seriously injured.
The accident shut down the northbound lanes of the turnpike between Exits 1 and 2.


Acier Leroux reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


California Speaker Frustrates G.O.P. One Last Time
Willie L. Brown Jr., the all-dominant Speaker of the California Assembly for 15 years, installed his own successor today in Sacramento before heading off to his hometown, San Francisco, to run for mayor.
In a stunning farewell display of political power, Mr.
Brown, a Democrat, not only chose his own successor but in so doing chose someone from the other party and the other sex and the most obscure back bench.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the improving prospects for gene therapy companies referred incorrectly to a patent on one form of gene therapy used by Genetic Therapy Inc.
The patent is held by the National Institutes of Health, not the company.
The institutes granted an exclusive license to the company, which was a collaborator in the gene therapy technology.


CPI Corp.(CPY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Freeing the Icicle
In the summer of 1940, the historian Samuel Eliot Morison warned Franklin D. Roosevelt that he was overwhelming his new Presidential library, not with books or files, but with things.
The basement was stuffed with the President's favorite carriages, sleighs, farm implements, an automobile, even two iceboats.
"I know you are the Nation's No. 1 collector," Mr.
Morison wrote, "But collecting can be overdone even by No. 1."


Do Movies and Rap Go Too Far?
To the Editor:
Re "Lyrics From the Gutter" (Op-Ed, June 2): Bravo to William J. Bennett and C. DeLores Tucker for having the courage to take on Time Warner, the megacorporation that promotes the ugly, misogynist garbage masquerading as "music." I fear, however, that asking a gigantic money-making machine to have a social conscience is akin to asking pigs to fly.
HELENE BENARDO Bronx, June 2, 1995


Judge Puts Police Panel In City Hands
The dispute between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council over how to monitor police corruption moved to State Supreme Court yesterday as the two sides argued before a judge who ultimately urged them to try again to resolve their differences.
The issue centers on a bill the City Council passed last year to create an agency with broad investigative and subpoena power to monitor police corruption.
Under the law, a five-member panel would be set up with two members appointed by the Mayor, two by the Council and the chairman being selected jointly.
The bill was vetoed by the Mayor, but the Council overrode the veto last January.


New England Moves to Shift Five Primaries To Same Day
In a bid to increase their importance in the Presidential race, five New England states have moved to create a regional "superprimary" early in the contest.
While the exact primary schedule remains somewhat in flux, the change could make New England the first big delegate prize of the campaign.
Given the region's reputation for being more liberal than other parts of the country, it could also offer an early opportunity for more moderate Republicans to gain an important victory.


Legion of Gloom: Devils Smother the Flyers Again
The Turnpike Series is becoming one continuous speed trap.
The Devils made it that way again tonight, staking out the Philadelphia Flyers at nearly every turn and imposing their cautious, calculated will for the second consecutive game in the Stanley Cup semifinals.


Guerrilla Problems Bringing Guatemala and Mexico Closer
Confronted with separate guerrilla movements on their common border, Guatemala and Mexico are trying to cast aside political and ideological differences and are stepping up their military and political cooperation.
Guatemala's armed forces, which since the early 1960's have been fighting a civil war with leftist guerrillas, are now providing informal military assistance to their Mexican counterparts, said Guatemalan military and Government officials.
In return, they said, Guatemala expects Mexico to press Guatemalan guerrillas to be more flexible in the negotiations now under way to bring that war to an end.


Asbestos Award Is Thrown Out
Both Camden shipyard workers died of asbestos-related lung cancer, juries decided.
But one man's widow was awarded $5.5 million while the other's survivors got $100,000.


Morgan Stanley Wins the Right To Jury Trial in West Virginia
In a ruling with implications for Orange County, Calif., the West Virginia Supreme Court decided yesterday that Morgan Stanley &amp; Company was entitled to a jury trial there over its role in a failed state investment strategy in the late 1980's, and reversed a lower court ruling that had fined the Wall Street firm $56 million.
The decision is on the question of whether Wall Street brokers can be held liable for investment losses suffered by local governments, especially when the losses stemmed from the sale of risky securities.
That issue is at the heart of a $1.2 billion lawsuit filed by Orange County against its broker, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, over the sale of securities that led to the bankruptcy of the county.


When the Easy Way Turns Out To Be Hard
WHY is nothing ever easy?
On May 2, this column discussed Batterydisk, a program that saves a computer's C.M.O.S. settings for restoration after the internal battery fails.


Woman Testifies on Weeks Held Against Her Will in a Brothel
A young Thai woman said yesterday that Federal prison was "a lovely place" compared with the Chinatown brothel where she and 30 other women had been virtually imprisoned.
The 23-year-old woman, Sunun Chalremsan, described to a Federal jury the miserable existence she led for three weeks inside a heavily guarded brothel at 208 Bowery Street, where women smuggled from Thailand were forced to have sex with men in order to buy back their freedom from the smugglers.


Chimp Talk Debate: Is It Really Language?
PANBANISHA, a Bonobo chimpanzee who has become something of a star among animal language researchers, was strolling through the Georgia woods with a group of her fellow primates -- scientists at the Language Research Center at Georgia State University in Atlanta.
Suddenly, the chimp pulled one of them aside.
Grabbing a special keyboard of the kind used to teach severely retarded children to communicate, she repeatedly pressed three symbols -- "Fight," "Mad," "Austin" -- in various combinations.
Austin is the name of another chimpanzee at the center.
Dr.
Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, one of Panbanisha's trainers, asked, "Was there a fight at Austin's house?"


Senate Votes to Aid Tracing of Explosives
The Senate approved an amendment to an anti-terrorism bill today to require that dynamite and other commercial explosive materials contain tagging agents that would aid investigators in tracing bombs.
But in a compromise to win the necessary Republican support, the Democratic sponsor of the legislation, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, agreed that smokeless or black gunpowder would be exempted from the regulation.
The move to include the gunpowder, which is popular with gun hobbyists, had been opposed by Republicans and by the National Rifle Association.


9 Women Object to Settlement Of Bias Complaint at C.I.A.
The principal female employees who have threatened to bring a sex discrimination suit against the Central Intelligence Agency have asked a Federal judge to reject a proposed settlement of nearly $1 million from the agency, saying it is unfair and inadequate.
The sharp protest from at least 9 of the 10 women who have led the threatened litigation deals a new blow to the intelligence agency, which had hoped the settlement announced in March would end embarrassing accusations of widespread sexism and harassment at C.I.A. stations overseas.


High-End Stores Push for Designer Sales
The diamond tiara of Empress Josephine teetering on one model's head, the naked male model lolling on a bed covered with newspapers and drinking champagne, the portrait gallery replete with a shadow where a masterpiece had been removed.
There was much that was evocative in John Galliano's show at Bergdorf Goodman.
But what the show evoked even more than its theme, a stroll through the delusional mind of one of Dolores Del Rio's lovers, was an era long after the 1930's reign of Del Rio the actress: the era of the reign of the great New York department store.


Chess
The elite Dos Hermanas International Tournament in Spain in early May had a rollicking finish.
With two rounds to go, Anatoly Karpov of Russia and Michael Adams, an English grandmaster, led with 5 points.
The 20-year-old Brooklyn grandmaster Gata Kamsky lay back in a tie for sixth place.
But then Kamsky made his move.
He defeated Karpov -- whom he is to play for the International Chess Federation's world championship -- in a spirited, grueling battle, while Adams was held to a draw.
The Englishman needed another draw to capture undivided first place.
But he could not make it against a determined Kamsky, who gnawed his way positionally to the whole point.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Look Anew at Seizing Property Tied to Crime
Continuing its critical examination of government authority to seize property, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether forfeiture laws must give property owners a chance to defend themselves as "innocent owners" who did not know their property was being put to an illegal use.
The Court accepted an appeal by a woman in Detroit who was the co-owner with her husband of a car that the Wayne County, Mich., prosecutor's office seized in 1988 under a state nuisance law.
The woman's husband was arrested for having sex in the car with a prostitute.


Boy's Death Ruled Accidental
The death of a 12-year-old boy who was experimenting with gunpowder has been ruled accidental, the authorities said yesterday.
The boy, Justin Szuba, was playing alone on Saturday when he decided to pack gunpowder into a carbon dioxide cartridge that he had found in his family's garage.
The cartridge exploded when he lit it, driving shrapnel into his heart.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 29


Algerians Still Hunger for Better Life Even More Than an End to Civil War
Algeria's Interior Ministry, an imposing U-shaped building anchored to one of the many hills framing this Mediterranean city, is surrounded by barricades and some of them are guarded by gun-toting, black-clad soldiers referred to as ninjas for their ski masks and their menacing demeanor.
Inside is the Interior Minister, Abdelrahman Mezian Sherif, whose job is to see that Algeria does not become another Islamic theocracy like Iran or the Sudan.


Dust and Ice
To the Editor:
I find the situation puzzling when prominent political figures like Senator Bob Dole (front page, June 1) and former Secretary of Education William J. Bennett (Op-Ed, June 2) condemn the constitutional right of free speech while supporting and encouraging the ownership of guns.


U.S. Acted Properly in Guatemala Death
To the Editor:
Your news article (May 15) and editorial (May 19) on the tragic death of an American archeologist, Peter Tiscione, in Guatemala cast doubt on reports that the death was a suicide and suggested that the United States Embassy staff was remiss in verifying the details of the police investigation.
The facts do not support these conclusions.


Bosnia Battle Shows U.N.'s Pride and Limits
When Capt.
Francois Lecointre arrived in Bosnia three weeks ago as a United Nations peacekeeper, he did not expect to find himself leading a commando raid into a hail of Serbian bullets.
"It's against anyone's nature to rush headlong into gunfire," the French officer said.
"But for the commander it's pride that pushes him. And for his men it's the sight of the commander in front of them. At such moments you cannot hesitate."


Accounts
*
Cellular World Corp., Dallas, to Dally, Dallas, to handle the account of the telecommunications retailer, previously in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million. *
Wesley's Ice Cream Co., Detroit, to F &amp; D Advertising, Westbury, L.I., to handle its account, previously in-house.
The billings were not disclosed. *
The First Years Inc., Avon, Mass., to Holland Mark Martin, Burlington, Mass., to handle the account of the toy company, previously handled on a project basis by various agencies when the company was named Kiddie Products Inc.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Pharmflex, Malvern, Pa., to the Dess Group Inc., New York, to handle the account of the drug sales organization, previously handled by Robert A. Becker Inc., New York, a unit of Euro RSCG.
The billings have not been determined.


People
*
Ron Hawkins was named senior vice president and executive creative director at Cole &amp; Weber, Seattle, a unit of the WPP Group, succeeding Bob Brihn, who left.
Mr.
Hawkins was previously a senior vice president and group creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago, also part of WPP. *
Paul R. Hansen was named president and chief executive at Telesession Corp., New York, succeeding Loren Zesch, who continues as vice chairwoman and was named to the additional position of executive director of the newly formed strategic business unit of the company.
Mr.
Hansen was previously president and chief operating officer at Ketchum/BRH&amp;M, New York, a unit of


All the Magic Pieces Fall Into Place
The team pulled a few Ping-Pong balls from the hopper, invested faith and time in its first draft choices and coaxed a power forward with three rings into joining the party.
Now the Orlando Magic stands on the threshold of the National Basketball Association title at the rambunctious age of 6.
"It all happened so fast," said Pat Williams, general manager of an Eastern Conference champion for the first time since 1983, when he was with Philadelphia.
"There is excitement, then amazement. But now, everything seems numb."


Watching the Generations Of Rock Merge and Mutate
On Saturday night at Town Hall, the guitarist Robert Fripp sat dimly lighted on a stool at the back of the stage, the calm in the center of the storm that was King Crimson.
Whenever the pioneering English art-rock band, which recently reassembled after breaking up more than 10 years ago, brought its complex instrumental thud down to a quiet drone, Mr.
Fripp was left alone.
He sat stiffly and impassively in his seat, either playing a sweet, harmonically rich guitar line that had been submerged in the song all along or sending sounds swooshing through the hall speakers.
Later that night, nine blocks away at Roseland, Alex Paterson (who used to work at EG, the label for which King Crimson recorded) stood stiffly and impassively on a dark stage, obscured by a bank of turntables and electronic effects, the calm in the center of the storm that was the Orb.
Nearly every time the Orb -- an English band that pioneered dance music's gentle, sleepy cousin, ambient house -- ended a thumping, twittering collage, Mr.
Paterson isolated one record that had been buried in the mix and played it on its own.


Serena's Song Also Arrives
D.
Wayne Lukas's Preakness winner, Timber Country, and his Kentucky Derby champion, Thunder Gulch, are expected at Belmont Park this morning for Saturday's Belmont Stakes.
Lukas, seeking a record-setting fifth straight Triple Crown victory, is also bringing a little surprise: The stablemate Serena's Song, the filly who set a blazing Derby pace only to fade in the stretch.
No one expected Serena's Song to be in town for the Belmont.
Lukas had apparently been pointing her all along toward the Mother Goose on Friday.
She will be the overwhelming favorite in her first New York appearance.
Two weeks after the Derby, Serena's Song annihilated a field of fillies in the Black-Eyed Susan at Pimlico.
And Sunday morning at Churchill Downs, she worked five furlongs in an eye-popping 582/5 seconds.


Students Interpreting Works Old and New
Works by a modern-dance pioneer and two choreographers who are better known as ballet dancers were highlights of the "Senior Dance Concert 1995," presented on Sunday afternoon by the dance department of the Fiorella H. La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts in Manhattan.
"Valse Caprice," created by Doris Humphrey in 1919, and "Soaring," choreographed the next year by Humphrey and Ruth St.
Denis, received luminously fresh performances in restagings by Jane Sherman.
They were danced to piano scores played by Lyudmila Melerud with a sweetness and energy that contributed much to the performance.


Q&amp;A
Male Calico Cats
Q.  Why are calico male cats almost always sterile?


No Cork, and No Apologies
Frisky American League hitters, beware.
Essentially, that was the message George Steinbrenner was sending when he ordered Manager Buck Showalter to request that the umpires confiscate Tony Phillips's bat on Sunday before the first pitch in a game that the Yankees won, 11-3, from the California Angels.
The American League determined yesterday that the bat was clean and legal, and though Showalter declined to explain why he had insisted on it being checked, there were strong indications that the Yankees pushed for it to prevent other hitters from tampering with their bats.
It was an odd move, with Steinbrenner's signature on it.


'You Have a Gerulaitis Problem,' He Told Me
To the Editor:
Your May 24 news article on the death of Vitas Gerulaitis provided a detailed account of how the tennis great had been asphyxiated by carbon monoxide fumes from a poorly ventilated gas heater for a swimming pool.
A pool mechanic's failure to install an extra $1.44 worth of exhaust pipe had taken a human life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  SERBS RELEASE U.N.
PEACEKEEPERS  Another 108 United Nations peacekeepers who had been held hostage by Bosnian Serb forces were released, and there were indications the rest would be freed soon.
A1  A THIN LINE IN BOSNIA  The new buzzword on Bosnia is the "Mogadishu line," and officials from Paris to Washington are wondering if it has been crossed.
A18


In Trade Dispute With Japan, Both Sides See Misjudgments
As the American deadline for a virtual embargo on imports of Japanese luxury cars approaches, both Japanese and American officials now concede that they deeply miscalculated the other country's resolve in their trade confrontation.
And so far, they say, neither side can find a way out.
Economic officials and diplomats, in interviews in Tokyo and Washington in the last two weeks, acknowledged that they had failed to recognize critical political signals indicating that neither side was prepared to back down.
That happened despite all the intense efforts to study each other, talk to each other and spy on each other.


Proceedings Get Graphic With Photos Of the Bodies
Nearly a dozen graphic photographs of Nicole Brown Simpson taken after she was slashed to death were shown today in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, eliciting tears, sobs and stunned looks from jury members and the courtroom audience.
Mr.
Simpson was visibly shaken by the presentation, although from his vantage point, he could not see the photographs.
He rocked back and forth in his chair, stared at the ceiling and exhaled in large gasps as the corner began to detail the dissection of the two murder victims.


Weak Dollar Can't Close Japan Trade Gap
To the Editor:
Peter Passell (Economic Scene, June 1) states that the dollar-yen crisis "is really the indirect consequence of Japan's economic stagnation" to explain why the United States trade deficit hasn't fallen in response to the weaker dollar.
This conclusion is badly flawed.


Policy on Sex: A Reminder
In one of his first official orders, a memo about reporting misconduct, Philip J. Tama took the opportunity to remind his safety officers that it is a felony and a violation of school policy for people 21 and over to have sex with children under 17.
"Sexual relationships with students on or off school premises are prohibited, regardless of a student's age," Mr.
Tama said, repeating a 1990 policy.


Ginnie Mae Wins Lawsuit on Insider Trading
In one of the first cases involving insider trading in the market for bonds that are backed by mortgages, a Federal judge has ruled in favor of Ginnie Mae in its lawsuit against three companies with which it did business.
Ginnie Mae, the Federal agency officially known as the Government National Mortgage Agency, contended that the companies used information they obtained through its mortgage programs to make unfair profits in the bond market.
The companies included York Associates Inc. and First Commonwealth Savings Bank of Alexandria, Va., both of which were headed by John C. York Jr., and a mortgage banking firm in Connecticut called USGI Inc.
Mr.
York was also a defendant in the suit.


Guest Worker Programs Do a World of Harm; California's Burden
To the Editor:
Julian L. Simon says that illegal immigrants are barred from receiving most social services except for education and emergency health care.
In 1992, the estimated two million illegal aliens in California cost MediCal about $1 billion.
That amounts to $500 per capita for emergency health care.


Chairman Proposes Redefining Tax Code
With some prominent Democratic support, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Representative Bill Archer, Republican of Texas, opened a political drive today that he hoped would ultimately lead to the replacement of the Federal income tax with a tax on what people spend.
"Our challenge," Mr.
Archer said, beginning the first of three days of hearings into new systems of taxation, "is to do no less than pull the current income tax code out by its roots and throw it away so it can never grow back."


Guest Worker Programs Do a World of Harm
To the Editor:
Julian L. Simon's "Foreign Workers, American Dream" (Op-Ed, June 1), on guest workers and illegal immigration, calls for a program of indentured servitude for Latin American workers as a solution to the illegal immigration crisis.


Labatt Accepts $2.9 Billion Bid From Large Brewer in Belgium
John Labatt Ltd., which has been fighting a hostile takeover bid from the Onex Corporation, said today that it had agreed to be acquired by the Belgian brewer Interbrew S.A., in a deal valued at $4 billion (Canadian), or about $2.9 billion (United States).
The Interbrew offer of $28.50 (Canadian) a share for Labatt topped the bid by Onex of $24, which was made on May 18.
It also includes the assumption of about $950 million of Labatt's debt.


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about Jennifer Muller/The Works at the Joyce Theater misstated the company's age.
This is its 20th anniversary season, not its 30th.


Panel Sees Merit in Earned-Income Tax Credit
As Republicans prepare to scale back the earned-income tax credit, a Federal commission has concluded that eligibility for the credit for poor and lower-middle-class families is much broader than previously thought.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the credit is not available to the same poor families year after year, the commission found.
Instead, many middle-class families are periodically eligible for the credit when the loss of a job or a serious illness temporarily reduces their incomes for a year or two.


The New York Philharmonic's European Tour, By the Numbers
On Monday, the New York Philharmonic set off on a benign invasion of Europe.
In the travel plans, little has been left to chance: even the signs that say "Dressing Rooms This Way" -- as well as the markers to modify them and the tape to hang them -- were in the orchestra's gear.
Here is what the orchestra's chartered jet carried to Europe and what its itinerary will include:  THE PEOPLE
181, including:
107 members of the orchestra
15 extra and substitute players
2 conductors: Kurt Masur and his assistant, Leslie B. Dunner
8 Philharmonic staff members
40 guests (spouses, children, one grandson, three board members, a photographer, a doctor, two librarians and two travel agents
and two representative of Citibank, which is underwriting the tour)
4 stagehands CARGO
113 cases weighing 23,000 pounds, including:
74 instrument trunks
34 wardrobe trunks
4 small but heavy (200 pound) music trunks
1 "office on the go" trunk, containing three computers, one fax machine and an assortment of supplies.
TRANSPORTATION, LODGING
7 flights
46 bus rides
2 trains
120 rooms in each of eight hotels THE CONCERTS
June 7, 9 -- Paris
June 10 -- Cologne
June 11 -- Dusseldorf
June 13 -- Amsterdam
June 15 -- Birmingham
June 16 -- London
June 18, 19 -- Vienna
June 22, 23 -- Istanbul
June 25, 26, 27 -- Athens
The schedule also includes:
3 news conferences
20 social events  WHAT THEY WILL PLAY
Barber, Second Essay for Orchestra
Beethoven, Symphonies Nos. 3 and 7, Egmont and Leonore No. 3 Overtures
Gershwin, "Oh I Can't Sit Down" from "Porgy and Bess"
Mahler, Symphony No. 1
Shostakovich, Symphony No. 5
Strauss, Metamorphosen
Wagner, "Die Meistersinger" Prelude
Webern, Im Sommerwind


North Korea Announces Atom-Reactor Deal, but U.S. Holds Off
North Korea said this morning that it had reached an agreement in principle with the United States on implementation of last October's Geneva accord aimed at halting the North's suspected nuclear weapons development program.
The leader of the United States negotiating team, however, said that an agreement had not yet been reached but that significant progess had been made in the negotiations taking place in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, over the provision of light-water nuclear reactors to North Korea.


Devils' Special Teams Are the Difference
Of all the reasons for the Devils' transformation from an average team in the regular season to a Stanley Cup contender this spring, the play of the special teams is perhaps the most significant.
Yes, Martin Brodeur has been superb in goal, but he was outstanding last year as well.
The Devils players have performed with a special focus and drive, but that could be expected from a group that came within a double-overtime goal of reaching the Cup final a year ago and is on a mission to get there this time.


CHRONICLE
As the wife of Dag Ahlander, the Swedish Consul General in New York, GUNILLA VON ARBIN does not often find herself on the street selling food.
But that's what she will be doing on Monday in front of the Consul General's residence on Park Avenue at 64th Street.
Dressed in a native costume, she will be serving $3 portions of herring, salmon, pastries with marmalades and other Swedish culinary specialties for New York's 1995 restaurant festival.
More than 200 restaurants, including the Gramercy Tavern and La Bonne Soupe, will also offer samples from their menus.
Part of the proceeds will benefit the hunger charities Citymeals-on-Wheels and Share Our Strength.


Agassi's Grand Plan Goes Awry In Paris
When the match was over, he simply left his racquets behind and, expressionless and empty-handed, trudged away from the center court of Roland Garros like a sleepwalker.
"I'm a neurotic athlete whose worst nightmare is to become injured; you need your body," said Andre Agassi, who was betrayed by his body on what for him was the gloomiest of quarterfinal days at the French Open.


The Pizza Police Get Tough
Italian guardians of the venerable pizza tradition say there is too much bogus pizza, and they want to set standards.
But some chefs say setting pizza rules limits creativity.
Florence Fabricant considers the demands of the pizza purists, page C6.


Affirmative Action: Selling to Big Companies  Cautiously in the Mainstream; Minorities Move Ahead as Political Currents Shift
Ernesta G. Procope is convinced that her commercial-insurance brokerage firm is one of the best in the business.
But it is her identity as a black woman, she says, that emboldened her firm, the E. G. Bowman Company in Manhattan, to go after Fortune 500 clients and helped her land 45.
"A white firm our size would never have the nerve to go against the Marsh &amp; McLennans or the other big boys," she said.
"Affirmative action has been a door opener."


Unlikely Combination of Errors Are Found in Crash on Subway
The motorman of a subway train that crashed on the Williamsburg Bridge on Monday apparently ran a red light and was still applying forward power when his train plowed into the back of another train, state transit safety officials said yesterday.
A safety system that was supposed to trigger the train's emergency brake when it went through the red light apparently failed, officials said, and Federal investigators said last night that it could have been because a metal arm on the track was just an eighth of an inch too low.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Overheard at the Cort Theater on West 48th Street during a recent Sunday matinee of "The Heiress": Three-fourths of the way through, a woman leans over to her companion and declares "You see: she is an heiress." MICHELE BAILEY
. . .
Child, age 3-ish, while inserting an assortment of colored pegs into a pegboard: Mommy, tell me about making decisions.


In America; Militia Madness
Last September, police in Fowlerville, Mich., stopped a car for a routine traffic check.
The three men in the car, all in their 20's, were wearing camouflage fatigues and had their faces blackened.
They said they were members of the Michigan Militia and bodyguards for the well-known militia nut Mark Koernke.
The police searched the car.
They found six loaded semiautomatic weapons, three revolvers, 700 rounds of ammunition, night-vision goggles, gas masks, knives, bayonets, two-way radios and handwritten notes that indicated the three men were conducting night surveillance of law enforcement officials.


Food Notes
Lutece (Foods) for Sale
Andre Soltner never went out of his way to market Lutece, the restaurant he ran for decades.
But that is changing now that it is owned by Ark Restaurants.
Today, the first retail food products bearing the Lutece name are on sale at Richart, a French chocolate shop at 7 East 55th Street.
Sumptuous sorbets and ice creams made for Richart by Eberhard Muller, the executive chef at Lutece, and his pastry chef, David Carmichael, come in single-serving boxes -- swanky snacks for $4.60.


U.S. Professional League Sets '96 Start With 10 Teams
Although the announcement came after repeated delays and a year behind schedule, the World Cup's intended legacy of major league soccer in the United States moved one step closer to reality yesterday when the league revealed plans for its inaugural season in 1996.
Hank Steinbrecher, secretary general of the United States Soccer Federation, also said that he would be leaving today for Spain to continue talks with Carlos Alberto Parreira, who coached Brazil to the 1994 World Cup title, about becoming head coach of the American national team.


A Little-Known Giant Foils Franco in the 9th
John Franco had been there before.
Most times, he had been successful.
And so when the Mets needed to get Barry Bonds out in a crucial situation today at Candlestick Park, Manager Dallas Green pulled his starter from the game and asked Franco to do the job.
Franco could not.
Asked to get four outs -- starting with Bonds -- to preserve Mike Birkbeck's shutout, Franco first blew the save while facing Bonds, then blew the game on a ninth-inning, pinch-single by Rikkert Faneyte that gave the Giants a 2-1 victory.


E.D.S. to Buy Consultant for $600 Million
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation, seeking to buy its way into management consulting's major leagues, agreed to buy the A. T. Kearney consulting firm for as much as $600 million today, half in cash and half in stock.
The agreement was the culmination of on-again, off-again talks as Kearney's partners weighed their loss of independence against E.D.S.'s determination to make them wealthy.


New Round of Chiapas Peace Talks Set to Begin


A Pesto Lower In Fat (Really!)
BECAUSE it has nuts, oil and cheese, pesto does not come immediately to mind when the subject of low-fat food comes up.
But there is a way to make a superb, if unorthodox version of pesto.
It can be served over pasta, but for a change I tried it over potatoes, which absorbed the glorious flavors.


Business Travel; There have been 10 billion passengers since that first commercial flight across Tampa Bay in 1914
THE first commercial flight in the United States occurred in Florida on Jan. 1, 1914, when Tony Jannus flew A. C. Pheil the 21 miles across the bay from St.
Petersburg to Tampa in a two-seat Benoist at an altitude of 15 feet.
These days the average trip is 983 miles, and last year United States carriers flew more than 1.4 million passengers, 48 percent of whom were business travelers.
In fact, air travel is so much a part of the fabric of American life that sometime next week -- no one knows exactly when -- the 10 billionth passenger will fly on a United States plane, according to Government and industry records, as well as traffic projections by the Air Transport Association.
And that two-seat Benoist, which flew without instruments, has given way to such improvements as jet aircraft, pressurized cabins, high-tech instrument panels and aircraft that -- like the 292-seat Boeing 777, which begins commercial service today on UAL's United Airlines flight UA921 from London to Washington -- carry price tags of $120 million.


Accounts
*
Kelliher/Samets/Volk, Burlington, Vt., was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated at $1.2 million: Cellular One, South Burlington, Vt., to handle advertising in Vermont and parts of New Hampshire, previously handled by the Hayes Group, Williston, Vt.; Green Mountain Power, South Burlington, Vt., previously handled in-house, and Camp Echo Lake, Warrensburg, N.Y., also previously in-house.


Preference In Admission Is Attacked In Fraud Suit
The University of California medical and law schools practice consumer fraud by failing to tell applicants that preferential consideration in the admissions process is given to some black and Hispanic students, a newly filed lawsuit contends.
The suit, brought in Los Angeles County Superior Court on Monday, comes at a time when affirmative action programs around the state are under fire.
Last week Gov.
Pete Wilson signed an executive order eliminating scores of such programs, contending that they created "a vast system of preferential treatment" for women and minorities in jobs and contracts.
He also urged colleges and universities, which are not directly affected by the order, to abide by the spirit of his directive in student admissions.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about gains in viewership by cable television channels included an erroneous figure from the A. C. Nielsen Company for the last year's performance of MTV.
Its ratings were the same as in the comparable period a year earlier; they did not decline 15 percent.
The data in the article showed a 15 percent decline because figures for Saturday and Sunday nights were omitted.


Seles's First Step Back: An Exhibition Match on July 29
Even though the match will take place on an unidentified court as an exhibition rather than at an actual tournament, the long-awaited comeback of Monica Seles is set for July 29.
It is the clearest harbinger yet that she will return to competitive tennis this summer.
Seles, the former No. 1 player who was stabbed during a tournament in Hamburg, Germany, just over two years ago, will face Martina Navratilova in a two-of-three-set exhibition to be televised by CBS in the United States.


Last-Place Yankees Are Playing That Way
Buck Showalter breezes by the standings in the sports section quickly, very quickly.
Steve Howe thinks the Yankees stink.
Luis Polonia called the last five weeks a nightmare.
Paul O'Neill conceded there is an urgency for the Yankees every day.
These things happen when a team plummets nine and a half games out of first place.
The Yankees have fallen and they cannot seem to get back up.
The free fall to the bottom of the American League East standing continued last night when Geronimo Berroa bashed a monstrous grand slam and Ruben Sierra slugged a two-run homer to help the Oakland Athletics top the Yankees, 8-6, at Yankee Stadium.
Another shabby outing by another young pitcher -- both homers came off starter Mariano Rivera -- produced another exasperating Yankee loss.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, a unit of Chemical Banking Corp., is selling $250 million of notes due in 2005 through UBS Securities Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.387 to yield 6.71 percent.
The issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's; A+ by S.&amp; P., and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Eaton Corp., Cleveland, is selling $150 million of bonds due in 2025 through Lehman Brothers.
The bonds, which can be sold back to the issuer in 10 years at par, are priced at 99.716 to yield 6.539 percent.
The issue is rated A2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about this year's convention of the American Booksellers Association misstated the publication date for a novel by Pat Conroy, "Beach Music" (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday).
It is later this month, not in the fall.


Plea by Judges Fails to Block Sentencing Bill
Ignoring a last-minute plea from an organization representing the state's Supreme Court justices, the Legislature passed a bill today that heavily revises criminal sentencing laws.
In a letter and attached resolution delivered to the State Capitol late Monday night, the justices urged the Legislature to delay approval of the bill, saying the changes could increase prison overcrowding and sharply restrict judges' control over sentencing.


Wings End Long Night And Aim For Sweep
Detroit's red-hot Red Wings are one victory from their first trip to the Stanley Cup finals in 29 years.
They won their eighth consecutive playoff game by beating the Chicago Blackhawks, 4-3, in double overtime tonight in the United Center.
The victory gives Detroit a 3-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game Western Conference finals.
The Wings can sweep by winning here on Thursday night.


Personal Health
FIFTY years ago, Grand Rapids, Mich., became the world's first city to fluoridate its water supply on purpose.
School-age children who grew up drinking the water experienced a 65 percent reduction in dental caries, when compared with children in a neighboring city where the water was not fluoridated.
The dental benefits of fluorides for adults as well as for children have been demonstrated over and over again amid a swirling dispute in which opponents have denounced this public health measure as a public health hazard.
Some studies in laboratory animals that were fed up to 80 times the level of fluoride normally added to water have suggested an increase in bone cancer, and Danish mineral workers exposed to very high levels of fluoride were found to have a suspiciously high level of bladder cancers.


2 Plead Guilty In Radio Fraud
In the latest development in the criminal fraud case of the radio talk show host Sonny Bloch, two telemarketers from New York pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal felony charges, stating they acted with Mr.
Bloch to defraud investors in a variety of wireless cable and radio station investments.
Philip Forma of Staten Island and Alan Herr of Brooklyn entered separate guilty pleas in Newark before United States District Judge Nicholas H. Politan.


Senate Backs Military Role In Fighting Domestic Terror
As part of its proposed antiterrorism package, the Senate tonight agreed to loosen a 117-year-old law that limits the military's involvement in domestic law enforcement.
Under the amendment to the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878, the military would be allowed in emergency circumstances to help in terrorism cases involving chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction.


Despite Engine Snag, G.E. Expects 777 to Be on Time
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had encountered a problem in the final development of its version of the jet engine that powers the Boeing Company's new 777, but both companies said they believed they were still on schedule to deliver planes equipped with the GE90 engines to British Airways P.L.C. in September.
General Electric said the problem was discovered during so-called bird-ingestion tests, in which the carcass of an eight-pound bird is fired from a cannon into an engine operating at full throttle.
Although the GE90's new composite turbine blades and aluminum casing emerged unscathed from the test, there was a greater than anticipated amount of imbalance in the engine afterward, the company said.
The cause of the imbalance was found to be the failure of an aluminum part mounted between the blades that has an aerodynamic function.


Book Notes
A Different Sort of Campaign
Booksellers may be fluent in punning and poetry, but when it comes to politics they don't speak the language.
That much was clear here over the last few days at the annual American Booksellers Association meeting, where the unusually large number of political figures turned authors, from Ed Koch to Newt Gingrich, seemed to throw the booksellers off balance.


Flyers Take Aim at Ending the Mistakes
This sudden Flyer quandary is so difficult to deal with because it is so maddeningly simple.
The most recent applicants for membership on Philadelphia's playoff bandwagon -- even the ones who ask what that red line in the middle of the rink is for -- can understand why the Flyers suffered two home losses in their Stanley Cup semifinal series against the Devils.
Costly turnovers in the neutral zone.
Crowd-pleasing hits that simultaneously inflicted pain on opponents and carry Flyers out of position.
Lapses in judgment that created Devil opportunities, that led to New Jersey goals, that pushed Flyers to do more, that led to more mistakes.


CHRONICLE
There are certain benefits that come along with the Hughes Gosset Award of the Supreme Court Historical Society in Washington.
One of them is the chance to dine with Justices of the Court.
Dr.
JILL NORGREN, a professor of government at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and at the Graduate Center of City University, found herself seated next to Justice DAVID H. SOUTER at the society's dinner on Monday when she received the award, which is given for articles published in the Journal of Supreme Court History.
She was honored for an article dealing with Cherokee Indian cases of the 1830's.
The cases are the basis of her book "The Cherokee Cases," to be published next month by McGraw-Hill.


Heart Bypasses Are Safer, Study Shows
The safety of cardiac bypass surgery in New York State hospitals has continued to improve, although a few hospitals and surgeons had track records that were significantly worse than the average, state health officials reported yesterday.
In releasing its annual survey of the bypass operations, the State Health Department described the results as extremely good, since the chance of dying after bypass surgery in New York is lower than that reported from any other area of the country.


Philip Morris Agrees to Keep Ads at Ball Parks Off TV
The Philip Morris Companies agreed today to remove from sports arenas and stadiums any cigarette advertising that may be regularly seen on telecasts of football, basketball, baseball or hockey games.
The company, the world's largest manufacturer of cigarettes, acted after the Justice Department had threatened to bring a suit accusing it of willfully violating the law against advertising cigarettes on television.


Corrections
A headline in the Styles pages on Sunday about the wedding of Patricia Ann Sypher omitted the bridegroom's first name.
He is Richard Edward Cavanagh.


Kemper Settles Two Longstanding S.E.C. Cases
The Kemper Corporation, the big Chicago insurance and mutual fund company, settled two long-running disputes yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the second complaint in recent years that the company favored its own retirement plan at the expense of investors in its mutual funds.
Kemper agreed not to violate certain securities laws in the future, without admitting or denying the S.E.C.'s charges.
One of the charges had involved insufficient disclosure to investors about real estate holdings.


Japanese Indict Leader of Cult In Gas Murders
Prosecutors indicted the leader and six other members of the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult on murder charges today in connection with the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system, setting the stage for eventual trials that could send the cult leaders to the gallows.
Shoko Asahara, the 40-year-old guru of the cult, was indicted on charges of masterminding the attack.
Arrested May 16, he has refused to cooperate with interrogators beyond maintaining his innocence.
He and the others could face the death sentence; multiple murderers are often hanged in Japan.


For Moscow's Crime Fighters, Ample Stress, Little Reward
Capt. Boris B. Ponomaryov is unhappy, overworked and underpaid.
He is one of four investigators at the militia station for the high-crime Kuzminky district in southeastern Moscow.
He tries to support his wife and two young sons on $120 a month after a university education and 18 years of experience.


Court Supports Show Rider
One of the country's leading amateur riders was treated unfairly by the American Horse Shows Association, a State Supreme Court Justice in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
Justice Edward J. Greenfield ruled that the association had acted wrongly in moving to nullify the membership of George J. Lindemann Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., who faces Federal charges of plotting to have his horse killed for $250,000 in insurance money.


Bill Is Signed Raising Limit To 65 M.P.H.
Gov.
George E. Pataki today signed into law a 65-mile-per-hour speed limit for 1,100 miles of the state's highways that is to take effect Aug. 1, vowing that the police would enforce the new limit more vigilantly than the current 55-m.p.h. limit.
Mr.
Pataki said it has been impossible for troopers to enforce the current law, citing statistics that 96 percent of drivers now violate it.


County Executive Plans Cuts in Work Force
Reflecting the national craving for smaller government, the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today proposed cutting county spending by $50 million next year and eliminating almost 10 percent of the county work force.
He also called for freezing property taxes for two years.
In his annual State of the County address, Mr.
O'Rourke said the time had come to reduce the county's bureaucracy, even though Westchester has one of the highest bond ratings in the nation.
His proposal would result in the elimination of about 850 county jobs: 200 through layoffs in July, as many as 250 through attrition, 395 through privatization and 25 through a merger of departments.


Telescope Captures the Fireworks When Stars Are Born
The final stages of starbirth, as seen in new pictures by the Hubble Space Telescope, seem to touch off a cosmic celebration.
Out of the dense whirlpools of gas and dust creating the stars erupt jets of shimmering gases extending billions of miles.
The stars themselves, in machine-gun fashion, fire bursts of material at speeds of half a million miles an hour, creating what appear to be strings of glowing beads.
The pictures showing the fitful, sometimes dazzling dynamics of relatively nearby stellar nurseries were taken by the orbiting Hubble telescope last year and released yesterday by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Guest Worker Programs Do a World of Harm; Native-Born Displaced
To the Editor:
Re "Foreign Workers, American Dream" (Op-Ed, June 1): Julian L. Simon, in his plea for a renewed "bracero" guest-worker program, quotes the leading scholar in the field, George J. Borjas of the University of California at San Diego, as saying there is "no evidence" that immigration adversely affects native-born earnings.


Republicans' Welfare Plan Is Again Attacked by Clinton
With Congress moving aggressively forward on proposals to overhaul welfare, President Clinton today again attacked Republican-sponsored measures, saying they would cut spending on the poor to finance tax breaks for the rich.
But he stopped well short of threatening a veto.
In a speech to a National Governors' Association meeting in Baltimore, Mr.
Clinton used some sharp words but broke virtually no new ground on an issue he helped bring to national prominence as Governor of Arkansas.
Indeed, his cautious remarks were a reminder that the White House has been so far overtaken by the Republican-controlled Congress that Mr.
Clinton may be forced for political reasons to sign a bill he does not like.


Troop Move Pits White House Against Pentagon
A day after announcing that 3,500 American troops would move from Germany to Italy to prepare for a possible evacuation of United Nations peacekeepers from Bosnia, the Pentagon today scaled back the size and scope of the commitment.
The about-face came after White House aides upbraided Pentagon officials for announcing troop movements before NATO allies, including Italy, were formally notified, Administration officials said.


Does Dave Need Another Tooth?
A young associate account manager at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York has had a "brush with greatness" -- figuratively and literally.
Molly Glover, 24, who joined the agency a year and a half ago and works on the Crest toothpaste account, appeared on "Late Show With David Letterman" on Monday night.
Her visit was part of a stunt stemming from an oversized toothbrush and tooth that decorate the window of her office, which is visible to members of the Letterman staff from their midtown Manhattan studio.


Chancellor Orders a Review Of Schools' Safety Officers
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday ordered an immediate review of the role the 3,200 school safety officers play in curbing violence in schools.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has launched a daily assault on the Chancellor for his handling of school security, wasted no time in ridiculing the review request as little more than an academic exercise.
"We've got children that are getting beaten up in schools," the Mayor said.
"We've got children that have been murdered in schools. We've got crime going up 25 to 30 percent, and we've got an essay exam here." He held up a copy of the Chancellor's letter to Philip J. Tama, the acting executive director, and added, "I think the Chancellor's memo, if you read it carefully, is about the best evidence so far that the Police Department should take this over."


The First to Meet Disaster Are Also the First to Meet the Dawn
Morning did not break so much as it creaked into being in Queens yesterday, daylight stretching out slowly across the concourse at Jamaica Center.
At 5:28 A.M., banks were locked, fast-food stores were shuttered, and most of the day's newspapers remained bundled in the street.
But down the sleepy streets, through the nascent light, men and women in construction boots and high heels walked briskly toward the 5:40 J train.
With most of the city still in bed, this off-peak shift was on its way to start the city's day, operating by internal clocks that keep them routinely out of synch with almost everyone else.


CHRONICLE
It will be a quiet birthday for CARMEN DELL'OREFICE, the model widely known by only her first name, but as she turns 64 today, she has plenty to celebrate.
Her appointment book overflows with plum assignments, including shoots for fashion magazines and runway shows in Paris, Milan and New York for designers like Jean-Paul Gaultier, Isaac Mizrahi, Gianfranco Ferre and Donna Karan.
This birthday may not be a milestone, but it is also the 50th anniversary of Carmen's first modeling job, a seven-page layout in Vogue magazine photographed when she was 14.
She had been discovered on a crosstown bus.


Ex-Chicago Housing Chief Says Bureaucrats Hindered His Efforts
As the hard-riving chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority, Vincent Lane made so many enemies the police gave him a bulletproof vest and assigned him a bodyguard.
He also made so many fans he was mentioned as a candidate to head the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Admirers of his tough talk and bold plans reached from the White House to Lottie Weathersby's house at the Wentworth Gardens, a public housing development on Chicago's South Side.


Japan Expresses Regret of a Sort for the War
Japan's governing coalition agreed tonight on a parliamentary resolution expressing remorse for causing "unbearable pain to people abroad, particularly in Asian countries" during World War II.
The compromise resolution appears to be more a triumph of carefully crafted ambiguity than a sincere apology, and it is unlikely to reassure Japan's Asian neighbors.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.99
4.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.50
5.48
4.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.35
4.47
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.06
6.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.50
6.52
7.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.51
7.52
8.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.87
6.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


'Leave Benefits Alone' Is Cry At Retiree Enclave in Florida
Republican plans in Washington to hold down Government spending have caused an odd tension in this land of middle-class retirees.
On the one hand, the people here, mostly refugees from Middle Western winters, hold firm to the principle of thrift that has guided their own lives, and they believe deeply that the Government should balance its books.


A Solitary, Tedious Job With Great Responsibility
The job is, by regulation, solitary.
The tasks are mostly simple, repetitive, even boring.
But each day, a subway motorman must neutralize the monotony with the realization that a single lapse could cost other people their lives.
"I don't know if it's necessarily any different from a sewing machine operator doing something over and over," said Steve Downs, a motorman who is on the executive board of the Transport Workers Union.
"But we have the added responsibility of people's lives in our hands, instead of just seams in clothes. If you screw up, something could happen to them."


New Formations for Stadium Signs
Marlboro Country will be reduced to a village in local stadiums and arenas because of the settlement of a Federal lawsuit against Philip Morris, the cigarette's maker.
The lawsuit charged that the premium placement of Marlboro signs was designed to circumvent a 24-year-old ban on television cigarette advertising.
Stadium and arena signs are an increasingly important source of revenues for teams and the owners of the facilities.
A courtside sign at Madison Square Garden basketball games costs upward of $150,000 a year and a center-field advertisement in a camera's direct line of sight at a baseball stadium could cost as much as $500,000.


A New Test Of Antitrust Hard Line
Which is the greater threat to competition: a $5 billion company that buys another that is pre-eminent in its field, or a $64 billion company that buys one with no competitor at all?
In Federal antitrust circles these days, the answer depends largely on which company is the Microsoft Corporation and which is I.B.M.
At a time when the Justice Department has made it clear that it wants to be an aggressive antitrust cop, the uninvited bid by I.B.M. to acquire the Lotus Development Corporation, announced on Monday, puts the Government under pressure to draw meaningful distinctions about perceived competitive threats to the technology marketplace.


Foufoundou Journal; A Dying Writer Finds Solace in the Heart of Africa
Emerging slowly from the thick bush into a forest clearing, Sony Labou Tansi greeted an unannounced foreign visitor to this remote village as if he had been expecting him all along.
"Mysteries still exist," said the man whom many consider Central Africa's greatest writer, a man with AIDS who, just a few weeks ago, friends said, was as close as one can get to death.


U.N. Buildup in Bosnia Eyes 'Mogadishu Line'
The new buzzword on Bosnia is the "Mogadishu line," and suddenly policy-makers and critics from Paris to Washington are worrying about it and wondering if it has been crossed.
The term derives from the debacle of the American-led intervention in Somalia, and it refers to that dangerous moment when United Nations troops change from being peacekeepers to combatants.


METRO DIGEST
NO SIGNS OF BRAKING IN SUBWAY CRASH
The motorman of a subway train that crashed on the Williamsburg Bridge on Monday apparently ran a red light and was still applying forward power when his train plowed into the back of another train, state transit safety officials said.  [ Page A1. ]


Wine Talk
THE Napa Valley has been called everything from America's last agricultural frontier to an enological Disneyland.
And in truth, it is a remarkable place.
An hour north of San Francisco, but really just a few miles beyond the San Francisco Bay Area's creeping urban spread, it presents itself as a bucolic paradise.
Sheltered by two striking mountain ranges, the Napa Valley, with its picture-book villages, meticulously groomed vineyards and handsome wineries, seems like some pastoral Shangri-La where every prospect pleases and Martha Stewart heads the zoning board.


Hospitalized Mantle Needs New Liver
Mickey Mantle, who was admitted to a Dallas hospital last Wednesday complaining of stomach pains, is suffering from progressive liver failure and has been recommended for a transplant, a hospital official said last night.
"He's on the liver transplant list and is waiting for a suitable donor," said Jeff Place, an administrative supervisor at Baylor Medical Center.


Computer Teacher Rushes To the Rescue in Subway
Donald Lanani was standing on a subway platform waiting for a train home from work yesterday when he saw a blur.
"All of a sudden I noticed something floating through the air and falling straight down on the tracks in front of the train," Mr.
Lanani, 40, said later.
"It didn't take long to register, it was a person, someone small, maybe a kid."


Truth and the Lies Everyone Relies On
The guest list for the party being planned in "The Radical Mystique," Arthur Laurents's achingly earnest comedy of manners at the Manhattan Theater Club, sounds very familiar indeed: the Lumets, Barbara Walters, Dick Avedon, Carter and Amanda Burden, Otto Preminger, the vanden Heuvels, ad infinitum.
These names all showed up, as it happens, in "Radical Chic: That Party at Lenny's," the 1970 New York magazine article in which Tom Wolfe famously skewered a cocktail fund-raiser for the Black Panthers given by Leonard and Felicia Bernstein.
The party in Mr.
Laurents's work is also for the Panther 21 (as the revolutionaries awaiting trial were fashionably known), and, until Mr.
Wolfe objected, the title of this play was "Radical Chic."


Real Estate; In Glendale, Calif., a building is sold in a deal that may indicate rekindled buying by pension funds.
A REAL ESTATE investor for a group of pension funds has purchased a 500,000-square-foot office building from Nestle USA Inc. in this city five miles north of downtown Los Angeles in a deal that brokers and investment advisers say is indicative of a rekindled interest by pension funds in investing in office buildings.
The reported price of $112 million to $115 million is "not far off the mark," an executive with the buyer, the Emmett Realty Fund, said, but he refused to disclose the price.
That range would set the price per square foot at $224 to $230, well above typical sale prices in the Los Angeles area, where the fund has bought other office properties for $125 to $160 a square foot.


Tracing the Routes Of the Irish in America
Happy groups of immigrants to America are all alike; every unhappy group is unhappy in its own way.
"Out of Ireland," Paul Wagner's evocative two-hour history of almost two centuries of Irish immigration, captures the lows and highs of an emigration that depleted the population of the home country as it enriched the United States.
Moving back and forth between Ireland and America, the program finds its way into the lives of a few of the millions of Irish Roman Catholics who made the journey, most of them in the years after the terrible potato famine of the 1840's.
The destruction of their subsistence crop seemed the final blow after centuries of political repression and economic exploitation by Protestant landowners under the protection of the British.
An Irish historian sings: "She's the most distressful country/that ever yet was seen./For they're hangin' men and women/For the wearin' of the green." From 1845 to 1860, two million people emigrated (or, as many of them felt, went into exile) and their departure, along with the deaths from hunger and disease, reduced Ireland's population by a third.


Transactions
Auto Racing  Indianapolis Motor Speedway
IMS -- Named Ralph Kramer director of the Hall of Fame Museum and corporate affairs.
Baseball


South Africa's Supreme Court Abolishes Death Penalty
In its first major decision, South Africa's recently created supreme court abolished the death penalty today, ending a decades-old practice of executing criminals convicted of serious crimes that had once given the country one of the world's highest rates of capital punishment.
Announcing the unanimous decision, Arthur Chaskalson, president of the Constitutional Court, said, "Everyone, including the most abominable of human beings, has a right to life, and capital punishment is therefore unconstitutional."


Irish to Try Their Luck In the Belmont Again
Dermot Weld, the leading trainer in Ireland, means it as no slight to D. Wayne Lukas and his team of wonder horses: Thunder Gulch, who won the Kentucky Derby, and Timber Country, last year's juvenile champion, who won the Preakness.
But Weld will nonetheless risk the long odds on Saturday and confront the two favorites with his Irish commuter, the lightly raced colt Off'n'away, in the 127th Belmont Stakes.
Don't laugh.
Weld tried the same trick in 1990 with the full brother to Off'n'away, the colt Go and Go, who flew to New York and won by eight lengths over Thirty Six Red.
And he had 12 lengths on Unbridled, winner of the Kentucky Derby and who would go on to win the Breeders' Cup Classic as well as Horse of the Year in North America.


Man Who Vowed To Abandon Crime Is Sentenced in Spree
Nearly three years ago, Howard Caesar was seriously wounded by a police officer in a carjacking that turned into a seething controversy over police tactics in the poor neighborhoods of Newark.
Mr.
Caesar recovered and vowed to turn his life around.
Today, he was sentenced to 71 years in prison for not keeping his word.
Mr.
Caesar, who had an extensive record as a teen-ager, was convicted last month of going on a wild crime spree last year that included robbing and assaulting several victims.
His lawyer had insisted that the Newark police had framed Mr.
Caesar for his role in the earlier incident, but a jury did not agree.


For Chronic Pain Sufferers, Change, Not Weather, May Hurt
BEFORE you decide to take your arthritis to Arizona, consider these surprising new findings about the influence of weather and climate on chronic pain: Patients living in the relatively warm, dry climate of San Diego reported a greater sensitivity to changes in the weather than those who had to cope with the cold and damp conditions of Boston or Worcester, Mass.
A better bet than any of those three cities for chronic pain sufferers seeking relief from the vagaries of weather might be warm and moist Nashville.
In a study of the four cities, chronic pain patients living in Nashville reported that they were least likely to be affected by changes in the weather.


CBS Said to Be Near Deal to Hire Warner TV Executive
CBS will hand the reins of its entertainment division to Leslie Moonves, the president of Warner Brother Television and the most successful television production executive in Hollywood, an executive close to the negotiations said last night.
The deal to bring Mr.
Moonves to CBS could be finished as soon as today, the executive said.
Mr.
Moonves's contract with Warner Brothers extends until the end of the year, though; CBS will have to find a way to extricate him from that deal or else wait until 1996 before Mr.
Moonves can take over CBS Entertainment.


Scenic Route on the Calligraphy Superhighway
FOR two decades, Nicholas Yeager, who likes to think of himself as a sort of medieval hacker, has been deeply committed to an ancient information storage and retrieval system.
"It is called the book," said Mr.
Yeager, a binder and calligrapher, in his workshop at 51 Warren Street in lower Manhattan, where, despite the competition of powerful new computer and video-based technologies, he is producing more books by hand and making more money than ever.


Fifi Awards Note Fragrance Ads
The Fragrance Foundation presented its 23d annual Fifi Awards last night in New York for the best fragrance advertising campaigns for the year.
Jean-Paul Gaultier Mode et Parfums won two awards for 1994 for its new women's fragrance, one for the best national print campaign and the other for the best television campaign; both were created in-house.


Lotus Huddles With Advisers On Hostile Bid
Shares of Lotus Development inched higher yesterday as the company's chairman, Jim Manzi, huddled with Wall Street advisers to consider alternatives to I.B.M.'s surprise bid to take the company over for $60 a share.
I.B.M., meanwhile, formally began its hostile tender offer and moved to replace Lotus's board of directors with three new directors of its own choosing.


Italian Pizza Police Offer Rules for the Real Thing
ITALY, the land of Michelangelo, Verdi and Versace, is trying to put the brakes on freewheeling pizza.
If the Italians had their way, there would be no more Chicago pizza, spicy Thai pizza or even, perish the thought, Domino's or Pizza Hut pizza.
The guardians of Italian pizza tradition have come up with 10 rules that must be followed for pizza to be authentically Neapolitan, which Italians consider the true pizza.


Philip Morris Agrees to Change Rules of the Game


J. Presper Eckert, Co-inventor Of Early Computer, Dies at 76
John Presper Eckert, co-inventor of the mammoth Eniac computer in 1945, believed by many computer experts and historians to be the first electronic digital computer, died on Saturday in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 76 and lived in Gladwyn, Pa.
The cause was complications from leukemia, a family friend, Thomas Miller, said.


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday about I.B.M.'s $3.3 billion offer for the Lotus Development Corporation referred incorrectly to Lotus's reaction, as did the article in Business Day at one point.
As the article stated elsewhere, Lotus said it was studying the offer and weighing its options; it was not resisting.


Dallas Sportscaster to Replace White
CURT MENEFEE, a Dallas sportscaster, will replace CARL WHITE on WNYW-TV/Channel 5 on July 3.
White resigned under pressure last week, and a search for his successor had been going on for several months.
Menefee's contract with KTVT-TV, where he has worked for three years, was not been renewed because of conflicts with station management and "a lack of resources to do what I wanted to do," he said.
"I didn't feel there was a commitment to do what I felt should be done in a competitive market."


Papers Fight Giuliani Newsstand Overhaul
Executives of newspapers and operators of newsstands voiced strong opposition yesterday to a Giuliani administration plan to change New York City regulations governing newsstands and to limit the number of newspaper vending machines on a single block.
The opposition came in the City Council's first hearing on the bill, which Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani introduced in April, to establish new regulations for bus shelters, public toilets and newsstands.
The bill is intended to reduce clutter on many of New York City's busiest corners.
It would also raise money for the city by allowing advertisements on newsstands and public toilets in addition to bus shelters, from which the city already derives revenue.


Seagram's Chief Says He Has No Candidates to Lead MCA
Edgar Bronfman Jr., the chairman of the Seagram Company, told top executives of MCA Inc. yesterday that he had no alternate choice to run the entertainment company, since the breakdown of talks on Monday with Michael Ovitz, the head of the Creative Artists Agency.
During a lengthy lunch in the company's private dining room in Los Angeles, Mr.
Bronfman told 16 MCA executives that he would not try to find a new top executive for MCA, according to an executive who attended.


AT LUNCH WITH: Ronald L. Kuby; Crispy Fries and Radical Causes
RONALD L. KUBY's professional life has the pace and feel of a movie thriller.
In his world, the cliches of the genre are real: there's always a reporter on the line, a fugitive client waiting in the wings, an attitude to be struck.
This high-wire activity takes place in the basement of a quaint Greenwich Village townhouse where Mr.
Kuby works as the junior partner of William Kunstler, the civil rights lawyer who was defending clients like Daniel Berrigan and Lenny Bruce back when Mr.
Kuby was in public school in Cleveland.
The presence of Kunstler &amp; Kuby is signified only by a tiny sign that says OFFICE .


Foreign Affairs; Allies
On the eve of the gulf war, I was a reporter on Secretary of State James Baker's last trip to line up allies to fight Iraq.
His last stop was London.
As we were waiting to board the Secretary's plane at Heathrow Airport, I fell into conversation with a British policeman.
He asked me: "So, who's going to fight?" And before I could answer, the policeman answered his own question: "I guess in the end it will be you and us."
That conversation always stuck in my mind.
I could never imagine having such a talk with a German or Japanese or Russian policeman, but it seemed perfectly natural in London.
It was just understood that we were allies and in the crunch allies count on allies and the gulf war was such a crunch and so we would stand together.
I've been thinking about that conversation as I have watched from London the shameful way the Clinton Administration and the Republican-led Congress have been dealing with our allies over Bosnia.


An Uneven Triumph Over Summer Atmospherics
Within the limits imposed by wildly changeable weather on Saturday, the Long Island Mozart Festival, beginning the second and final weekend of its 10th-anniversary season here at the Planting Fields Arboretum, led a charmed existence.
The threat of rain receded just in time for the afternoon concert; the shower that followed the first half merely lengthened the intermission.
And the evening concert was finished in glorious weather before the downpour set in.
Still, the hot, muggy conditions for the afternoon concert were far from ideal.
Diane Walsh, a pianist and an excellent chamber musician, provided a sturdy, enlivening presence in Haydn's "Gypsy Rondo" Piano Trio, Schubert's Trio in B flat (D. 898) and Mozart's Sonata in E minor for Piano and Violin (K. 304).


Hardaway's World Has No Tomorrow
Anfernee Hardaway was describing the nuances of playoff basketball recently, explaining why he launched a 3-pointer with 1.3 seconds left in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals when the play was designed to tie the game with a 2-point shot.
"I wanted the knockout punch," he said of the swish that was overshadowed by Rik Smits's game-winner for the Pacers at the buzzer.
"You never know what's going to happen."


Hospitality Franchise to Acquire Century 21 for $200 Million
Hospitality Franchise Systems, the world's biggest hotel franchiser, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement in principle to buy the Century 21 Real Estate Corporation, the nation's largest residential real estate sales organization, for $200 million in cash and stock from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
The purchase price does not include another payment of $30 million contingent upon certain levels of home sales in the United States through 1997.
The transaction is expected to close by August.


Sondheim And Lyrics That Still Explode
INSIDE THE ACTORS STUDIO Stephen Sondheim  Bravo, tonight at 10 Produced and directed by Lou Del Prete; James Lipton, writer, host and executive producer.
Bravo's "Month of Stephen Sondheim" salute begins tonight with the reclusive lyricist and composer sitting somewhat squirmingly for an interview in the series "Inside the Actors Studio." Coming up on successive Saturdays beginning this weekend are television versions of three Sondheim musicals: "Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street" (an excellent rendering); "Sunday in the Park With George" (not entirely compatible with the small screen), and "Into the Woods" (enchanting).
Mr.
Sondheim can also be seen on Wednesday, June 21, conducting a master class on Melvyn Bragg's "South Bank Show." All of which is indeed worth saluting.


Clinic Fights for Its Lease
The owner of a Long Island abortion clinic who is threatened with eviction said today that the dispute was not about abortion but rather was about the landlord's effort to get rid of him so he could obtain a higher rent.
"This is not really about any philosophical difference," the owner, Dr.
Moshe Hackamovitch, said during a break in court.
"The landlord just wants to make more money."


Prices Mixed For Treasury Securities In Slow Day
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with bonds at times moving in tandem with the dollar and other maturities slipping lower on raised doubts about how soon there might be a rate cut.
Trading was slower than normal, as some investors waited for Friday's producer price data for direction.
The 30-year bond was up 6/32 , to a price of 11422/32 for a yield of 6.50 percent, down from 6.52 percent the previous day.
Meanwhile, shorter- maturity bills were mixed, and intermediate-term notes were down a bit.


Judge Rules in Killing of Candy Heiress
A Federal judge today found that a horse trader and stable owner had solicited the long-unsolved killing of Helen Vorhees Brach, a candy heiress.
But after a last-minute legal maneuver by a defense lawyer the judge put off sentencing the man on racketeering and other charges.
Mrs.
Brach disappeared in 1977, leaving a fortune now worth more than $70 million.
Her body has never been found.


L.P.G.A. Names Ritts as Commissioner
After a six-month search, the Ladies Professional Golf Association will announce JIM RITTS as its new commissioner to succeed CHARLES S. MECHEM, who is retiring after this year.
Ritts, 41 years old, will begin his tenure with the L.P.G.A. immediately and will officially replace Mechem, who is 64, as commissioner next Jan. 1, when Mechem's five-year term ends.


U.S.I.A. Would Fit Right In at State Dept.
To the Editor:
"An Independent U.S.I.A." (editorial, June 2) inadvertently makes the best case I have seen for integrating the United States Information Agency into the State Department.
From what you say, their missions are the same.
As a diplomat for 40 years I considered it my job to "dig into a country's grass roots," "to keep in touch with journalists, intellectuals, students and cultural organizations," "to explain American values and history and even acknowledge inconsistencies in American policy."


Panel to Hear Packwood
Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, will appear before the Senate Ethics Committee on June 27 to answer the committee's accusations of sexual misconduct, tampering with evidence, and asking lobbyists with business before him to find his wife a job.


New York's Elderly Subways
The safety of New York City subway riders depends on human drivers and an antique automated safety system.
On Monday one or both of these failed, with tragic results: a driver was killed and scores of passengers were injured when a J train plowed into a stationary M train on the Williamsburg Bridge.
The accident has raised some hard questions about how to insure safety at a time of scarce resources for the city's mass-transit system.
The National Transportation Safety Board has formed five committees, with state and city representatives, to study the crash and determine its cause.
It will probably take them months to come up with a conclusive answer.


Amendment on Flag Burning Is Opposed by Administration
The Clinton Administration said today that it opposed a constitutional amendment to prohibit desecration of the American flag, saying the issue presented no problem serious enough to justify amending the First Amendment for the first time.
An Assistant Attorney General, Walter Dellinger, went out of his way in testimony before a Senate Judiciary Committee to stress President Clinton's personal "abhorrence of flag burning and other forms of flag desecration."


Leadership Contest Threatens to Split Likud
The opposition Likud Party, which hopes to return to power next year and undo many of Israel's present peace policies, stumbled today along the same self-destructive path that brought it to defeat in the last national election.
Likud faced potentially ruinous divisions after adopting a system of primaries favorable to the party leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, and considered disastrous by his archrival, former Foreign Minister David Levy.


INSIDE
No Holds Barred at I.B.M.
I.B.M.'s $3.3 billion hostile bid for Lotus Development reflects a sea change in the corporate ethos.
What was unseemly in the 1980's is now expected at even traditionally conservative companies.
Page D1.
Juror Tells of Seeds of Doubt
A juror dismissed from the O. J. Simpson case indicated that the defense had scored points and that the jury was harmonious.
Page A20.
Agassi Upset in France
Andre Agassi, No. 1 in the world, lost in the quarterfinals of the French Open tennis tournament to Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia.
Page B13.
South Africa Executions End
In its first major ruling, South Africa's newly created supreme court abolished the death penalty, ending a decades-old practice.
Page A3.


Goodbye to Green Monster As a Hello to Progress?
If the picture Gene Budig sees for the near future develops as he sees it, his league soon will blossom with new ball parks.
Budig's picture encompasses new parks in Boston, Detroit, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, Seattle and Anaheim.
"I am optimistic that there will be commitments for new facilities in all six locations in the next 18 months," Budig, the American league president, said before leaving yesterday for the owners' quarterly meetings in Minneapolis.
"I have talked with many community leaders. I have talked with representatives of the clubs. I have talked with representatives of the media. No one debates the importance of new facilities for the long-term well-being of these clubs. I believe the case is persuasive."


Big Severance Deal Seen at Warner Music
Robert J. Morgado, who was ousted last month as chairman of Time Warner's music division, is nearing a severance agreement with the company that would pay him between $50 million and $75 million, people familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
Mr.
Morgado declined to comment, as did a spokesman for Time Warner.
But an executive close to the talks said the company and Mr.
Morgado could sign a agreement within a few days.


108 U.N. SOLDIERS HAVE BEEN FREED, SERBIAN AIDE SAYS
A Serbian official said that 108 more United Nations troops who had been held hostage by Bosnian Serb forces were released early today with a promise that the remaining peacekeepers would be freed soon.
The release came after international pressure, including appeals from the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Big Three's lobbying arm is serious about its business and, apparently, about its gimmickry.
THESE days, the business of the United States auto industry is politics.
And as the current trade fight with Japan attests, the industry has grown far more adept at that business since the 1960's, when General Motors clumsily hired private detectives in hopes of discrediting Ralph Nader.
The industry's newfound success is owed partly to a reinvigorated Washington lobbying arm, the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, which for about 18 months has been conducting a carefully targeted advertising and public relations campaign to alert policy- and opinion-makers to the industry's economic clout.


Different Paths and Stakes For Rival Chief Executives
Beyond money and strategy, big takeover deals are always a clash of people and personalities.
The $3.3 billion hostile bid by I.B.M. for the Lotus Development Corporation is a confrontation between two men who were once both management consultants at McKinsey &amp; Company but who now find themselves on very different paths.
For Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s chief executive, the bid represents his stepping up to make a bold strategic move intended to secure future growth for the big computer company after two years of belt-tightening and work force reductions.


Market Place; SunAmerica hopes to prosper with annuities for baby boomers.
ONE of the leaders in the race to exploit the requirements and interests of baby boomers these days is SunAmerica Inc., a financial services concern that specializes in tax-deferred long-term savings and investments.
As a result of this specialization -- and its corresponding determination to stay away from mortality-based life insurance -- the company has enjoyed five years of strong profits.
And analysts are projecting even further earnings increases this year and next.


Former Simpson Juror Sees Weak State Case
One of two jurors dismissed from the O. J. Simpson trial on Monday indicated in interviews today that virtually every seed of reasonable doubt sown by the defense had germinated in him.
But the sentiments of the juror, Willie Cravin, may also contain good news for Judge Lance A. Ito, the taxpayers of Los Angeles and a country exhausted by the Simpson case.


Victor Potamkin, 83; Turned Ailing Cadillac Agency Into $1 Billion Empire
Victor Potamkin, the supercharged car salesman who used a combination of deep discounting and extensive advertising to turn an ailing Manhattan Cadillac agency into the flagship of a $1 billion-a-year automotive empire, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami.
He was 83 and lived at the Regency Hotel in New York.
At his death, Mr.
Potamkin and his sons, Robert and Alan, controlled more than 50 franchises at 20 locations from New York to Florida.


Lunacy With Missing Minutes
The 1992 film "Arizona Dream" arrived on the home video market with traffic-stopping credits and a badly checkered past.
Starring Johnny Depp and Faye Dunaway long before the more staid (believe it or not) "Don Juan DeMarco" made the world safe for that pairing, it also features Jerry Lewis, Lili Taylor, Michael J. Pollard and Paulina Porizkova.
Not to mention an arrowtooth halibut, a set of homemade flying machines and various sled dogs, who play prominent roles in the characters' reveries.
As do the crop-duster sequence from "North by Northwest" and a willful red balloon.
"Arizona Dream" was directed by the Bosnian film maker Emir Kusturica ("When Father Was Away on Business"), who apparently intended it as a festive, 2-hour-and-22-minute delirium about, among other things, American enterprise.
Pink Cadillacs and pink flamingos are among its other visual motifs; Mr.
Lewis wears a lot of pink and is made a walking symbol of go-getterism.
He could have been an easy target, but he's appreciated in ways that accentuate this film's unexpected generosity, its greatest virtue.


Rockets and Magic Expecting Hot Stuff in N.B.A. Finals
It is a matchup that hardly anyone expected when the playoffs began.
And yet, it has the potential to be a classic confrontation.
The Houston Rockets, seeded sixth in the Western Conference, were not favored to escape the first round.
The Orlando Magic, a six-year-old franchise with a 23-year-old center and a 23-year-old point guard, had never won a playoff game until this season.


Snipers Tighten Terror's Grip on Bosnia's Capital
After more than three years of war, the lines of sniper fire are pretty well known in this city.
But the Bosnian Serbs recently opened a new one, straight down the central Marshal Tito Avenue, and today they displayed their new prowess.
A bullet smashed through the windshield of a white Volkswagen Golf, grazing the driver's eye.
Sejla Krlicbegovic, 12, watched as the four men in the car crawled out and dashed for cover.
A French United Nations armored personnel carrier rumbled out to cover the line of fire.


Music and Mathematics as 2 Aspects of One Thing
Emblems of Mind  The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics
By Edward Rothstein
Illustrated. 263 pages. Times Books. $25.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 2
May 26
June 3
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
8.0
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.4
Gasoline stocks
208.7
209.5
216.8
Distillate stocks
116.3
115.1
114.5
Crude imports, daily
7.7
7.0
7.5
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.3
1.7
Crude stocks
325.3
326.5
328.8
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.0
95.2
95.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


No Headline
"I don't know if it's necessarily any different from a sewing machine operator doing something over and over. But we have the added responsibility of people's lives in our hands, instead of just seams in clothes." STEVE DOWNS, a motorman on the executive board of the Transport Workers Union.  [ B3:5. ]


Cowens Is Eyed for Celtic Coaching Job
M.
L.
CARR, director of basketball operations for the Boston Celtics, said he expected to talk in the next few days with the former Celtic DAVE COWENS about the vacant Boston coaching job.
Carr said that on Monday, he asked for and received permission from the San Antonio Spurs to meet with Cowens, who has a year left on his contract as an assistant with that team.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DONNELLY CORP., Holland, Mich., completed the purchase of a majority of Hohe G.m.b.H., a German producer of auto mirrors, for $32 million.
MARRIOTT INTERNATIONAL INC., Bethesda, Md., has established a program to purchase its common stock with no brokerage fees from shareholders owning fewer than 100 shares as of May 30.


Executive Changes
GILLETTE CO., Boston, named A. Bruce Cleverly president for Braun U.S. and group general manager for Braun North America subsidiaries.
LORILLARD TOBACCO CO., New York, a unit of Loews Corp., promoted Alexander Spears 3d, its vice chairman and chief operating officer, to chairman and chief executive, succeeding Andrew Tisch, who will take on an expanded role with the parent company's management committee.


Corrections
Another Business Day article, about trading in Lotus stock and options before I.B.M.'s announcement, misstated the term for an option to buy a stock at a specified price.
It is a call. (A put is an option to sell.)


Fear Rekindled in Sarajevo


Trooper Dies After Crash
A New Jersey state trooper died early yesterday without regaining consciousness after another car hit his cruiser, which was parked on the turnpike median in Salem County.
Marvin R. McCloud, 31, of Westville, is the first trooper killed in the line of duty this year.


A Long Reluctance to Meddle
Life at Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School in Long Island is so unruly that even when a team of state inspectors made an announced visit in April, students were seen casually donning stereo headphones during class, stepping outside to improve cellular telephone reception and breaking into a state inspector's car.
But despite recent calls by New York State's Education Commissioner, Thomas Sobol, and two local legislators for a state takeover of the troubled school district, many in the Legislature have deep misgivings about rewriting the law to permit interference with local control.


'Sesame St.' Maker Cuts 12% of Staff
Children's Television Workshop, the producer of "Sesame Street" and other educational programming for children, yesterday laid off 47 people, about 12 percent of its staff of just under 400.
A three-sentence statement released by the independent, nonprofit production company quoted David Britt, the president and chief executive officer, as saying the cutbacks had been made "to insure that CTW is most efficiently organized to be in a position of strength for the future."


Drawing Blooms


Anger and Suspicion Pervade Hearing on Medicare Cuts
Administration officials squared off with leading Senate Republicans over Medicare today, and the two sides emerged as polarized and suspicious as ever.
Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee pushed their party's core message that the Clinton Administration was walking away from the financial problems in the 30-year-old health insurance program for the elderly and disabled.


Wedding Cake Lineup
To help couples select their wedding cakes, Linda Kaye, the owner of Birthday Bakers Party Makers, has set up a display of about a dozen wedding cakes by different bakers in her townhouse office, 195 East 76th Street.
The cakes, in an array of styles and sizes, are priced from $6.50 to $11 a serving.
They can be ordered, some with as little as 10 days' notice, through Birthday Bakers Party Makers.
The display can be seen by appointment: (212)288-7112.


Sports of The Times; Foreman Has New Pulpit: Safe Boxing
THE noted pugilist and preacher, George Foreman, once administered a simple test on a couple of boxers.
He recited a sequence of letters and asked them what he was doing.
"The alphabet -- backwards," he says they said.
A couple of years later, Foreman performed the same test on the same boxers.
This time, nothing.
Brother Foreman thinks it had something to do with their line of work -- taking punches in the brainpan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Japan and U.S. Admit Missteps Over Trade
Japanese and American officials concede that they deeply miscalculated the other country's resolve in their trade confrontation, and so far, neither side can find a way out.


'Mogadishu Line'
When United Nations peacekeepers in Somalia became combatants, they crossed what became known as the "Mogadishu Line." Policy-makers wonder whether a similar line has now been crossed in Bosnia.
Article, page A18.


Never a Schlemiel
To the Editor:
I have been called many things during my almost half-century of lawyering, but never a schlemiel, the anglicization of the Yiddish word "shlumiel," loosely defined by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary as "an unlucky bungler" or "chump."


Disney Venture Animates Great Lawn in Central Park
The Great Lawn in Central Park is usually associated with softball on languid afternoons or summer concerts by the New York Philharmonic.
But yesterday the park's largest open space looked more like Port Newark.
Six huge cranes hauled mammoth red steel cargo containers, stacking them until there were 10 piled one atop the other.
Workers unloaded trucks piled with gray metal barriers, while forklifts shuttled building materials across the broad lawn.


Results of Primaries For the Assembly
In Assembly races yesterday, incumbents easily outdistanced challengers except in the Democratic primary in the 28th District.
In the 22d District, a write-in effort by the Democratic Party derailed the candidacy of Holocaust revisionist, John L. Kucek.
Some final results were not available at press time. (i) Incumbent + Winner STATE ASSEMBLY Democratic Primary Two to be nominated in each district.


What's in the Soda
To the Editor:
The soft-drink industry may be amazed by the soaring sales of Mountain Dew (Business Day, May 30), but your article contains a clue as to why that brand may have so many repeat customers.


Suddenly, the Hostile Takeover Is a Benevolent Act
With its stunning $3.3 billion hostile bid on Monday for the Lotus Development Corporation, I.B.M. did not so much alter today's rapidly evolving corporate ethos as lay down an historic marker for the deep changes already at work in an economy obsessed with efficiency and cost-cutting.
The bluest of blue-chip companies emphasized that the gentlemanly days when corporate giants operated through the Old Boy network and extolled the values of corporate citizenship have been replaced by a sense that competing, and competing aggressively, is a corporate executive's highest calling, whatever it takes.


Lawyer and His Father Indicted for Fraud
A Manhattan lawyer and his father have been indicted on charges that they operated a scheme in which 19 investors, who believed they were making mortgage loans to homeowners, were defrauded of at least $1.1 million, the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said yesterday.
The investors were promised a return of 16 percent interest every month, which they received, and were supposed to have their entire principal paid back after a year.
"So it was a very enticing scheme," Mr.
Hynes said at a news conference at his office.
"But once people began to demand a full return of the capital, as they were promised, then the scheme fell apart."


An Attack on Disabled Children
The Senate will soon decide whether to follow the lead of the House and slash aid for disabled children.
Republican leaders in the House and Senate charge that the Supplemental Security Income program -- which provides up to about $450 a month for disabled children from poor families -- is riddled with abuse.
They propose stiffer requirements that could drive out nearly 300,000 of the 900,000 children who are currently enrolled.
Accusations that the program pays cash to children not in need are based on anecdotes that tell of parents coaching their children to fake mental disabilities.
But a study by the nonpartisan General Accounting Office has uncovered no systematic abuse.
Eligibility rules could be tightened to eliminate mistakes.
But there is no justification for widespread evictions.


Sometimes a Home Is Not a House
Jozel Smith is houseless but not homeless, not if home is the place you leave every morning and to which you return every night.
For eight years, on and off, Mr.
Smith has lived behind a tan building north of 125th Street, hidden under a highway, with the Hudson River hard by.
Mr.
Smith, a mechanic, spends his days repairing cars or clearing the mounds of trash around his home.
Or he ambles over to a drop-in center near 125th Street run by a group that works with the homeless.
Or he sits around and gets high.
"I do it when it's there," he said.
"If somebody comes around with stuff, I'll do it."


Chalk Up Rowdy Police Behavior to Common Alcohol Abuse
To the Editor:
The widely reported behavior of members of the New York City Police Department at a Washington convention may have less to do with their profession than with American attitudes about alcohol and an environment that in several respects mirrors that of many college campuses.
Away from homes and families, the police engaged in binge drinking, just as many students do.
Drunken college students, however, rarely generate headlines unless they hurt each other or damage property.


Trump Plaza Casino Stock Trades Today on Big Board
Donald J. Trump has sold stock in one of his casinos, the Trump Plaza in Atlantic City.
The initial public offering of the company that owns the Trump Plaza and will operate any new Trump casino ventures, including one planned for a riverboat based in Gary, Ind., was priced yesterday at $14 a share for the 10-million-share offering.
It will raise $130.5 million for the company after paying the underwriters, led by Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Images of Lawlessness Twist Russian Reality
The West has the impression that Russia is rancid with crime, that gangs rule the streets, that few people are safe from a post-Soviet horde of muggers, murderers, racketeers and thieves.
In Moscow, where gangland killings have a cinematic brutality, Russians have the same impression, and the perception of growing criminality, corruption and instability is associated in many minds with democracy and a market economy.


The Legacy of Boss Daley
Henry Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, has assumed control of Chicago's public housing authority and announced ambitious plans for revitalizing the most dangerous and disreputable public housing system in the country.
The takeover, the largest yet by the Federal Government, marks a significant test for Mr.
Cisneros and for HUD.
Known for its violent housing projects and intractable bureaucracy, the Chicago Housing Authority has defeated its recent chairman, Vincent Lane, an earnest reformer with limited management skills.
Mr.
Lane's efforts to reshape the Housing Authority made so many enemies that he was given a police escort and a bulletproof vest.
The HUD takeover came just after he and the Authority's board resigned en masse, imploring the Government to lend its muscle to the problem.


Squealing Tires Are Stilled for Now


U.S.I.A. Would Fit Right In at State Dept.
To the Editor:
Your June 2 editorial on the United States Information Agency and its continuing relevance to American foreign policy was right on the mark.
Financial savings are not involved; a merger with the Department of State would be little more than a power grab.
U.S.I.A. is not "broke," so why "fix" it?
HENRY E. CATTO  San Antonio, June 2, 1995 The writer was U.S.I.A. director in the Bush Administration.


Valenzuela Does It All For Padres
Padres 1, Phillies 0
Fernando Valenzuela drove in the only run of the game and pitched six strong innings for his first victory as a San Diego starter as the Padres handed visiting Philadelphia its fifth straight loss, 1-0, last night.


Bronx Prep Student, 17, Wins Foil Title
He began fencing at 8 years old and has never let up, so it was no surprise when 17-year-old CLIFF BAYER of Manhattan, a senior at Riverdale Country Day School in the Bronx, became the youngest fencer ever to win the foil division of the United States Fencing Association national championships.
It happened on Monday in Louisville, Ky., when Bayer defeated NICK BRAVIN, also of Manhattan, by 15-12.


Stocks End Day Mixed, With the Dow Advancing by 8.65
The stock market closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, as the bond market continued its rally and the dollar stabilized abroad.
The equities market continues to baffle analysts who have long predicted a substantial correction of at least a few hundred points in the Dow Jones industrial average.
The Dow has risen more than 650 points this year, or almost 17 percent.


Corrections
2 Recipes TWO recipes with an article on May 31 about the growing popularity of vanilla in many of New York's fine restaurants listed ingredients incorrectly.
1.
Place a roasting pan large enough to hold the lobsters in the oven, and preheat to 450 degrees.
With the tip of a sharp knife pierce the lobsters between the eyes to sever the spinal cord.
Crack the claws using the blunt edge of a cleaver or a hammer.
Place the lobsters in the hot roasting pan, drizzle with oil and roast until red, about 15 minutes.
Remove from the oven, and set aside.
2.
Melt 2 teaspoons of butter in a small saucepan, add the shallots and saute over low heat until soft and translucent, about 3 minutes.
Add wine and vinegar, raise heat and cook at a moderate boil until the liquid is reduced to 1 tablespoon, about 5 minutes.
Remove the pan from the heat, and whisk in 6 tablespoons of butter, about 1 tablespoon at a time until all is incorporated.
Scrape the seeds from the vanilla bean into the sauce, stir to combine and strain into a clean saucepan.
Season with 1/4 teaspoon salt and pepper, and set aside.
3.
When the lobsters are cool enough to handle, remove the meat from the claws.
Detach the tails, and discard the heads.
With a pair of scissors, cut the shell on the underside of each tail in half lengthwise, remove the meat and cut into 1/4-inch-thick slices.
Loosely cover the meat with aluminum foil, and keep warm.
4.
Melt 1 tablespoon of butter in a large pot, and add spinach and watercress.
Stir until greens have melted down, and continue to cook, stirring occasionally, until greens are tender, about 5 minutes.
Season with 1/4 teaspoon salt and pepper.
5.
To serve, reheat the sauce over low heat until warm, whisking constantly.
Place a bed of greens on each plate, arrange the lobster meat on top and spoon the sauce over the lobster.
Serve immediately.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 650 calories, 50 grams fat, 230 milligrams cholesterol, 1,385 milligrams sodium, 40 grams protein, 9 grams carbohydrate.
1.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.
Place the reserved fennel ribs in the cavity of the chicken, and truss if desired.
Season with 1/2 teaspoon salt and pepper, and place in roasting pan.
2.
Melt butter in a small saucepan over low heat.
Stir in honey, zest, juices and extract.
Brush the chicken all over with vanilla mixture, place the chicken on its side and roast 15 minutes.
Turn chicken on its other side, baste with pan drippings and roast 15 minutes more.
3.
Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat, and saute the garlic until soft, about 3 minutes.
Add the fennel, and saute over medium heat until softened and golden, about 15 minutes.
Season with 1/4 teaspoon salt and pepper.
4.
Remove chicken from the oven, place breast side up and reduce the oven temperature to 375 degrees.
Spoon the fennel around the chicken, and pour wine over the fennel.
Return chicken to the oven, and roast, basting with pan drippings every 10 minutes, until the juices run clear when the chicken is pricked in the thickest part of the thigh, about 35 to 45 minutes.
If chicken browns too quickly during roasting, cover loosely with aluminum foil.
5.
To serve, remove the fennel from the pan with a slotted spoon, and divide among 4 plates.
Carve the chicken, and divide the meat among the plates.
Season to taste, and serve immediately.
Yield: 4 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 740 calories, 45 grams fat, 220 milligrams cholesterol, 665 milligrams sodium, 65 grams protein, 20 grams carbohydrate.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Quigley Outpaces Field in Open Qualifier
There were eight positions available and 88 local pros and amateurs competing yesterday in Purchase, N.Y., in the 36-hole sectional qualifying for next week's United States Open in Shinnecock.
L.I.
But one golfer, Dana Quigley, outdid everyone else on the courses of the Old Oaks Country Club and Century Country Club.
Quigley scorched the field with a 67 in the morning round at Old Oaks and a 65 at Century in the afternoon for a two-round total of 132 that was six shots better than the rest of the field.
For the 48-year-old former PGA Tour player, it will be his third United States Open.


Young and Unfamiliar But at Ease at the Fore
Both the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater have recently thrust young talent or virtual unknowns into principal roles with phenomenal success.
Angel Corella, a 19-year-old Spanish dancer who joined Ballet Theater this season, had already made some impact.
But his astonishingly polished debut opposite Amanda McKerrow in George Balanchine's "Theme and Variations" on Monday night was his first major assignment at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Bucharest Journal; With Old Tricks, Romania's Old Reds Curb Press
On the top floor of a Communist-era apartment block, Neculai Munteanu dons headphones and readies himself before the microphone of a jerry-built hi-tech radio studio for his show, "News for the Trash Can."
His breakfast-time barbs are delivered in a crackling style: How is President Ion Iliescu, a foe of the deposed Romanian monarchy, going to treat the visiting Duchess of York?
Why is his rendition of the Romanian flute so weak compared with Bill Clinton's lusty sax?


Norton McNaughton Inc.(NRTY,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to May 5


With First Veto, Clinton Rejects Budget-Cut Bill
President Clinton vetoed his first bill today, striking down a plan to cut $16.4 billion in spending this year and marking a new phase in his confrontation with the Republican-controlled Congress.
During a Rose Garden ceremony honoring high schools for combating drug use, Mr.
Clinton repeatedly struck a lectern for emphasis as he said the bill, which Republicans had offered as a down-payment on their promise to balance the Federal budget in seven years, would strike at an array of education programs while providing new money for building projects.


District of Columbia Moves Toward Curfew for Those Under 17
The District of Columbia, which like many urban areas has watched crime rates increase for young people, is moving to enact a nighttime curfew for anyone under 17 years of age.
The District's City Council is expected to give final approval to the curfew later this month.
It could then be signed by Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., but like all municipal legislation for the capital, it would become law only if Congress chose not to intervene.


Securities Take Drop On Comments By Greenspan
Prices of Treasury securities turned sour yesterday, as the market reacted to statements by Arthur Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, that suggested the Fed was likely to stand pat on interest rates rather than cut them in the near future.
Traders said the market weakened significantly in the afternoon after the Market News wire service said that Mr.
Greenspan, at a conference of bankers in Seattle, had indicated that he was not overly concerned about the recent slowdown in economic growth.
The report lowered investors' expectations that the Fed would cut short-term rates anytime soon.


A Cool Pettitte Notches No. 1 in the Big Leagues
Andy Pettitte was not supposed to be a savior for the Yankees.
Not this season.
He was not been depicted in that grandiose a manner.
Not this season.
But those plans were before this season became a season the Yankees have wanted to rewind.
Now Pettitte is much more important than originally planned.
Definitely a factor in this season.
For one night, Pettitte was a savior of sorts.
He saved the Yankees from disappearing even deeper in the American League East standings, saved them from possibly being swept by Oakland and saved them from another night of discontent by pitching wondrously in a 6-1 victory.
His wife should also save some space for a baseball in the trophy case because Pettitte collected his first major league triumph with an artistic performance.


NEW YORK OFFICIAL WARNS OF LAYOFFS IN THE CLASSROOM
With New York City's schools facing a double blow of city and state budget cuts, a senior Board of Education official has warned local districts that they may have to eliminate thousands of school jobs and make other reductions totaling $400 million.
A cut of that size would be the largest to classrooms since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's and, the official said, could force the layoffs of teachers, principals and aides.


I.B.M.'s Chief And Lotus Head Meet to Discuss Takeover Bid
In their first face-to-face conversation since I.B.M. began its hostile takeover bid for the Lotus Development Corporation, the heads of the two companies met yesterday in Manhattan, according to an executive familiar with the meeting.
While the meeting was described as merely exploratory on the part of the chairman and chief executive of Lotus, Jim P. Manzi, it is expected to continue today and is the first indication that Lotus is at least willing to hear I.B.M.'s case for acquiring the software company through a tender offer of $60 a share.


Foote, Cone Expands In Latin America
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, the largest agency unit of True North Communications, said yesterday that it had further expanded its ownership of agencies in Latin America.


Telewest Is Seen Planning Deal To Join With SBC Cablecomms
Telewest Communications P.L.C., the biggest cable television operator in Britain, is expected to announce soon that it will merge with SBC Cablecomms, two executives familiar with the talks said yesterday.
The terms of the proposed deal were not disclosed, but The Financial Times reported earlier today that the deal being discussed was valued at $:690 million, or $1.01 billion.


But What of the Violence in Popular Culture?
To the Editor:
I have a question for the author of "Mr. Dole's Entertainment Guide" (editorial, June 2): Which of the following is to be preferred:


A Bright Idea for Sick Children
In a contest for ideas to improve the world, children came up with more than 10,000 suggestions.
A 7-year-old Morris County boy had the best one, judges decided, and they plan to provide $100,000 to make it reality.
What Scott Krenitski of Montville thought up was a way to cheer up sick children in hospitals: Have other children bring them bags full of books, games and puzzles.
His inspiration was a friend who later died of brain cancer.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc.(JBM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday in the Evening Hours column of the Styles pages about the opening of the American Museum of Natural History's new dinosaur halls misidentified the man standing next to Ellen V. Futter, the president of the museum.
He was Richard J. Tofel, an assistant managing editor of The Wall Street Journal, not Ms.
Futter's husband, John Shutkin.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.96
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.50
4.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.49
5.37
4.49
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.18
6.08
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.55
6.50
7.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.56
7.51
8.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.87
5.86
6.16
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Records Show Philip Morris Studied Influence of Nicotine
In 15 years of previously undisclosed research, the world's largest tobacco company studied nicotine and found that it affected the body, brain and behavior of smokers.
That work is at odds with arguments by the company, Philip Morris, that nicotine should not be regulated under laws applying to drugs that affect the body.
About 2,000 pages of documents obtained by The New York Times show that the company's researchers used laboratory methods that are customarily employed in assessing drugs to study the effects of nicotine on smokers, and wrote about what they described as the "pharmacologic" effects of nicotine.


Devils Reject Offer on New Lease
The Devils yesterday rejected an offer of a renegotiated lease from the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, setting the stage for an extended battle to keep the team from trying to move to Nashville.
The team spurned the offer in a letter to the authority from Lou Lamoriello, the Devils' president and general manager, according to two people familiar with the situation.
John McMullen, the Devils' owner, has left the talks to Lamoriello.


Ares-Serono Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Red-Tape Waivers for Schools
Schools could cut through state rules on everything from building codes to curriculum under a policy approved yesterday by the state Board of Education.
To get waivers, they have to convince state officials their solution will save money or solve another problem.


Spanish Chain Of Stores Wins Bankrupt Rival
El Corte Ingles S.A., Spain's largest department-store chain, has won the bidding for a bankrupt rival, Galerias Preciados, with an offer of 30 billion pesetas, or $247 million, Commerce Minister Javier Gomez Navarro announced today.
The purchase will make El Corte Ingles, already the nation's fifth-largest company in terms of sales, a retailing power that far outdistances other Spanish retailers.
A spokesman for one of the losing bidders, Alianza Galerias, said it might examine whether the purchase breached free-competition rules.


Increasing Shift Work Challenges Child Care
ANGELA ALSTON, a single parent, is constantly scrambling for someone to care for her two preschool daughters while she processes paperwork and inmates at a county jail in Winston-Salem, N.C.
Hers is an unpredictable, ever-shifting schedule.
Some days, she picks up the phone and calls in her sister, who's often busy with her own teen-ager.
Some nights, she persuades a friend with two little ones of her own to let the Alston girls sleep over.
When she's assigned to the day shift, Miss Alston uses a local day-care center that, like most others, is designed for parents who work from 9 to 5.
No one is happy with the arrangement, least of all her children.
"My oldest daughter is having some behavioral problems," Miss Alston said.
"She throws tantrums and tears up stuff. And tonight the baby threw a fit." The family agony makes her job look less and less desirable.
"I've considered quitting several times, but it's not a practical thing to do," she said.
"You get pushed up against a wall sometimes."


Registers of Deeds Allege Sexism
The registers of deeds in Essex and Union counties, both women, say they think their jobs are in jeopardy because of sexism.
"What else can we conclude?" said Joanne Rajoppi, noting that a bill before the Legislature would not eliminate the jobs of male registers in Passaic and Hudson counties.
Ms.
Rajoppi and the Essex register, Carole Graves, are Democrats in counties now run by Republicans.


Block Drug Co.(BLOCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Argentina Weighs Offer to Buy Falkland Islanders' Allegiance
Thirteen years after losing a war to Britain over the Falkland Islands, Argentina is as determined as ever to gain control of the disputed islands, even if it means buying out the 2,100 people who live there.
In recent weeks, the Argentine Government has said that it is willing to consider paying the islanders a "large amount of cash" if they vote to transfer British sovereignty over the islands to Argentina.


How Writing Is Linked To Destroying the World
HOW TO WRITE Advice and Reflections  By Richard Rhodes  229 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.
THE COURAGE TO WRITE How Writers Transcend Fear  By Ralph Keyes  229 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $17.95.
Unlike books about how to play the stock market or handicap race horses, instruction books on writing don't make you wonder why their authors aren't busy practicing the skill themselves.
Often enough, the writers of such books have actually proved that they can write successfully.


Woman Convicted in Abduction of Executive
A woman accused of making ransom calls in the abduction of the tuxedo manufacturer Harvey Weinstein was convicted yesterday of kidnapping the businessman, who was held captive for 12 days in a dark, cramped pit.
The jury, which listened to 19 taped conversations that she admitted making to the Weinstein family asking for $5 million in ransom money, found Aurelina Leonor, 46, guilty of first-degree kidnapping.
It deliberated for only two hours.


95-Year-Old Composer Honored By Ensemble 80 Years Younger
As part of the final concert of its 15th season on Tuesday evening at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, the North/South Consonance Ensemble presented a tribute to Otto Luening, whose 95th birthday is next Thursday.
An elder statesman of the generation of American composers who came of age between world wars, Mr.
Luening did a great deal of experimentation with electronic music between the early 1950's and the early 1970's.
But he has also created an enormous catalogue of instrumental and vocal music, much of which deserves better than to be dusted off only when he is celebrating a milestone birthday.
Mr.
Luening was on hand for the celebration on Tuesday.
Always a sharp-eyed observer of musical life (his 1980 autobiography, "The Odyssey of an American Composer," is a delightful and illuminating read), he took a few moments to lament -- gently, if slightly caustically -- the current state of arts education and support.
He also assured listeners that he continued to compose every day, adding that he was writing a lot of accessible music, mainly (but not exclusively) for young listeners.


Clinton's Policy on Bosnia Draws Criticism in Congress
The Clinton Administration's policy on Bosnia came under assault on Capitol Hill today as lawmakers began to call for the withdrawal of United Nations peacekeepers and demanded to know the circumstances under which American troops might be sent into war.
In two separate hearings with Secretary of Defense William J. Perry and Gen.
John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Democrats and Republicans alike faulted the Administration for making confusing statements on Bosnia, but offered no alternative to ending the war or making peace.


Savely Kramarov, Comedian Revered in Russia, Dies at 60
Savely Kramarov, a bumbling, cross-eyed Russian comic who unified a generation of disgruntled Soviet movie fans in laughter, died on Tuesday at the Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco, 13 years after immigrating to the United States.
He was 60 and lived in Forest Knolls, in nearby Marin County.
His wife, Natalia, said the cause was endocarditis.


For Two, It's All Sound and Fury, Signifying Nothing
Bosnia was the issue du jour in Congress today, and it was hard to tell who was most jaded in the audiences listening to lawmakers' assorted demonstrations of confusion and concern.
"This is a most appalling and disingenuous statement," whispered Marshall Harris, the State Department's former Bosnia desk officer, quietly furious at what Defense Secretary William J. Perry was telling the Senate Armed Services Committee in defense of Clinton Administration policy.


One Pass Holds Key That Lets Flyers In
Their minds were telling them that the problems of the first two games of the Stanley Cup semifinal series could be solved.
Their hearts were sending mixed messages as the Philadelphia Flyers came north, searching for a breakthrough with time running out on their season.
That breakthrough came tonight, when the Flyers were able to benefit from three factors that brought them to a 2-1 deficit in the four-of-seven-game series.
Philadelphia's 3-2 overtime victory over the Devils could be traced to three essential elements.


Omni Hotels' Parent Raises Possibility of Selling Chain
Wharf Holdings Ltd., a major Hong Kong conglomerate, apparently has raised the possibility of selling some or all of its 45 Omni hotels, although it is unclear whether it currently is interested in a sale.
Henry Silverman, chairman of Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc., said yesterday that Smith Barney approached his company about one month ago to discuss the possible purchase of Omni hotels.
He added, however, that "I said we wouldn't be interested without a partner, so any potential involvement on our part just kind of died."


Clemens Back in Fine Form As Division Leaders Battle
Red Sox 5, Angels 1
Roger Clemens needed only two starts to make it seem like he was never gone.
The three-time Cy Young Award winner struck out eight and allowed two hits and two walks in five innings as the Boston Red Sox beat the visiting California Angels, 5-1, last night.
Clemens (1-0) struggled last Friday in his 1995 debut -- one that was delayed by a strained right shoulder muscle -- when he allowed five runs on six hits and hit a career-high three batters in five innings.
Last night, he let only two runners reach second base.
He left after throwing 87 pitches.


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Smith Shoots Down The Mismatch Theory
They worked out with Sam Cassell last summer, shooting 3-pointers and running the floor until the air inside Houston's Straight Jesuit High School turned so stale, and the sweat was pouring off their bodies so profusely, that they had to stop for water.
From those informal workouts, Kenny Smith learned a lot about Anfernee Hardaway: how competitive the Orlando Magic point guard could be, how long his arms were and how intense a defensive player he became when challenged.


POP
A Lilting Detour From a Harder Alloy  Ian Anderson Beacon Theater
When Ian Anderson performed Monday night at the Beacon Theater, longtime fans saw something unexpected: his chin.
Since Jethro Tull began in the late 1960's, Mr.
Anderson has been its bearded, manic singer, flutist and songwriter.
On his first solo tour, between Tull ventures, a cleanshaven and genial Mr.
Anderson is bringing out his bucolic side, the part that linked Jethro Tull to Celtic music and mythology.
His band included violin, keyboards, bass and percussion, but no electric guitar.


Jacob S. Katz, 95, Ex-Police Official
Jacob S. Katz, a former Deputy Police Commissioner in New York City, died on Monday at a retirement home in Columbia, Md.
He was 95 and had lived in Miami until a few months ago.
Mr.
Katz, who had an engineering degree, took part in developing the "911" emergency telephone system.
He was involved in the construction of new precinct houses and the design of the new headquarters at One Police Plaza.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Akers Will Miss at Least One Game
Michele Akers, among the world's top female soccer players, will not play for the United States against Denmark today, and probably not against Australia on Saturday, because of a mild concussion suffered during a collision with a Chinese player at the women's World Cup opener in Gavle, Sweden, on Tuesday.
The United States, the defending world champion, led by 3-1, but China rallied with two goals in the last 16 minutes to earn a 3-3 tie.
Four years ago, Akers, who has 82 career goals in 88 international games, netted both goals as the United States defeated Norway, 2-1, in the final to win the inaugural women's world championship in China.


Democratic Organization Ousts Eight-Term Legislator in Essex
The Essex County Democratic organization defeated one of its own Tuesday when it denied the organization line to an eight-term state assemblyman and nominated someone else in the primary election.
It was, as Thomas Giblin, the Essex County Democratic Chairman, pictured it, a page out of the past when the strong Democratic organizations in Essex and nearby Hudson County recycled some of their legislative seats to give more party regulars a turn at elective office and to keep organization morale high.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed John Kruk, designated hitter, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 3.
Recalled Lyle Mouton, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with John Wetteland, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Israeli Urges Hearing In Arab Prison Death
The Israeli State Attorney ruled today that an interrogator from the Shin Bet security service who caused the death of a Palestinian prisoner in April will not be criminally prosecuted, but should face an internal disciplinary hearing.
The prisoner, Abd al-Samad Hreizat, 30, died on April 25, three days after he was arrested at his home in Hebron on suspicion of membership in the armed wing of the Muslim militant movement Hamas.


Bridge
Two defending champions captured the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship on Sunday at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street.
Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens, and Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, who won last year with different partners, teamed with Brian Glubok of Manhattan and Ravindra Murthy of Berkeley, Calif.
They won the 56-deal final by 58 imps against George Tornay, August Boehm, John Roberts, Saul Bronstein, all of Manhattan, and Bob Sartorius of Lake Hiawatha, N.J.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
For a Windy Aerie
Q.
I wish to start a garden on my 16th floor terrace, where the winds are quite strong.
Can you recommend a wind-protective mesh or any other way to deal with this problem? -- Franklin C. Southworth, New York


2 Picked to Share Top Effie Award
Nabisco Foods and FCB/Leber Katz Partners shared the top prize last night when the New York chapter of the American Marketing Association gave out its 27th annual Effie Awards to recognize effectiveness in advertising.
Nabisco, a unit of the Nabisco Holdings Corporation in Parsippany, N.J., and FCB/Leber Katz, a unit of True North Communications in New York, won the Grand Effie for a campaign for the popular Snackwell's line of cookies and crackers.
Humorous television commercials are centered on a Snackwell's employee being pursued by three hungry shoppers.
FCB/Leber Katz also won five other awards.


Republicans Battle Party on Arts Funds
A majority of New York's Republican delegation to Congress is breaking with its party for the first time to support Federal funds for a favorite conservative target, the National Endowment for the Arts.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich has called the N.E.A.
"arts patronage for an elite group," and Dick Armey of Texas, the House majority leader, describes it as "an affront to the American taxpayer." Elimination of the endowment is high on the national Republican Party's agenda.
In fact, the endowment is threatened with extinction in a House bill and major restructuring in the Senate.


Lukas Is a Bit Fearful of Irish Colt
Not that D. Wayne Lukas is confident, but here is how he handicaps Saturday's 127th running of the Belmont Stakes.
"If form means anything," he said yesterday, "you would have to be ultra, ultra modest to say we can't win this race."


Calendar: Tours and an Exhibition
Urban Garden, Urban History  Conservatory Garden in Central Park, Fifth Avenue between 104th and 105th Streets; (212)838-6878.
The Abigail Adams Smith Museum is sponsoring a tour of the garden by Diane Schaub, the museum curator, today at 6:30.
Reservations are required.
Fee, $10; those 65 and older, $8; members, $6.


Kicker Anderson Rejects Steelers' Offer
Kicker GARY ANDERSON's 13-year career with the Pittsburgh Steelers has apparently ended after he rejected a contract that would have paid him at least $525,000 a year.
Anderson thanked his fans yesterday for their support and said he and the National Football League team could not agree on contract terms.
"It's very disturbing to me that my career as a Pittsburgh Steeler seems to have come to an end over a contract," Anderson said in Warrendale, Pa.


Hirschfeld to Drop Logo
Abe Hirschfeld, who had a fleeting tenure as publisher of The New York Post in 1993, agreed yesterday to stop using the newspaper's distinctive logo on his corporate stationery.
Mr.
Hirschfeld, a parking lot magnate who took over The Post for 16 days, also agreed to add the word "former" when he lists himself as "chairman and publisher."


Merrill Lynch campaign shows a shift to financial planning basics.
IN advertising, sentiment is a well-worn tool of the trade.
But in a new $22 million campaign devised by Bozell Worldwide for Merrill Lynch, the agency uses a provocative variation -- sentimental comeuppance.
And Bozell, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon and Eckhardt, uses it to sell one of Wall Street's sourest services, financial planning.


U.S. Indicts A Fugitive Over Drugs
A fugitive whom officials describe as one of Colombia's most powerful drug lords has been charged with importing tons of cocaine into New York and sending millions of dollars back home through an intricate money-laundering operation, according to a Federal indictment unsealed yesterday in Brooklyn.
Law-enforcement officals said the fugitive, Jose Santacruz Londono, is one of the top three leaders of the Cali drug cartel and the man responsible for overseeing a major portion of New York's cocaine trade.


Send the Peacekeepers Home, a Ravaged Rwanda Tells U.N.
While world attention has been on strengthening the United Nations force in Bosnia, quiet talks have been going on with Rwanda, which wants peacekeepers -- or many of them -- to leave.
A year after a genocidal rampage left hundreds of thousands dead, and with the perpetrators threatening a comeback, the Security Council has been trying to persuade Rwanda to allow more than 2,500 troops and military observers to stay on to provide security.


The Lights! It Must Be Pink Floyd
When Pink Floyd performed at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx last summer, the lights and films were so spectacular that one almost forgot about the music.
So naturally on Tuesday, when Pink Floyd released "P.U.L.S.E." (Columbia), a two-CD set documenting its 1994 tour and including a performance of the songs from its landmark 1973 album, "The Dark Side of the Moon," which is among the world's best-selling records, it couldn't just forget about the lights.
Besides beaming a light show from the top of the Empire State Building the night before the album's release, the spine of the CD case has a blinking red light that is supposed to flash nonstop for a year.


Breakthrough Is Announced in U.S.-North Korea Nuclear Talks
The United States and North Korea announced today that after months of deadlock, they had made significant progress on an agreement intended to end the threat of North Korea's acquisition of a nuclear arsenal.
The North Koreans issued the most optimistic statement today, announcing in Pyongyang, their capital, that "both sides reached agreement in principle on the major issues such as the choice of the reactor model."


A Musical Trance for Healing, From Morocco
Around the world, spirits are summoned with drums, dance and song to carry participants into altered states of consciousness.
On Sunday night at Symphony Space, the World Music Institute presented a derdeba, a ceremony used for healing by the Gnawa sect in Morocco.
Hassan Hakmoun, a Gnawa musician who has lived in New York City for eight years, led five other musicians, singers and dancers from his family; his mother, Fatima Hakmoun, was the trance medium.
The music and ceremony blended West African and Middle Eastern traditions.
Complex cross-rhythms, pentatonic melodies and call-and-response singing echoed music from sub-Saharan Africa, and the form of the ceremony, a succession of songs and dances each devoted to one spirit or group of spirits, resembled rituals of Caribbean Santeria and Brazilian Candomble, which also have West African roots.
But the ceremony was an Islamic one, and Mr.
Hakmoun sang in Arabic with the fervent tone and sliding inflections of Middle Eastern music.


Divorce for Medicaid Is Upheld
The State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that a Middlesex County man, who was previously ineligible for Medicaid because he made too much money, qualified after he divorced his wife of 63 years and transferred his pension to her.
An appeals court had previously said that a ruling for the man could encourage people to divorce to obtain Medicaid.


10 Democrats, but 20 Votes
The voting machine showed that Mary Calabrese got 20 votes in the Democratic primary in the Ninth Assembly District.
Trouble is, only 10 of the borough's 86 Democrats went to the polls.
The problem, officials say, was not fraud.
They suspect that someone forgot to reset the counter on the voting machine before the polls opened on Tuesday.
[ More election news, page B4. ]


But What of the Violence in Popular Culture?; To Shame an Industry
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's June 4 column demonstrates that he is entitled to his opinion, but he is not entitled to his facts regarding my May 31 speech on the entertainment industry.


New York's G.O.P. Backs Arts
A majority of New York's Republican delegation to Congress is breaking with its party for the first time to support Federal funds for a favorite conservative target, the National Endowment for the Arts.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich has called the agency "arts patronage for an elite group."
Article, page B6.


New Sisters Take Vows


U.S. Jet Pilot Lost in Bosnia Is Found Alive
The pilot of an American F-16 that was shot down by Serbs over northwestern Bosnia has been found alive by an international rescue team and United States Marines, the Pentagon announced early today.
The pilot, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady, whose plane was destroyed Friday by a Bosnian Serb missile, was found about 20 miles southeast of Bihac.


Court Gives Talley Industries a Lift in Reviving Air Bag Business
Talley Industries' efforts to revive its air bag business got a boost from a Federal court this week, which ordered TRW Inc. to prepay $138 million in royalties to Talley.
Judge Paul G. Rosenblatt in Federal District Court in Phoenix had previously dismissed TRW's breach of contract claims, which were made in a lawsuit filed in Phoenix in February 1994.
The suit contended that Talley had broken its promise not to compete with TRW for five years, a stipulation negotiated as part of TRW's $85 million buyout of Talley's air bag business in 1989.


Dawn of Art: A New View
The painting of the long-horned rhinoceros shown here was newly discovered in the cornucopia of art in the Chauvet cave near Vallon-Pont-d'Arc in the south of France.
It was found near paintings of similar artistry that have now been dated at 30,000 years old.
What French scientists now call "the oldest known paintings in the world," the cave paintings are sophisticated art rather than crude sketches, and the finding has "overturned the accepted notions about the first appearance of art and its development," scientists say.
Other new discoveries include a mysterious portrait called Sorcerer, half man and half bison, and a depiction of a mammoth with feet like snowshoes.
Article, page A18.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(STEI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Mixed Reviews for School Takeover Plan
They gasped when they heard that only four students in their high school graduated with the academically respected Regents diplomas last year, that 15 to 20 teachers are absent on any given day, that discipline is so feeble that firecrackers are tossed in hallways with security guards standing nearby.
In short, more than 700 parents and community leaders who filled the auditorium of Roosevelt Junior/ Senior High School tonight were almost unanimous in their shock at hearing a state-appointed school superintendent describe the "chaotic" and "deplorable" conditions at Roosevelt's only high school, as if they were hearing of these matters for the first time.
But they differed passionately, and often noisily, over what should be done.


Newbridge Networks (NN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


INSIDE
More Clues to Train Crash
A one-inch misalignment of two metal rods apparently caused an emergency subway braking system to fail, an official said.
Page B1.
Cuban Army Expands Role
While the responsibilities of the Communist Party have declined, the role played by Cuba's armed forces has expanded rapidly.
Page A12.
Devils Fall in Overtime
The Philadelphia Flyers won, 3-2, on a goal by Eric Lindros and now trail the Devils, 2 games to 1, in the Stanley Cup semifinals.
Page B13.
Rockets Win Game 1
Houston rallied to defeat Orlando, 120-118, in overtime in the first game of the N.B.A. finals.
Page B13.


19 Nonresident Families Sued for School Fees
An Essex County school district yesterday unleashed the latest tactic to keep students from other towns out of their system, filing a lawsuit demanding that the parents of 19 children from outside the district pay back over $500,000 in tuition.
Officials at the South Orange-Maplewood school district said that they knew of no other district that had gone after so many families for such a large sum.
And they said that even more families might be added to the suit, filed in Superior Court in Essex County.


Richfood Holdings Inc.(RCHF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


68 Days Late, Lawmakers Pass $33 Billion New York Budget
The Legislature concluded a bitter five-month battle over the budget tonight, completing passage of the $33 billion spending plan at 11:40 P.M., 68 days overdue and just five hours short of the record for the latest budget in state history.
After Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver declared a pension bill approved and gaveled the session to a close, the Assembly rose to give him, their aides and perhaps themselves a standing ovation.
"I'm not sure what we're clapping for," mused Assemblyman Anthony J. Genovesi, a Democrat of Brooklyn.


Lawyers Shudder Over Peers' Indictment
As the three indicted lawyers pushed through a throng of colleagues and reporters to surrender today in Federal District Court, Neil Nameroff, a defense lawyer, watched and shook his head.
"It's not a circus; it's not a game," he said.
"It's a nightmare."
The three lawyers, charged with helping the Cali cocaine cartel in Colombia in a criminal conspiracy, posted bond today while dozens of other defense lawyers, including Mr.
Nameroff, looked on and quietly complained that they were witnessing a show of intimidation by Federal prosecutors against defense lawyers who handled drug cases.


Lenox Baker, Palsy Surgeon, Is Dead at 92
Dr.
Lenox Dial Baker, a Duke University orthopedic surgeon who contributed to the treatment of children with cerebral palsy, died on Friday at the Hillcrest Convalescent Center in Durham, N.C.
He was 92.
He joined the Duke faculty in 1937 as an assistant in orthopedics and served as a full professor from 1947 until he reached emeritus status in 1972.
He was chief of orthopedics from 1937 to 1967.


Militias and Radicals Question Authority
To the Editor:
I am not altogether sure what point Carol Muske Dukes was making when she quoted me in her May 30 Op-Ed article on the 1960 radicals and the 1990 militias, but I fear she thinks I "lumped together" two very dissimilar groups.


Greenspan Sees Chance Of Recession
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, raised the possibility today of a brief recession, although he played down its likelihood.
He stressed the economy's long-term health in terms that the financial markets took as a signal that no imminent cuts in interest rates are planned.
Commenting on an abrupt economic slowdown, which he called "very pronounced," Mr.
Greenspan acknowledged that "as a consequence of the sluggish economic outlook, the probabilities, as some of my colleagues have indicated, of a recession have edged up, as indeed one would expect."


Birds' Deaths in Mexico Are a Test for Trade Pact
Environmental groups have used the death of thousands of birds at a Mexican reservoir in December to mount the first test of the environmental tenets of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
In a petition filed today in Montreal with the North American Commission for Environmental Cooperation, the groups asked for a investigation into the death of 40,000 egrets, sandpipers, ducks, coots and other waterfowl that landed on the Silva Reservoir, in Guanajuato State in central Mexico.
The groups described the incident as "among the worst bird kills ever reported in North America."


Lamps Made Of Scrap Metal
"I STARTED recycling metal years ago when I couldn't figure out what to do with an old refrigerator," said Heather Faulding, an architect with Faulding &amp; Fredman in New York, who has designed a line of lighting fixtures made of scrap metal.


Report Says Bobby Hurley Injures Ankle
Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY, trying to make a comeback after a near-fatal car accident, has torn ligaments in his right ankle, The Star-Ledger of Newark reported yesterday.
The newspaper said Hurley suffered the injury while working out last week in Jersey City.
He is on crutches and is expected to be sidelined for four weeks, the paper added.
But a spokesman for the Kings, TRAVIS STANLEY, said the injury wasn't that serious.
"I spoke to Bobby two days after that incident," he said.
"It was nothing more at that time than a sprained ankle. No one from our organization has heard anything about torn ligaments. The doctor told him to stay off the ankle for two or three weeks."


A Tree of Tranquillity in Chinatown


Zale Corp. (ZALE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


AT HOME WITH: Debi Mazar; A Tomb of One's Own
DEBI MAZAR is an oddly likable person, and not just because she collects Lady Schick shavers.
It is also because Ms.
Mazar, the actress, lives in a studio apartment decorated like a charming tomb, because she says she would rather date a plumber than a Hollywood agent, and because when a reporter offered to take her to lunch, she said no and whipped up tuna-fish sandwiches instead.


International Briefs; In Brief
Sanofi S.A., a French drug and beauty products company that is a unit of the Elf Aquitaine oil company, expects its profit to grow at least 10 percent this year, its chairman and chief executive, Jean-Francois Dehecq, told shareholders yesterday at the annual meeting.


Economic Scene; Turning the Baby Bells loose on the long-distance market.
SURE, you can get 40 percent off on calls to second cousins after midnight, and even a free diagnosis of why your fax never made it to Boise.
But does that prove that the long-distance telephone business is truly competitive?
The question of whether the half-regulated world of long-distance communications can successfully mimic a free market has fascinated economists since AT&amp;T was chopped into seven regional monopolies and one long-distance carrier in 1984.
But it has taken on new urgency because the regional Bell operating companies are fighting to get into long-distance service, arguing that the market needs more big players if consumers are to enjoy the full fruits of deregulation.
And Congress seems increasingly inclined to go along.


Trump Pays 15.5% In Junk Bond Sale
Trump Hotels and Casino Resorts, the Donald J. Trump venture that owns the Trump Plaza Casino in Atlantic City and plans to open a riverboat casino in Gary, Ind., paid a surprisingly high 15.5 percent yesterday when it sold $155 million in junk bonds.
The bond deal was raised from $140 million to provide extra cash after an accompanying initial public offering of 10 million shares was sold at $14 a share, at the bottom of the $14 to $16 range that was sought.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Philip Morris Studied Effects of Nicotine  In 15 years of previously undisclosed research, Philip Morris studied nicotine and found that it affected the body, brain and behavior of smokers.
The research is at odds with company arguments that nicotine should not be regulated under laws applying to drugs that affect the body.
About 2,000 pages of documents show that the company's researchers used laboratory methods that are customarily applied in assessing drugs to study the effects of nicotine on smokers, and that they wrote about what they described as the "pharmacologic" effects of nicotine.
The company said yesterday that the research was never applied toward the creation of products.  [ Page A1. ]


Neilson Reportedly Out as Panthers Coach
The Florida Panthers have fired Coach ROGER NEILSON despite the team finishing just one point out of playoff contention in each of its first two years, Miami television station WTVJ reported early today.
Neilson, 60, led the expansion team to a 20-22-6 record this season for fifth place in the Atlantic Division.
A news conference was scheduled for this afternoon.
Neilson could not be reached for comment late Wednesday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARGOSY GAMING CO., Alton, Ill., an operator of riverboat gambling casinos, acquired Jazz Enterprises Inc.
Baton Rouge, La., a casino and real estate partnership, for about $27 million.
Argosy will also assume about $22 million of debt.
BANTA CORP., Menasha, Wis., acquired the assets of Applied Technology Corp., Franklin Park, Ill., a specialty products supplier for the health care industry, for undisclosed terms.


An Ethics Test for the G.O.P.
The new Republican majority in Congress has shown little interest in disturbing Washington's cozy and corruptive culture, especially the link between money and politics.
A chance for the G.O.P to redeem itself will arise shortly in the form of a bill that would put a stop to the meals, resort vacations and other gifts that lobbyists and other special interests bestow on lawmakers to gain legislative advantage on Capitol Hill.
A bipartisan group of senators plans to offer a measure that would ban such gifts and establish a new registration system requiring lobbyists to disclose their clients, their fees and their legislative issues.
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, and most Senate Republicans supported a similar bill last year.
But in the final hours of the last Congress Mr.
Dole joined with Newt Gingrich, then the House Republican whip, to kill the reform, thereby denying the Democrats something to boast about on the campaign trail.


JAZZ
A Consistent Style, Modern but Restrained  Lynne Arriale, pianist Zinno
Part way through her show on Monday night, Lynne Arriale, a pianist, played "I Loves You Porgy," lighting up the melody with her firm, clear touch.
Ms.
Arriale, backed by Michael Moore on bass, is at ease with ballads and makes the most of their lyrical qualities.


Japan and Its Past
Fifty years after the end of World War II, Japan can still twist itself into contortions over whether to apologize for its conduct in the war.
The latest debate has yielded a feeble parliamentary resolution acknowledging Japanese aggression and colonialism, but only in the context of other countries' offenses.
Remorse or reflection about Japan's behavior is offered, depending on the translation, but no apology.
While the whole exercise may seem irrelevant, Japan's tortured reckoning with history is part of a larger internal debate over its role in the world today.
Until Japan comes to terms with the destructive role it played in Asia's past, it cannot play the constructive role it should in Asia's future.


F.A.A. Opposed to Requiring Baby Seats
The Federal Aviation Administration told Congress yesterday that requiring babies on planes to ride in safety seats remained a bad idea, despite a renewed recommendation by the National Transportation Safety Board.
The aviation agency also said that using two kinds of child restraints, booster seats and harness web belts, was more risky than simply strapping a child into an adult lap belt.
It proposed banning the child restraints.


Koch Opposes 'Pocahontas' on Great Lawn
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday criticized the Giuliani administration's decision to allow the Walt Disney Company to use the Great Lawn in Central Park for the premiere on Saturday night of the new animated feature "Pocahontas."
Mr.
Koch said it was "wrong" to deprive the public of the Great Lawn for more than a week while the area was prepared for the screening, and he termed "an outrage" the use of the police to make certain that only those with tickets are admitted to the film.


Mantle Has Liver Cancer and Needs Transplant
Mickey Mantle, jaundiced, stricken with liver cancer and confined to a hospital bed, has two to four weeks to live unless he gets a liver transplant, his doctors said today.
They are confident of keeping him alive until a liver becomes available for a transplant.
But they are not sure when one will, and warned that he could take a sudden turn for the worse.


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Bad Night for Devils May Be Good for the Game
When the first Devils shot of the game sailed by Flyers goalie Ron Hextall after 92 seconds of play last night, it seemed as if the romp was on.
The fans who packed Byrne Meadowlands Arena were on their feet, hootin' and hollerin' so loud you could have heard them down in Nashville, or at least in Philadelphia.
It seemed as if the Devils were on their sweet way to a 3 games to 0 lead in the Eastern Conference finals and an inevitable meeting with Detroit in the championship round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.


So How do Their Gardens Grow?
IT'S worth your life to get to a great garden in England.
Because every brain cell must stay focused on driving on the left and surviving those endless roundabouts and making sense of signs that name villages known only to the locals.
I was headed to the northwest corner of Herefordshire, to a garden called Bryan's Ground, which is literally a field away from Wales.
It's the new-old garden of David Wheeler, the editor of Hortus, the English literary garden magazine, and of Simon Dorrell, the painter whose intricate drawings grace its pages.
Since Mr.
Wheeler started the quarterly in 1987, fine gardeners like Rosemary Verey, Graham Stuart Thomas, Beth Chatto and Robert Dash have been able to write the meaning of gardens, not just how to plant a laburnum walk.


Arbitragers Have a Field Day With I.B.M.'s Bid for Lotus
I.B.M.'s hostile bid for the Lotus Development Corporation has buoyed the spirits of the professional investors known as arbitragers, who seek to profit from mergers and takeovers.
Arbitragers have continued to snap up the shares of Lotus in anticipation of a higher bid ahead for the software company.
Lotus's share price has soared since I.B.M. announced its $3.3 billion bid, closing yesterday at $62.375 -- well above the offering price of $60 a share.
The arbitragers, or arbs, are clearly betting on a higher bid.


Sports of The Times: 1995 N.B.A. PLAYOFFS; Post-Up Pupils Take a Final Exam
FIRST they hugged at center court.
Then, with Bill Russell watching from courtside, they battled ferociously through 53 uproarious minutes.
Finally, while Shaquille O'Neal was going after Clyde Drexler's right-side runner, Hakeem Olajuwon snuck inside for a game-winning tip.
Olajuwon's Houston Rockets outlasted O'Neal's Orlando Magic, 120-118, in Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals.
The war of friendly titans and Pete Newell's prize graduate students has begun.
It promises to be one for the ages.


Turncoats in the War on Drugs
Federal officials say that the indictments this week of three former Justice Department lawyers on charges of helping the Cali cocaine cartel reflect the high level of drug-related corruption in Colombia and the United States.
Yet whether any former officials broke the law is not the only issue.
Equally troubling is that they are only a few of the many former Federal prosecutors who defend or give legal advice to the suspected drug kingpins they once tried to send to prison.
In all, 62 people were indicted, including the three former officials and three other lawyers.
According to the indictments, the lawyers helped launder money, obstructed prosecutions and fabricated evidence.
The Government says this resulted in the murder of an informant and in the intimidation of witnesses.


Eino Friberg, 94, a Translator Of the Finnish National Epic
Eino Hjalmar Friberg, a blind Finnish-American writer known for his translation into English of Finland's national epic poem, died on May 27 at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 94.
His death was reported by The Associated Press on Monday.


Notes Creator Seen as Tied to Lotus
The head of the software team that created Lotus Notes -- the hot product that I.B.M. is seeking in its $3.3 billion bid for the Lotus Development Corporation -- has an employment contract that could well keep him at the company for years, according to industry executives.
The software creator, Ray Ozzie, has a contract that requires him to remain with Lotus through the development of two more versions of Notes, according to people close to Mr.
Ozzie's software team.


CHRONICLE
The Needlers is an organization for executives in the garment district, but that's not why it's called the Needlers.
"Our name has nothing to do with the sewing business, but with the fact that we were organized 24 years ago to needle each other," RALPH IANNAZZONE, the president of the philanthropic and fraternal organization, said yesterday.
"We still do that. Our meetings are nothing but chaos."


Hanna Andersson and Its Offshoots
SINCE 1983, parents have been ordering children's cotton clothing by mail from Hanna Andersson.
On July 1, the company will open its first retail store, in the Westchester mall in White Plains.


Old Yanks And New Are Pulling For Mantle
Hank Bauer remembers living with a 19-year-old Mickey Mantle in an "itty bitty old apartment" above the Stage Delicatessen at 54th Street and Seventh Avenue during Mantle's rookie season.
The year was 1951 and Bauer said times were simpler, much simpler, as he spoke by telephone yesterday after learning that his former Yankee teammate needs a liver transplant to have a chance at survival.
The 72-year-old Bauer understands Mantle's medical situation acutely because he overcame a serious case of throat cancer two years ago.
His voice, always gravelly, is softer now since the tumor was removed, and Bauer spoke passionately about the friend and fellow outfielder he tried tutoring more than 40 years ago.


Daniel Bershader, 72, Physicist Who Studied Fast Flight, Dies
Daniel Bershader, an internationally recognized aerophysicist whose calculations furthered the mechanics of supersonic flight and space exploration, died on May 30 at his home in Stanford, Calif.
He was 72.
The cause was complications from chronic peptic ulcers, according to a report from Stanford University, where he was professor emeritus of aeronautics and astronautics.


Holly Corp.(HOC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


International Briefs; Sandoz Plans Public Sale Of Its Chemical Business
Sandoz A.G., Switzerland's second-largest pharmaceutical and chemical company, said yesterday that it would sell its chemicals division to the public, though it did not rule out the possibility of selling the unit to another company.
Analysts estimate that Sandoz would earn as much as 2 billion Swiss francs, or $1.72 billion, from the sale of stock in the new company, to be called Clariant.


Zimmer Walks Off Field Into Retirement
Without fanfare, the Colorado Rockies coach DON ZIMMER retired Tuesday night after 47 years in baseball as a player, manager and coach.
Zimmer, 64, left the Rockies' bench in the fifth inning of Colorado's 5-4 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals, saying he didn't want to make a big issue of his retirement.


Evoking the Mayans On a Florida Beach
IN the early 1980's, Seaside, Fla., a private resort community on the Gulf of Mexico east of Pensacola, with strict urban and architectural guidelines, began to be a showcase for some well-known New York architects, including Walter Chatham and Steven Holl.
This week will see the completion of Seaside's latest addition: a 60-foot-high obelisk (below) designed by David Coleman, an architect based in Burlington, Vt., and Seattle.
The Coleman Pavilion, which on Monday survived Hurricane Allison, its first hurricane, sits on a dune 25 feet above the beach.
Inside its arched base, people can gather in the shade to take in a 360-degree view of ocean and village.


Philips Pleads Guilty in Case Of False Data
The Philips Electronics North America Corporation, one of the world's largest producers of semiconductors and electronic components, pleaded guilty on Monday to charges that it had falsified testing data about military equipment it made for the Defense Department and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The company, a unit of Philips Electronics N.V. of the Netherlands, entered its plea in Federal District Court and agreed to deposit $9 million toward settlement damages involving its plant in Mineral Wells, Tex., which developed electronic resistors for navigation and weapons systems such as the Air Force F-16 and the Army's Patriot missile.
A further $5 million will be placed in an escrow account toward nongovernmental claims.


Ross Anderson, 75, Retailing Executive
Ross F. Anderson, a retired San Francisco retail-chain executive, died on Sunday at his home in Menlo Park, Calif.
He was 75 and also had a home in Rutherford, Calif.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Seraphic Romp With an Episcopal Flavor  'Masque of Angels' Trinity Church
One of opera's distinguished ancestors is the Christian service: the acting-out before an altar of a religion's stories and rituals.
Dominick Argento's "Masque of Angels" on Sunday afternoon took opera back to one of its sources.
Angels roamed the sanctuary, in the form of Trinity'schoir wearing white smocks, modest halos and rolled-down tube socks.


Procrastinating on School Safety
With school violence on the rise and school security officers accused of lawless behavior, Chancellor Ramon Cortines has fashioned an inadequate, defensive response.
While Mayor Rudolph Giuliani hammers at him to let the Police Department take over the school safety division, Mr.
Cortines is playing for time by ordering a review of the division's performance, with results due in a few days.
Mr.
Cortines seems to have forgotten that a study of the division two years ago addressed many of the same issues.
He and the Board of Education need to stop resisting the transfer of security responsibilities and make a deal with the Mayor that will benefit schoolchildren.


Newly Found Cave Paintings in France Are the Oldest, Scientists Estimate
Scientific tests have shown some of the masterly drawn beasts discovered last December in a cave in the Ardeche to be at least 30,000 years old, making them the world's oldest known paintings, the Culture Ministry announced this week.
The ministry said French and British specialists had determined that charcoal pigments of two rhinoceroses and a bison found in the Chauvet cave in the southeastern Ardeche were between 30,340 and 32,410 years old.


I.B.M.'s Surprising Software Bid
I.B.M. has a huge distribution network, through which it sells everything from mainframe computers to business consulting services.
The problem is that I.B.M. lacks exciting software that will keep its customers in tow or attract new ones, especially in the personal computer market where I.B.M. lags.
Lotus Development Corporation cannot recreate I.B.M.'s distribution network, but it can create something even better, a computer network.
A Lotus software product known as Notes allows computers, often within an organization, to share files, data and other electronic communication, whether those computers are in the same building or on opposite sides of the world.
By tying computers together, Notes can be as vital to a business as the operating system that runs its stand-alone computers.


Plan to Cut School Bus Eligibility Rejected
The New York City Board of Education last night unanimously rejected a proposal by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to cut by almost a third the number of students eligible for school bus transportation.
Mr.
Cortines had proposed the plan as part of his efforts to close the school system's projected budget deficit of between $750 million and $1 billion for the 1996 fiscal year.


Cygne Designs Inc.(CYDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Foul-Shot Follies Are Opening Act For Rocket Heroes
Kenny Smith sent the game into overtime.
Hakeem Olajuwon sent the Houston Rockets into celebration.
And the loss sent the Orlando Magic home to a difficult night's sleep.
In a memorable Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals, the Rockets defeated the Magic, 120-118, tonight in a game that saw both teams walk a tight rope between victory and defeat.
And in the end, Orlando was the team that fell.
Thanks to a tip-in by Olajuwon with three-tenths of a second left in overtime, Houston won a wild, exciting game that gave the Rockets an early edge in the four-of-seven-game series.


Effort to Evict Clinic Is Called An Attempt to Ban Abortions
A court hearing on an attempt to evict a Garden City abortion clinic concluded today with the clinic's lawyer arguing that the eviction was an illegal attempt to limit abortions.
"Everything we have heard from the landlord is a contrivance," the lawyer, David Rosenberg, said.
"It's clear that what the landlord is trying to do is limit abortions, get rid of the clinic and get a new tenant to pay higher rents."


Bullpen Yet Again Can't Get Bonds Out
John Franco was asked to get Barry Bonds out in a key situation on Tuesday, and he could not do it.
Franco, the best pitcher in the Mets' bullpen, gave up a single and the Mets went on to defeat.
Tonight at Candlestick Park, Dallas Green plucked Eric Gunderson out of the bullpen and asked him to perform in a similar situation.
Gunderson, a left-hander, had not pitched since May 29, but Green clearly thought it was time to try someone other than Franco.
Gunderson fared no better than his bullpen mate had the previous evening.


The Annals of Film, As Told in Dance
Accustomed to being challenged, provoked and even shocked by the American choreographer Bill T. Jones, dance lovers here seemed unprepared for the respectful sobriety of his latest creation, an homage to Lyons's own Lumiere brothers on the 100th anniversary of their invention of modern cinema.
Not that the 80-minute work, "24 Frames per Second," lacked sensuality as Auguste and Louis Lumiere danced a steamy tango together, or the soundtrack boomed out rhythmic breathing that ended in a sexual climax, or a near-naked woman wearing a white falcon's head symbolized flights of cinematic imagination.
It was just that this year's Lumiere anniversary -- the brothers' first 50-second movie was shot outside their family's factory here on March 19, 1895 -- is a major event for Lyons and, as resident choreographer at the Lyons Opera Ballet, Mr.
Jones clearly felt that this occasion was more suited to poetic narrative than emotional agitation or political controversy.


Wyman Pendleton; Actor, 79
Wyman Pendleton, an actor in theater, films and television, died last Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from a head injury suffered in a fall at his home, said a friend, Joseph Cali.


Chance of Recession Is Seen by Greenspan
Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, raised the possibility of a brief recession, but stressed the economy's long-term health.
Markets took this as a signal that interest-rate cuts were not imminent.
Article, page D1.


Angiola Sartorio; Dancer, 91
Angiola E. Sartorio, a dancer, teacher and choreographer who worked with Kurt Jooss in the 1930's, died on May 26 at her home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 91.
Miss Sartorio was born in Rome.
She trained with Rudolf von Laban, the dance theoretician, and performed and taught with Ballet Jooss for five years.
She founded, directed and choreographed for the Ballet of the City of the Florence, believed to be the first modern-dance company in Italy.


Haiti Rolls Out a Slightly Soiled, but Democratic Red Carpet
The gesture was intended simply as one of political solidarity and symbolism: gambling that they would be able to welcome Haiti back into the fold of democratic nations, members of the Organization of American States voted a year ago, when Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his cronies still ruled this land, to hold their next General Assembly in Haiti.
But any attempt to organize an international event in the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere involves challenges and risks.


METRO DIGEST
THOUSANDS OF SCHOOL LAYOFFS POSSIBLE With New York City's schools facing a double blow of city and state budget cuts, a senior Board of Education official has warned local districts that they may have to slash thousands of school jobs and make other reductions totaling $400 million.
A cut of that size would be the largest to classrooms since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's.  [ Page A1. ] Board of Education rejects plan to cut number of school bus riders.  [ B8. ]


Limits on Free Mileage
WITH summer vacationers about to get rolling on behind-the-wheel trips, several major rental-car companies have announced plans to start charging consumers by the mile if they drive more than 100 to 150 miles a day.
The new charges -- typically 20 to 29 cents a mile beyond the new limits that will now be included in the rental agreement -- may signal the end of unlimited free mileage, a staple of the car rental industry for a decade.


Simpson's Wife Faced Killer and Struggled, Coroner Testifies
Nicole Brown Simpson apparently faced her killer and put up a fight before he viciously slashed her throat, the Los Angeles County chief coroner told the jury today, reconstructing minute-by-minute the frenzied, bloody struggle that preceded the victim's death.
The coroner, Dr.
Lakshmanan Sathyavagiswaran, also told jurors that once Mrs.
Simpson was on the ground, probably unconscious, her assailant could have turned his attention to her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, and then returned to cut Ms.
Simpson's throat.
Her death was quick but not instantaneous, Dr.
Sathyavagiswaran said.


3d Try in Tough Town for Comedy
New York may be a funny place, but it's not that easy to set the town laughing.
The producers of the Toyota Comedy Festival have been working at it for two years.
On Friday they will mount their third annual offensive, hoping to make the kind of impact that will turn a young, struggling festival into a fixture.
Over 10 days, the festival will present about 80 acts at clubs, theaters, parks and even bookstores all over Manhattan.
By design, it's a mixed bag.
Audiences can hear younger, little-known comics free in Bryant Park or known commodities like Steven Wright, who has not done a one-man show in New York in nine years, at the Beacon Theater.


Game Is in Dire Need of Positive Spin
The month of May was anything but merry for major league baseball.
June isn't turning out to be much better.
There was a Barry Bonds tirade against San Francisco fans who dared boo him Monday and an expletive-deleted diatribe by Dallas Green -- unseemly and overexposed, thanks to the national airwaves.
The Mets' manager, his tolerance at a low, railed against reporters who dared question him after his club lost Tuesday.


Big Drug Companies Brace For Battles on Patent Rights
The big prescription drug companies are preparing for court battles over patent rights worth billions of dollars that have been put at risk under conflicting interpretations of a new Federal law.
The legislation enforces the new world trade agreement, which takes effect today.
The new law, called the the Uruguay Round Agreement Act, opens the door for many drugs to get months and even years of added patent protection, delaying the introduction of lower-priced generic versions.
Consumer groups say the delays will add up to $6 billion to the costs borne by individuals, Medicaid and other taxpayer-financed programs.


Stepping Out of the Ballroom and Onto the Stage
Whatever the season or time of day may be, it is always a starry spring evening when American Ballroom Theater dances.
The troupe is celebrating 10 years of choreographic fair weather with an anniversary season, which opened on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Pierre Dulaine and Yvonne Marceau, the company's directors, have demonstrated that ballroom dance can be as fun to watch as it is to do, and that it is capable of great variety.
The Joyce program offered new works and old.


Taking a Census in the Hudson; Biologists Seek Reasons for Sharp Decline of the Shad
Kathryn Hattala was standing waist deep in the Hudson River, talking to a fish.
"For the pleasure of being caught, you win a red tag in your side," Ms.
Hattala, a state fisheries biologist, said to a slab-sided shad as she plunked it into a trough on a plywood stand.


Parole Delay for Officer's Killer
In 1973, Derrick C. Butler killed a Camden police officer.
Now he is eligible for parole.
But the New Jersey Parole Board decided yesterday to postpone his release, scheduled for today, until Camden officers have a chance to make their case to keep him in prison longer for the slaying of Patrolman Elwood Ridge.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co.(NWSW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Youth Injured in Palisades Fall
After four classmates finished their final exams, they went for a walk Tuesday along the cliffs overlooking the Hudson River.
Yesterday Mark West, 18, was in the hospital, critically injured, after falling off the Palisades to a ledge about 80 feet below.


Talks Start on Trade-Pact Membership for Chile


Corrections
A picture in Science Times on Tuesday showing a chimpanzee using a keyboard of symbols, carried an incorrect credit.
The photographer was Michael Nichols, for Magnum.


Tory Leaders Misled Parliament On Iraq Arms Sales, Panel Finds
After spending more than two years investigating Britain's sale of military equipment to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war, an independent judicial panel has found that leaders of the governing Conservative Party misled the public and Parliament about its arms-sales policies, although unknowingly in some cases.
The panel's draft report, portions of which were leaked to the British media over the last two days, said officials right up to Margaret Thatcher, who was Prime Minister at the time, continued to insist that they were strictly adhering to a policy of not selling any equipment that could have military applications to either Iran or Iraq in the late 1980's even as the Government was permitting some sales to Iraq.


Sports of The Times; Mickey Mantle's Cancer
AS soon as you walked in the door on Central Park South, a framed Yankee uniform with the "7" on the back told you where you were.
And if you were lucky that lunch hour or dinner time, down past the big rectangular bar the color of baseball bats, in the last booth on the right, Mickey Mantle would be sitting with a drink.
"Whenever he was here in the last year, he loved this IBC diet root beer in a brown bottle," his restaurant partner, Bill Leiderman, was saying yesterday.
"Or a Diet Coke."


2 Braking Rods Are Faulted In Fatal Crash Of J Train
A one-inch misalignment of two metal rods apparently caused the failure of an automatic braking system on a subway train Monday morning, moments before it slammed into another train on the Williamsburg Bridge, a state investigator said yesterday.
The two pieces of metal, one on the track bed and one on the train, are supposed to strike each other squarely if a train runs a red light, setting off the emergency brakes.
But state and Federal investigators said that it appears that just their tips made contact.
"The strike marks are about an inch off where you would expect," said William J. Dayton, supervisor of rail investigations for the State Public Transportation Safety Board.


SENATE APPROVES ANTI-TERROR BILL BY A 91-TO-8 VOTE
The Senate today approved broad counterterrorism legislation that would give Government law-enforcement officials expanded powers, make it easier to deport illegal aliens suspected of terrorism and limit most death row prisoners to one appeal in Federal court.
Seven weeks after the Oklahoma City bombing and after four days of debate, the package of bills, the Comprehensive Terrorism Prevention Act of 1995, won passage on a vote of 91 to 8, with wide bipartisan support.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  U.S.
PILOT FOUND  The American pilot of a fighter jet downed over Bosnia on Friday was found and rescued early today.
A1


Market Place; The Magellan fund's manager bets on lower interest rates.
INVESTORS in America's largest mutual fund might not know it, but they are betting that the Federal Reserve is about to ease interest rates -- and sharply.
In a speech two nights ago in New York, Jeffrey N. Vinik, manager of the $44 billion Fidelity Magellan fund, spoke at length about what is, for a mutual fund manager, a risky proposition -- the direction of interest rates.
The Federal Reserve, Mr.
Vinik predicted, will lower short-term rates "very soon and very rapidly over the next several months."


Editors' Note
An illustration on the Education page yesterday with an article about a gift of Cartier heirlooms to St.
Louis University was actually a montage of items in the bequest, including two photographs and articles of jewelry.
The montage was prepared by the university for publicity.
The Times avoids printing combined or altered photographs if the effect may be misleading.
And even when the nature of a montage is clear, the paper's policy is to specify the technique in a caption or label.
Such a label should have appeared in this case.


House Defeats Bid to Repeal 'War Powers'
Despite a last-minute appeal from the Speaker, Newt Gingrich, the House defeated an attempt tonight to repeal the 1973 War Powers Act.
The act requires a President to bring home American troops within 60 days of deployment unless Congress authorizes their continued role overseas.
In a significant foreign policy vote, the House voted 217-201 not to repeal the law.
Mr.
Gingrich and Representative Henry Hyde, Republican of Illinois, who sponsored the repeal, said they had failed to educate enough Republicans; but they also said the war in Bosnia had scared Republicans away from giving President Clinton a freer hand overseas.


U.S. Indicts Arkansas Governor on Fraud Charges
A Federal grand jury today indicted the Governor of Arkansas, Jim Guy Tucker, charging him with making false statements to obtain a federally backed loan and conspiring to defraud the Internal Revenue Service.
The indictment says Mr.
Tucker tried to hide profits from a multimillion-dollar cable television deal.
The indictment was sought by Kenneth W. Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel, but does not involve President Clinton or Mr.
Clinton's former business partner, James B. McDougal.
Mr.
Starr's broad investigation into the Clintons' personal and campaign finances grew out of allegations concerning Mr.
McDougal and the Whitewater real estate venture, and his mandate allows him to expand his investigation when he uncovers evidence of other possible wrongdoing.


Israeli Anthem Revised
To the Editor:
Your account of the exclusion of non-Jewish Israeli citizens by the words of "Hatikva" (Jerusalem Journal, June 1) does not mention that the national anthem has been revised once for historical reasons and by someone other than its author, Naphtali Herz Imber.


From Comedy Central, An Animated Therapist
Now that rerun season is lumbering along in earnest, Comedy Central is hoping to snare viewers with several new and insistently wacky series.
The theory: Better you should laugh while perspiring this summer.
Maybe.
The best of the lot is "Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist," Comedy Central's first half-hour animated sitcom, on Sundays at 10:30 P.M. and Tuesdays at 8:30 P.M.
The soundtrack's star and co-creator is Jonathan Katz, a stand-up comic, actor and writer whose credits range from appearing on Comedy Central's "Politically Incorrect With Bill Maher" to co-writing the screenplay for the 1987 film "House of Games" with David Mamet.


No Headline
"This shows us that early art, just like art of the past few thousand years, had ups and downs, that there were periods when art had a heyday or was less important, and that there were artists who were more backward or more gifted." -- JEAN CLOTTES, who led the exploration of Chauvet cave in France.  [ A18:2. ]


THEATER
Battling Cancer and Guilt On the Way to a New Self  'The Lobster Reef' Theater Row Theater
In a role to die for, Marilyn Chris brings to vivid life the ailing, complex woman who is the sole character in Eda LeShan's play "The Lobster Reef."


Bosnian Serbs Release 3 More United Nations Hostages
The Bosnian Serbs released 3 more United Nations hostages today, bringing the total freed since the peacekeepers were seized last month to 232, United Nations officials said.
But 53 peacekeepers were still detained and 93 confined at their positions by the Serbs, said Leah Melnick, a spokeswoman for the United Nations in Zagreb.
Officials in the Serbian capital, Belgrade, said it was likely that the remaining 53 hostages would be released soon.


Stocks Mixed in Moderate Trading as Dow Retreats 23.17
The stock market closed mixed yesterday in moderate trading, as investors continued to be perplexed about the course of the economy and what the Federal Reserve planned to do about it.
Only a month ago, traders and market analysts were saying vaguely that the Fed would cut interest rates later this year.
Then more and more traders started pointing to August as the likely time for the rate cut.
Then, last week, traders started talking about a rate move in July, at the very next meeting of the Fed's policy-making group.


Lindros's Legion Finally Breaks Through Brodeur's Force Field
The Flyers and the Devils had played into overtime a combined five times in the first two rounds of the Stanley Cup playoffs this season and neither team had been a loser.
So when they finished the regulation 60 minutes of Game 3 of their Eastern Conference final all even at 2-2 tonight, one unblemished record had to give.
The Devils blinked first, and in a flash, the Flyers were back in the series.


Washing a Doll's Head and Untangling a Dream
MY 5-year-old niece, Bridgette, a tall, waif-thin girl, is the color of caramel, with wide brown eyes and fuzzy, dark brown hair.
At the United States Air Force day-care center she attends in Arizona, her friends are of all hues.
She has her own "family" of more than 30 dolls at home, about half of which are black, like herself, and two Mexican and two Asian, plus a Native American Barbie.
She has not yet begun asking questions about color, race or ethnicity.
But they are already shaping her.
One night while I was visiting, my sister went out, leaving me to baby-sit.
I suggested we play beauty parlor and wash her dolls' hair.
We chose two "makeup" dolls, each a huge head plopped atop a tray of beauty and hair utensils.
One was the epitome of Barbie -- peachy-white skin, straight blond hair, blue eyes and chiseled nose.
The other looked the same, but her eyes and skin were brown.
She also had a head of curly brown hair, much like Bridgette's.
We began to wash.
First the white doll, then the black.


Amendment to Protect Flag Wins House Panel's Approval
Voting on party lines, the House Judiciary Committee today approved a constitutional amendment that would enable Congress and the states to prohibit "physical desecration" of the American flag.
The committee chairman, Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, said the issue, more "than the flag itself," was "a popular protest against the vulgarization of our society." He was among the 18 Republicans who voted for the amendment.
Twelve Democrats voted no, and two Republicans and three Democrats did not vote.


Why Is This Surgeon Suing?
Jack Singer, an ophthalmic surgeon in Vermont, removes cataracts about 250 times a year.
It hardly seems the sort of work that turns someone into an industrial pirate.
But because he specializes in an incision that eliminates the need for stitches, Dr.
Singer has found himself at the center of a remarkable controversy.
Dr.
Samuel Pallin, an Arizona ophthalmic surgeon, says he owns the procedure for stitchless cataract surgery.
Patent in hand, he has declared that Dr.
Singer and any other surgeon brandishing a knife the same way must pay him a royalty.
Other ophthalmic surgeons like Dr.
Singer, however, argue that Dr.
Pallin was not the pioneer of the technique, just the first one to think of patenting it.


1, 2, 3, 4: Anderson Misses Them All
This is all he needed to do to secure a victory for his team in Game 1: make one of four free throws in the last 8 seconds.
Nick Anderson had spent most of his adult basketball life practicing for this moment.
It never came because the ball never went in.


U.S.-Serb Talks Suspended
Talks between an American envoy and the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, were suspended today without the diplomatic breakthrough the two had been seeking.
The envoy, deputy assistant secretary of state Robert Frasure, left Belgrade after failing to reach an accord that many hoped might be a step toward peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, diplomats said.


Giant Food Inc.(GFS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 20


International Briefs; Sale of Holvis Unit Cleared by Swiss Agency
Switzerland's takeover commission said yesterday that Holvis Holzstoff A.G.'s agreement to sell its Fiberweb unit to BBA Group P.L.C. conforms with the Swiss takeover code.
The commission stipulated, though, that Holvis and BBA show the agreement to the International Paper Company.
International Paper, which is bidding to take over Holvis, had contended that its accord with BBA violates the takeover code and Swiss securities law.


Fluke Corp.(FLK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 28


International Briefs; Profit Drops at Hambros
Hambros P.L.C., a British merchant bank, said yesterday that its pretax profit had fallen 58 percent in the year that ended March 31, to $:37 million, about $58.9 million, and that it had halved its year-end dividend payout to 7.5 pence.
The company's stock plunged 300 pence a share, to 181. (Reuters)


Expos' Alou Signs for a Year at $3 Million
Outfielder MOISES ALOU avoided a salary arbitration hearing and signed a one-year contract yesterday with the Montreal Expos worth $3 million.
The contract gives Alou a raise of $1.6 million.
He had been seeking $3.5 million for 1995, while the Expos offered $2.5 million. (AP)


Oh, So That's a Russian Palace!
YOU don't have to be a head of state anymore to see some of the most lavish private apartments in the palaces of the Kremlin.
Now, armchair travelers can visit the exotic, splendid rooms -- many of which have never been altered -- in "The Moscow Kremlin in Watercolor" (inset below), a $95 book of 19th-century paintings that the French publisher Alain de Gourcuff has assembled from the archives of the Moscow Kremlin Museum.


Neophytes No Match For Gifted and Talented
The score, at the close of yet another soggy day at Roland Garros, was two for the past and present French Open champions and nothing for the underqualified opponents, both of them neophyte Grand Slam quarterfinalists.
Instead of making career breakthroughs, the 61st-ranked Renzo Furlan fell to the two-time defending champion, Sergi Bruguera, in straight sets, and Adrian Voinea, ranked 128th, received a straight-set comeuppance from Michael Chang.
In 1990, Chang became the youngest champion in French Open history when he won just three months after his 17th birthday.


Roads Interest Albany, Not a Train to the Plane
WELL, it sounded like a good idea, for a moment there.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan says there's a plummy pot of Federal money available to help build the train to the plane, the proposed rail line to Kennedy and La Guardia airports that has been all but declared dead because it's so expensive.


CHRONICLE
Does the world need yet another perfume?
People who buy beauty products from the actress and singer CONNIE STEVENS on the Home Shopping Network have been clamoring for one, she said yesterday.
She was in New York to introduce her new perfume, Kali, this week.
"I got so many requests from women themselves," she said.
"The scents I use in my other products are so popular that I felt there was room for another unique perfume."


A Parisian Garden Of Artful Delights
ON June 22, the German conceptual artist Lothar Baumgarten will celebrate the unofficial opening of his first garden, Theatrum Botanicum.
The garden, at 261 Boulevard Raspail on the Left Bank in Paris, is part of the much-praised new Cartier Foundation headquarters and art gallery designed by Jean Nouvel.


An Experimental Plan for Mantle
In planning to treat Mickey Mantle's liver cancer with a liver transplant, his doctors are gambling on a new and highly experimental treatment, involving not only the transplant but also high doses of chemotherapy.
The decision raises ethical questions about who gets the scarce organs available for transplant, and it raises medical questions about whether the risky treatment is worthwhile.
Medical experts said it may be Mantle's only hope of surviving.


High School Aide Held in Sexual Abuse of Student
A troubled 16-year-old student's statement to a high school guidance counselor led to the arrest yesterday of a New York City teacher's aide on charges of sexual abuse, the police said yesterday.
The arrest marked the fifth incident of sexual abuse involving a New York public school employee and a student in the last four weeks.


Investigation of Senator Proceeds on Course
To the Editor:
"Is Anyone Investigating Senator Daschle" (editorial, May 29) implies that the Department of Transportation's Office of Inspector General is delaying or not pursuing an investigation of Senator Tom Daschle, his wife, Linda Daschle, deputy administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, and allegations about F.A.A. activities concerning B &amp; L Aviation.


G.O.P. Also Protects the Environment
To the Editor:
Re "The G.O.P.'s War on Nature" (editorial, May 31): Republicans -- including those in the House -- are not uniformly opposed to sensible environmental safeguards, and Democrats do not uniformly support them.
Take the clean water bill approved by the House.
As a Republican I proudly led the forces attempting to moderate the bill on the floor.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the trade confrontation between Japan and the United States referred incorrectly to a statement by Walter F. Mondale, the United States Ambassador to Japan, about Japanese bureaucrats.
Mr.
Mondale said in an interview that one reason for Japan's increased resistance to American calls for open markets was the rise to power of a new generation of bureaucrats, who had chafed for decades as their superiors gave in to Washington on one trade dispute after another.
He did not attribute the new bureaucrats' attitude to a growing movement in Japan to lean toward Asia instead of the United States.


Criticism Grows Over Mixed Signals in Bosnia


In Cuba, Army Takes On Party Jobs, and May Be Only Thing That Works
With Cuba in an economic and ideological crisis over the worldwide collapse of Communism, the role and responsibilities of the Cuban armed forces have been expanding rapidly while those of the Communist Party have been sharply declining.
Diplomats and economists here estimate that units of the army, which has traditionally been one of President Fidel Castro's principal pillars of support, are now producing and distributing between a quarter and a third of the country's food supply.
The military has also set up highly profitable tourism, construction and retailing companies of its own, and officers have been put in charge of many state enterprises in an effort to reduce corruption and inefficiency.


History Will Judge New York City by Its Airport Rail Link
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick's "Train to the Plane Turns to Pie in the Sky" (Metro Matters, June 5) is painful but necessary reading.
But it need not be the last word.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday about the financial results of the Lotus Development Corporation carried erroneous scales in some editions.
The figures showing net sales and net income were in millions, not thousands.
In 1994, Lotus reported net sales of $970.7 million and a net loss of $20.9 million.


Executive Quits As CBS Unit Fills New Job
Peter Tortorici, the president of CBS Entertainment, resigned yesterday with the naming of Leslie Moonves, the president of Warner Brothers Television, to a new position in charge of the CBS entertainment division.
Mr.
Moonves's appointment was expected.
He will assume the titles of president of CBS Entertainment and executive vice president of CBS/ Broadcast Group, said Peter Lund, the network's president, who called Mr.
Moonves "one of the giants of the entertainment industry."


Taiwan Enthralled by President's 'Private' U.S. Trip
For the record, the President of Taiwan says his trip to an alumni reunion at Cornell University is strictly a private affair.
The White House, which granted President Lee Teng-hui a visa to attend the gathering, wishes the world would ignore it.


Clinton Embraces a Proposal To Cut Immigration by a Third
The White House today welcomed a Federal advisory panel's recommendation to cut legal immigration by one-third.
But the proposals met fierce opposition from Hispanic, Asian-American, Roman Catholic and Jewish groups, as well as from the National Association of Manufacturers.
Barbara Jordan, chairwoman of the panel, the Commission on Immigration Reform, delivered the plan to President Clinton, and he congratulated the panel.
"Consistent with my own views, the commission's recommendations are pro-family, pro-work, pro-naturalization," he said.


Mantle Has Cancer and Needs a Transplant
Doctors in Dallas said yesterday that the former Yankee star Mickey Mantle was suffering from liver cancer and had only several weeks to live unless he gets a liver transplant.
Early this morning, a spokesman at the Baylor University Medical Center, where Mantle is being treated, said there was a possibility a liver had been found.
He said doctors were looking to prepare Mantle for surgery, possibly as early as today.


Journal; Hard(cover)ball
The American Booksellers Association's annual convention is supposedly a literary trade fair, but no one here was debating the merits of "The Unconsoled," Kazuo Ishiguro's first novel since "The Remains of the Day." In this great city for both politics and art, politics won out this time, as the country's two most prominent fantasy candidates for President, Colin Powell and Newt Gingrich, opened their unofficial, undeclared campaigns for higher office by promoting their hardcover wares.
Under the rules of this game, of course, none dared call it "campaigning." Mr.
Powell and Mr.
Gingrich were, instead, initiating "book tours." But call it what you will, the two literary lions will barnstorm the country for months to come, giving speeches and signing autographs and dominating local news until they butt into primary season.


Corrections
A report in the On Stage, and Off column of Weekend on May 26, about preparations for contract talks between Broadway producers and the stagehands union, misstated the union's strike history.
The union indeed struck once, in 1919, in sympathy with striking actors.


Remembering the Beverly Hills Hotel
To the Editor:
I read with interest your June 1 Arts pages article on the reopening of the Beverly Hills Hotel, as my family moved to Beverly Hills in 1923 just two blocks down Beverly Drive from it.
I used to catch polliwogs in the park's pond across the street from the hotel and, much later, had lunch in the Polo Lounge and my hair cut in the barbershop.


Health System Gets New Head
Andrew Greene has resigned as vice president and treasurer of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to lead the Robert Wood Johnson Health System.
The organization's six hospitals and 2,600 doctors serve half a million patients in New Jersey each year.


Senators Debate New Expatriate-Tax Study
The debate over taxing wealthy individuals who give up American citizenship has flared anew on Capitol Hill with the publication of a Republican-directed study that Democrats attacked today.
"Although there is some anecdotal evidence that a small number of U.S. citizens may be expatriating to avoid continuing to pay U.S. tax," the Joint Committee on Taxation concluded in a study it published this week, the staff "found no evidence that the problem is either widespread or growing."


Essay; Lubyanka Lullaby
The name has been changed five times in the past five years.
But the agency headquartered in what was the Lubyanka prison is still known here and abroad as the K.G.B.
"Changing names is a hobby of ours," shrugs Aleksandr Mikhailov, press agent for what is this month called the Federal Security Service.
On his office wall is a picture of, and a poem by, Yuri Andropov, who was K.G.B. chief when the agency acted as dread "sword and shield" of the Communist Party.


Tax-Cut Plan Is Denounced By Democrats
In what was supposed to be a triumphantly bipartisan event, the Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, announced today that he and the County Legislature had agreed to cut the county's 8.5 percent sales tax next year by a quarter of a percentage point, to 8.25 percent.
But in the kind of political fight the county is famous for, the Democratic minority leader, Maxine S. Postal, declined to attend, saying the cut was too small.


But What of the Violence in Popular Culture?; Slaying the Messenger
To the Editor:
William J. Bennett and C. DeLores Tucker are unwise to cite Plato to support their case against gangsta rappers (Op-Ed, June 2).
Whereas they object to the lyrics of such artists as "offensive and obscene," Plato, in the passage they cite, is concerned only with the power of "rhythm and harmony" to "fasten on" the soul: he makes no reference to the verbal communication of ideas.


AEP Industries(AEPI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


High Concept Meets Good Housekeeping
THERE is nothing haphazard or ordinary in the little Upper East Side penthouse duplex that Abbie Zabar -- artist, writer, designer and gardener -- shares with an 18-year-old Persian cat named Timothy.
No piles of newspapers or magazines.
No clutter of little objects in danger of overtaking any surface.
No jarring conversation pieces, though Timothy does lap his water from a sterling silver porringer that is an heirloom from Ms.
Zabar's Manhattan babyhood.
As meticulous as the watercolor illustrations that decorate Ms.
Zabar's resolutely imaginative and whimsical books about herbs, the alphabet and friendly animals, the apartment is a picturesque kingdom that has been evolving over the last 19 years under the watchful eye of its ruler, one of whose maxims can be found engraved in neat black lettering on the edge of a bookshelf: MEANDERING LEADS TO PERFECTION .


Big Powers Plan a World Economic Bailout Fund
The United States and its major economic partners plan next week to urge the creation of a worldwide emergency fund intended to bail out countries that find themselves, as Mexico did early this year, on the verge of national bankruptcy.
The fund's creation is described in a draft copy of the communique for next week's meeting of top leaders of seven of the world's largest industrial nations in Halifax, Nova Scotia.


A Birth Method Stirs a Debate
In a promotional video for Russian water birthing, a woman in an advanced stage of labor bobs above wind-tossed waves of the Crimean sea.
The camera zooms in as a nude midwife helps the woman to shallow water, where she sprawls against a rock as her baby's head slowly pushes into the chill, bloody water.
The newborn is fine.
The mother, shivering, smiles weakly as she cradles her infant.
Later, on the beach, the midwife swings the newborn by his legs in the air -- part of the vigorous postpartum exercise endorsed by followers of Igor Charkovsky, who claims to be the inventor of water birthing.
"This is what makes all the West accuse us," the midwife, Marina Dadasheva, said dryly as she switched off the videotape.
"They say it is violence."


Brazil Takes Big Step Toward Ending State Monopoly Over Oil
Discarding a once-cherished nationalist symbol, Brazil's Chamber of Deputies voted tonight to end the state oil monopoly, which was first adopted in 1953.
Foreign oil companies would be allowed to explore and to drill for oil in Latin America's largest country under the proposed constitutional amendment, which faces three more congressional votes.


Milt Hinton's Birthday
The New School Jazz Program is to honor Milt Hinton, the jazz bassist, on his 85th birthday with its Beacons in Jazz Award at a June 23 benefit at 8 P.M. at the Tishman Auditorium, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Those to perform include Mr.
Hinton, Ron Carter and Marian McPartland.
Tickets are $25; benefit tickets, which include a party, are $100 to $1,000.
Information: (212) 496-8524.


In Search Of Answers In Wrong Places
After a few drinks, after saying, "My only regret is that I didn't take better care of myself," Mickey Mantle might hunch forward and narrow his eyes and add, "People think that my legs and my injuries hampered me a lot; they did, but if I had taken better care like Willie Mays and Stan Musial and Hank Aaron, the guys that are up in the record books, Pete Rose. . . ." His voice would trail off and the eyes would seem wistful.
His regretful choices have always seemed interestingly self-aware, his own roster of stars whose accomplishments pointed up his own sense of losses and failures as a man and a ballplayer, of what he thought he missed along the way.


airo Journal; Nights on the Nile: Under the 7 Veils, a Russian?
Egyptian belly dancers, condemned by Islamic militants as licentious and scorned by the general public as disreputable, face a new onslaught from Russian rivals, who have invaded the nightclubs that line the road to the pyramids and crowd the banks of the Nile.
The Russian dancers began to appear in the clubs shortly after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Now, about 100 professional Russian belly dancers are working in Cairo, about a third of all those registered with the moral police, who oversee the shows to make sure they do not become too bawdy.
Egyptian belly dancers, famous for their skill throughout the Arab world, say they are increasingly having trouble finding work.


In Looping Lines, a Clue To the Elusive Malraux
Who was Andre Malraux?
The question probably sounds absurd to older Americans for whom he equaled French culture in the years before and after World War II.
Like Sartre, Malraux was an intellectual celebrity.
Every educated person in this country knew who he was, and even what he looked like, with his deep-set eyes, Byronic gaze, slicked-back hair and omnipresent cigarette, which he waved around in "a kind of aerial dogfight," as one observer wrote.
There were various Malrauxs, and all of them were famous: Malraux the adventurer, Malraux the Resistance hero, Malraux the novelist, Malraux the art writer, Malraux the hypnotic orator, Malraux the Communist sympathizer, Malraux the Gaullist.
To younger Americans who have come of age since his death in 1976, however, he tends to be no more than a name that rings a distant bell.
His novels are no longer fashionable, at least compared with those of French writers like Celine, Bataille and Duras.
His books on art are dismissed, or more often just ignored, by art historians.
Some French critics have lately called him a forgotten man.
The question -- who was Malraux? -- would not seem odd to them.


11 Linked to Homemade Bombs LITTLE EGG HARBOR TOWNSHIP
Homemade bombs, made with granulated chlorine, have damaged mailboxes and a golf course since March 14.
The culprits, the police say, are 11 teen-age boys who now face charges of possession of explosive devices and criminal mischief.


Greif Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


'Play Ball!' 'Faster!'
Baseball owners unanimously backed six proposals to shorten the time of games, including one to keep hitters in the batter's box.
Article, page B13.


Fleshing Out Jung's Theory
DO you believe with Sigmund Freud that sex is at the root of everything?
Or do you side with Carl Jung, especially with his theory of the collective unconscious: human behavior is influenced by mythological images and archetypes that have been buried in the mind since time's beginning?
Have you ever been analyzed by anybody other than your so-called best friend?
Do your eyes glaze when someone insists on telling you last night's dream?
Have you read to the end of this paragraph?
These are questions to answer before rushing to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, where James Lapine's "Twelve Dreams," directed by the playwright, opened last night.
You might be fascinated by it.
Then again, it could send you out of the theater in need of a strong dose of "Saturday Night Live" reruns.
When you see this play, you're helped if you have a pre-existing point of view about both psychoanalysis and its various schools.


Land Sale to Ease Budget Woes
Balancing a budget always means making tough choices, and in Essex County it meant selling a huge piece of prime real estate.
The Hilltop tract, 365 acres of steep woods straddling Verona, Cedar Grove and North Caldwell, will be sold to the Essex County Improvement Authority for $33 million.
The county board of freeholders approved the sale Wednesday.


Washington Talk; A Senator Holds the Center for Medicaid
Whether it be an era of Democratic dominance or Republican revolution, the middle usually matters in the Senate.
This explains the continued relevance of Senator John H. Chafee, the moderate Republican from Rhode Island, even as the political world on Capitol Hill has been made anew.
A year ago, Mr.
Chafee was trying to broker a compromise health bill between moderate Republicans and conservative Democrats.
His proposal would have expanded coverage substantially, but gradually, among the nation's 39 million uninsured.
But in those expansionist days, when the Clinton Administration still dreamed of completing the agenda of the New Deal, the Chafee compromise was widely faulted for falling short of guaranteed coverage to every American.


Reputed Russian Crime Chief Arrested
A man described by Federal authorities as the most powerful Russian organized-crime leader in the United States was arrested in a Brooklyn apartment yesterday and charged with trying to extort $8.5 million from two immigrant businessmen.
Federal Bureau of Investigation officials said that that the suspect, Vyacheslav Kirillovich Ivankov, had been delegated in 1992 by other Russian crime chiefs to manage and control the increasingly violent Russian gangs in America.


Looking Back Over a Century of Films, and Loving It
A glossy valentine produced in association with the American Film Institute, "The First 100 Years: A Celebration of American Movies," begins by declaring that "they amazed us from the start; they amaze us still." The documentary was written and directed by Chuck Workman, who has crammed a staggering number of images into a mere 90 minutes (the final credits are yards long).
Its scattered broadcast times on HBO include this afternoon at 4:30.
After a quick dip into the moving images of penny arcades and nickelodeons in the 1890's, the survey jumps to the legendary D. W. Griffith, whose feature-length films would put movies in theaters.
The familiar names tumble forth, from Mary Pickford to Charlie Chaplin, who describes his silents as "sort of a comic ballet." When sound arrived, Al Jolson sang and Greta Garbo talked.
James Cagney specialized, we are told, in portraying "men who could beat the system by any means possible."


Three Officers Disciplined For Drunken Hotel Spree
A New York City police officer has resigned and two others have been suspended from the force because of their participation in a drunken spree through seven Washington hotels three weeks ago, police officials said yesterday.
Saying the department was making steady progress in the investigation, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said the vaunted "blue wall of silence" was cracking as police investigators continued to interview officers.
About 800 officers were in Washington on May 15 ostensibly to take part in a national memorial ceremony honoring officers who died in the line of duty.


A Big Hedge Fund Returns $1.3 Billion to Its Investors
The Caxton Corporation, a big hedge fund based in New York, returned about $1.3 billion of its capital to investors, saying that its very size had begun to hurt its performance.
Caxton is one of several large hedge funds that have returned money to investors recently in an attempt to stay nimble and profitable.
Hedge funds, which are private investment partnerships, made huge amounts of money in 1993 but have generally found it more difficult to make money recently.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD World Record in 5,000 Meters
Moses Kiptanui of Kenya broke the men's 5,000-meter world record yesterday, clocking 12 minutes 55.30 seconds at the Mobil Grand Prix Golden Gala meet in Rome.
The previous record was 12:56.96, set last June by Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia.
Kiptanui's countryman, Daniel Komen, finished second in the 5,000, also under the previous record, in 12:56.12.
Komen's time was a world record for juniors.


After the Cigars, Clinton Still Faces Growing Criticism of Bosnia Policy
President Clinton and his national security adviser, Anthony Lake, celebrated the rescue of a downed American fighter pilot with cigars on the Truman balcony early this morning.
But within hours, Mr.
Clinton faced renewed Congressional demands for changes in the Administration's Bosnia policy.
With Capt.
Scott O'Grady pulled safely from a Bosnian forest, the House of Representatives quickly approved an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would require the United States to end its participation in the United Nations embargo against arming the factions in Bosnia.
Mr.
Clinton has already vowed to veto the measure because of other issues.


P. J. Harvey Breaks Down Love to Its Scary Essentials
Composure can be devastating, and P. J. Harvey knows it.
At the Academy on Wednesday night in the first of two sold-out concerts, Ms.
Harvey wailed and moaned, yelped and growled while her new band pounded out primal blues riffs and slow, stark backdrops for ballads.
She was singing about love stripped of all romantic comforts: love that would be heaven or hell, all-consuming and irrevocable, as strong as religious faith and as terrifying as a revelation.
But she sang about abandon without giving in to it; every phrase was controlled, every gesture plotted.
From the blues, Ms.
Harvey has learned how to visit the abyss without falling in.
In Ms.
Harvey's songs, women address their lovers, present and more often absent; she plays a temptress and an unwed mother, a lonely seeker and a "50-foot queenie." Most of her set came from her new album, "To Bring You My Love" (Island), on which she uses biblical and blues imagery to remove her characters from the here and now, to make their longings archetypal and mythic.


Affirmative Action Makes Colleges Better
To the Editor:
Affirmative action will die if both sides continue to characterize it as an "effort to undo two centuries of discrimination" (editorial, June 4).
It does not attempt to even the historical score.
The legacy of discrimination cannot be undone; it is in everyone's interest to guarantee equal opportunities now.
JAMES HICKS East Haven, Conn., June 5, 1995


Beethoven a Proto-Nazi? Is One Paranoid to Ask?
Paul (Jim Helsinger), the central character in Richard Brody's earnest but hopelessly muddled film "Liability Crisis," is a morose young advertising executive and aspiring film maker whose obsession with the Holocaust has gone way out of control.
Paul has been compiling interviews with World War II survivors for a documentary film, and the project has propelled him to a state of paranoia.
Listening to Beethoven, Paul worries that the composer wrote "Nazi music" and imagines that the plush sound on a Furtwangler recording owes to the violins' strings having been made out of "Jewish intestines." He hallucinates a woman in his apartment building carrying a copy of "Mein Kampf," and voices a hysterical resistance to authority figures who remind him of the Germans' rationalization for the Holocaust that they were "just following orders."


CHRONICLE
Originally, the plan to establish the MARTIN DUBERMAN Fellowship in Lesbian and Gay Studies was to have been a surprise for the celebration, on Wednesday, of Mr.
Duberman's 65th birthday.
"But ELI ZAL, my partner, who did the fund raising, decided that since I had a heart attack several years ago, it would be better to tell me two weeks ago," said Mr.
Duberman, the historian and author, who is the founder and executive director of the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York.


Japan Deserves A Tariff
Although European and Asian governments have complained about the Clinton Administration's regrettable but justified proposal to place tariffs of 100 percent on 13 Japanese-made cars, most agree that Japanese trade barriers threaten the world trading system.
Debate in America on the issue has been more primitive.
Many free-market economists, some pundits and lobbyists for Japanese and for some European interests question whether there is even a problem to be solved.


For New Jersey Welfare Recipients, a Rule to Join H.M.O.'s
All New Jersey welfare recipients, except the elderly, disabled and the chronically ill, will soon be required to join a health maintenance organization, a move state officials say will provide better health care and reduce state and Federal Medicaid costs by millions of dollars.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced the start of the program after receiving permission on Wednesday from the Federal Government to make enrollment in H.M.O.'s mandatory.
More than half of the states already have received the necessary Federal waiver, said William Waldman, the State Commissioner of Human Services.
The permission came from the Health Care Financing Administration.


Cleaning the Slate


General Host Corp.(GH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


On My Mind; Legal and Damnable
The story in the paper stuck with me as I was doing reporting on other things, even when I was writing about them.
After a bit I knew why -- this story was a personal assault, a mugging on a lighted street.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts came up with the right word when I called about it -- the indictment in Miami of three attorneys for the Cali drug cartel who had something special in common.
All had been Justice Department prosecutors, and one, Michael Abbell, was the former head of a section that sought extradition of cartel drug criminals.


At the Bar; For the Clinton Administration, a constitutional scholar forges opinions from theory and real life.
On a recent morning, the Clinton Administration's designated arbiter of what is and what is not constitutional was summoned to the White House to pronounce upon a policy.
He donned a safety helmet, leaped upon his bike and pedaled the half mile from his Justice Department office to the meeting.
The cyclist was Walter E. Dellinger, the Assistant Attorney General who heads the Office of Legal Counsel.
Although the agency is little known to the public, it has wielded enormous influence during the past few decades as a kind of constitutional hinge for an administration's public policies.


Art in Review
Win Knowlton  Bill Maynes Contemporary Art 225 Lafayette Street SoHo Through tomorrow
The single sculpture in this show consists of 32 attenuated, white, polelike forms clustered at the center of the gallery.
Modeled in plaster over wire armatures, their surfaces are uneven in texture, with irregular bumps and indentations.
Each component stands on a rough brick or cinder block base and reaches to the ceiling, where it is capped by cushioning slats of wood shingle.


British Union Of Big Cable Operators
TeleWest Communications, Britain's largest cable television operator, said today that it would acquire the fifth-largest cable company, SBC Cablecomms, in a stock deal valued at $1.1 billion.
The accord brings together two sets of American companies that have aggressively expanded in the British cable industry.
TeleWest, which sold about a quarter of its shares in a public offering last year, is 38 percent-owned by Tele-Communications Inc., the largest cable company in the United States, and 38 percent by US West, the Denver-based regional phone company.
SBC Cablecomms is half-owned by SBC Communications Inc., formerly Southwestern Bell, and Cox Communications, the Atlanta-based media and cable group.


Jeffrey Z. Rubin, 54, an Expert on Negotiation
Jeffrey Z. Rubin, an academic expert in and author on the art of negotiation, died on Saturday in a mountaineering accident in Baxter State Park in Maine.
He was 54 and lived in Newton, Mass.
J.
William Breslin, a spokesman for the Program on Negotiation at Harvard Law School, said Dr.
Rubin was hiking up Fort Mountain in northern Maine in adverse weather when he apparently slipped and fell to his death.
His body was found on the mountain at noon Sunday during a helicopter search.


Restaurants
When the right restaurant moves into a neighborhood, it is instantly obvious.
Consider the case of the Chelsea Bistro and Bar.
When it was known as T. Rex, the people who lived nearby went hurrying past the restaurant without a glance.
Children adored the dinosaurs that seemed to crash through the walls but most adults thought the theme was sort of silly.
Then the dinosaurs disappeared and suddenly people started taking note of the little restaurant on West 23d Street.
They watched happily as workmen turned the cave into a smart bistro and installed a fireplace in the space once occupied by a fierce giant reptile.
"When is it going to open?" they'd call to the carpenters, eager to be the first on the block to get in the door.


Art in Review
Alberto Savinio  Paolo Baldacci Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through next Friday
Alberto Savinio (1891-1952) was Giorgio de Chirico's younger brother.
Before World War I, the brothers studied and worked together, and Paolo Baldacci makes a convincing argument, in the catalogue of this exhibition, that Savinio played an important part in the formation of the "metaphysical" esthetic for which de Chirico became famous.
During those years Savinio concentrated his creative efforts in the field of music: at a 1914 concert, he played the piano so violently that it fell to pieces (anticipating 1960's rock guitarists).
But Savinio's compositions were greeted with unrelenting hostility, and from 1925 to 1946 he abandoned music in favor of painting.
In the last years of his life he returned to composing and also worked as an opera-set designer for La Scala in Milan.


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp.(CHF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Inside Art
Loyalty to Art and Yale
Richard Brown Baker has been quietly collecting contemporary art since the late 1940's, when he was a research analyst for the State Department in Washington.
By 1952, however, he was so enamored of abstract painting that he retired, moved to New York City and immersed himself in the art world, getting to know the important artists and dealers.
For a while, he even studied painting with Hans Hofmann.


Panthers Send a Shocked Neilson Packing
The Florida Panthers closed a chapter in their young existence yesterday, firing Coach ROGER NEILSON, who had the team within a point of the playoffs in each of its first two seasons.
"I want to emphasize that Roger Neilson is not being released because of past performances with the Florida Panthers," General Manager BRYAN MURRAY said.
"We're looking for someone that's very open-minded, someone willing to play younger players, someone willing to give those players a chance."


Late Budget In Hand, Pataki Faces Power Shift
Was it just coincidence, or was there some Democratic design behind bringing the budget in so close to a new record for lateness?
That record of 68 days late was set last year, and as he did every year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo blamed the Republicans who control the Senate for being obstructionists, for holding out for every last morsel.
Mr.
Cuomo said it as often as he could: The public only blames the Governor for a late budget.


Semper Fi, and Proud: Marines Do Their Job
It was a good day to be a marine.
It was Camp LeJeune's people, from the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit, who swooped in and plucked Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady from under the noses of Serbian forces early this morning.
At the camp and in the neighboring town of Jacksonville, where half the men seem to have crewcuts, people celebrated.


METRO DIGEST
HIGH HOSPITAL MORTALITY FOR NEWBORNS A State Health Department study has found an unexpectedly high number of deaths among newborns in some of New York City's busiest public and private hospitals.
Officials have not identified a cause for the high mortality rates, which at some hospitals are roughly 50 percent above the national average.
But they have ordered an extensive investigation.  [ Page A1. ] OFFICER QUITS OVER WASHINGTON RAMPAGE One New York City police officer has resigned and two others have been suspended from the force because of their participation in a drunken spree through seven Washington hotels three weeks ago, police officials said.  [ A1. ]


What's Disney in Park To Most New Yorkers?
To the Editor:
Your June 7 news article on the Walt Disney Company's appropriation of Central Park's Great Lawn for Saturday, June 10, glosses over troubling issues.
This event is a publicity stunt to enhance the coffers of a private enterprise with little gain to average New Yorkers, who are denied access to the event.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the Fidelity Magellan fund's anticipation of changes in interest rates, misstated the expected impact of a weak dollar on interest-rate policy.
A weak dollar is likely to persuade the Federal Reserve to raise rates, not lower them.


Gen. Juan Carlos Ongania, Argentine Ex-President, 81
Gen.
Juan Carlos Ongania, a cavalryman who was Argentina's repressive President from 1966 to 1970, died yesterday at the Military Hospital in Buenos Aires.
He was 81 and lived in a suburb of Buenos Aires.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.
He had suffered a stroke in May that had left him paralyzed and unable to speak.


McDowell Seems Lost In Yankees' Dense Fog
Forty-two days.
Enough time to collect six paychecks.
Enough time to complete one fourth of this truncated baseball season.
Sadly for the Yankees, a month and a half has not been enough time for Jack McDowell to win two games.
It has been 42 days and counting since McDowell strutted to the mound and won his first Yankee start against Kansas City.
The pretty picture was supposedly forming.
It was why the Yankees heisted him from the White Sox for two minor league players, why they pay him $5.4 million and one reason why they were expected to dance atop the American League East.


House Votes to Lift Bosnia Arms Ban
The House defied the Clinton Administration today and approved a sweeping foreign aid bill that includes an amendment, passed easily, to end United States participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia.
The provision to ignore the United Nations embargo gives President Clinton one more reason to veto the entire foreign aid package, a step he has already threatened to take if it reaches his desk.
It must first clear the Senate, which is considering a similar bill in committee and will most likely act separately on the arms embargo in the days ahead.


Ex-Replacement Player Sues Yanks for Termination Pay
The curse of Replacement Baseball lives, at least as far as the Yankees are concerned.
The Yankees, who thought they were finished with replacement players when the strike ended, are faced with the prospect of paying out more than half a million dollars as a result of a lawsuit filed in New Jersey Superior Court in Hackensack.
Doug Cinnella, one of the Yankees' replacement pitchers, filed the suit Wednesday, claiming that the Yankees owe him $20,000 in termination pay stipulated in his contract.
His lawyer, Barry Epstein of Rochelle Park, N.J., made it a class-action suit, saying that approximately 30 other players had signed identical contracts with the Yankees.


Trevor N. Dupuy, 79, Prolific Military Historian
Trevor N. Dupuy, a prolific military historian and battlefield theorist whose expertise extended over 5,000 years of warfare, from the conflicts of ancient Egypt to the Persian Gulf war of 1991, took his life on Monday, three weeks after learning that he was terminally ill.
He was 79 and lived in Vienna, Va.
The police in Vienna said Mr.
Dupuy, a retired Army colonel who had told his family of his intentions after learning that he had pancreatic cancer, shot himself in a parking lot across the street from the police station.


Give Them an Alternative to the Drug Trade
To the Editor:
Die-hard Congressional opponents of overseas development assistance, and their "doubting Thomas" colleagues, would do well to consider your June 2 front-page report on Mexico's long-ignored Tarahumara Indians.
Once again, the drug trade is filling a convenient economic vacuum created by "poverty and marginalization."


Budget Conferees Gather, But Not Really to Confer
The Senate-House conference committee on the Federal budget met for the first time today, and this much was settled:
*Democrats will have no role whatsoever in working out the differences between the House and Senate budget resolutions passed last month.


Transat A.T. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Mets Gift-Wrap Big Inning for Mlicki
Dave Mlicki did not know what kind of lead the Mets needed to feel safe from Barry Bonds, the Giants slugger.
Neither did his manager, Dallas Green.
Bonds dismantled a Mets lead with one hit on Tuesday, and he destroyed yet another possible Mets victory on Wednesday night.
Today at Candlestick Park, though, the Mets created something they had not been able to do in their two previous outings -- they built a lead that was Bonds-proof.


Abroad at Home; 'A Culture of Rights'
Until a few years ago South Africa was an extreme example of a country that exalted the power of the state.
Today it makes the rights of the individual the society's highest value.
That extraordinary change was dramatized this week by a decision of the country's new Constitutional Court.
It held the death penalty unconstitutional.


CHRONICLE
Seventy-one years ago, BURGESS MEREDITH was a boy-soprano soloist with the Cathedral School choir at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
The 83-year-old actor is no longer a soprano or a soloist, but on Sunday he will sing with a combined student-adult choir at the cathedral.
He will also be the guest speaker at the school's alumni day.
Mr.
Meredith is coming to New York from his home in Malibu, Calif., today and will be visiting the campus for the first time in years.


Treasuries Fall Hard Again As Rate-Cut Hopes Recede
Fading expectations of a cut in interest rates anytime soon caused prices of Treasury securities to pull back sharply for a second consecutive day yesterday.
Lawrence B. Lindsay, a governor of the Federal Reserve, said yesterday that the economy was not likely to slip into a recession though it faced 18 months of slow growth.
On Wednesday, the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, said he expected an economic recovery in the second half of the year, and the vice chairman, Alan S. Blinder, said he expected a quick adjustment by businesses to the slower economy.
The comments have been interpreted by the market to mean that the Fed would not move soon to cut short-term interest rates.


Baseball Takes Steps to Speed Up the Game
Major league baseball owners, expressing alarm that nine-inning games that took approximately two and a half hours to play less than 20 years ago now last three hours, adopted six recommendations today to roll back the clock.
The proposals were made by Steve Palermo, the former American League umpire assigned by the owners to look into reducing game times.
They range from the shortening of breaks between innings to the raising of the pitcher's mound from the current 10 inches to between 12 and 13 inches.


President Replaced At Warwick Baker
Bob Fiore, president and chief creative officer at Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York for the last decade, is being replaced unexpectedly, effective immediately, by Kevin O'Neill, who has held a top creative position at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York.
"There were business issues we talked about and didn't agree on," Wilder Baker, chairman and chief executive of Warwick Baker, said of Mr.
Fiore, who is 60.
Several telephone calls to Mr.
Fiore were not returned.


Now the Banks Turn Against the Elderly; No to Teller Fees
To the Editor:
You report (front page, June 5) that banks have begun charging excessive fees on basic services like teller transactions.
They hope to discourage people from using tellers by switching to automatic teller machines, or from being a customer at all.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend "A MONTH IN THE COUNTRY," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A Turgenev drama, set in 19th-century Russia, about a woman who falls in love with her son's tutor; with Helen Mirren; directed by Scott Ellis.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8.
Limited seating available at $55.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"2: GORING AT NUREMBERG," Primary Stages, 354 West 45th Street, Clinton.
Romulus Linney's drama about Hitler's deputy.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 333-4052.


Sanchez Vicario and Graf Bracing for a 2-in-1 Battle in France
The favorites punched in, the challengers punched out; the two leading ladies of tennis prefer not to have it any other way.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the French Open's businesslike defending champion, and Steffi Graf, a three-time champion fixated on ending her yearlong Grand Slam drought where in 1987 she claimed the first of 15 Slam crowns, once again had their way on the clay.
"I'm absolutely ready for it," Graf said of the prospect of a rematch with the woman who took away her 1994 United States Open title the last time they tangled and has twice prevented her from defending titles here.
The duo, already in a tussle over the No. 1 ranking, today earned the right to fight to the finish at the French Open after muscling their way through two distinctly different semifinals.
Graf, who sent out for some restorative bananas midway through the third set, clawed a meandering path into her seventh final here by defeating fourth-seeded Conchita Martinez, 6-3, 6-7 (4-7), 6-3.
Their 2-hour-33-minute confrontation pitted the German's powerful serve-and-forehand combination against the mixed bag of playmaking the Spaniard has used with increasing proficiency since winning her first Grand Slam title last year on unlikely territory at Wimbledon.
"Today, my balls were too short, and she was on top of them with her forehand, and I'm sure she has, if not the best serve on the tour, one of the best, and it's quite difficult to return it," said Martinez, who converted just 5 of the 17 break points she earned against Graf's backup weapon.
While Graf had to survive some tremulous moments, Sanchez Vicario methodically ground ninth-seeded Kimiko Date, the first Japanese semifinalist here in two decades, 7-5, 6-3.
Sanchez Vicario, looking none the worse for wear for her weeklong bout with a stomach virus, reached her fourth French Open final.
Date was staked to a 2-0 lead in both sets but visibly wilted after Sanchez Vicario broke her in the last game of the opening set.
"It was not an easy match, but maybe I am much more the specialist than her on clay," said Sanchez Vicario, who performed flawlessly on all six of the break chances she received.
"But what counts, on the important points, I probably played my best."
Graf's performance was far from unflawed; she committed 67 unforced errors, more than half of them backhand slices that found the net.
But Graf was pleased that, when it most counted at the end, she was obviously the fitter and more ferocious contestant.
"I haven't been on a court for two and a half hours since last summer," said Graf, who is 24-0 in 1995 and hadn't dropped a set this year until Martinez won the middle set.
"I was real happy to go the distance, and I fought till the end. I think I won this time because I fought."
Martinez's inability to persevere along the comeback trail brought her 24-match undefeated streak atop clay to a halt and also marked her first loss since hiring a new coach, Carlos Kirmayr, after her last defeat, which happened to come against Graf in March at the Delray Beach final.
"I think at the beginning of the match I make so many mistakes that I didn't know if I was passive or aggressive," said Martinez, who slowly solved her psychology problem as the match wore on and Graf began piling up her unforced errors.
Martinez's play was hot and cold.
In the opening set, she was no more present than a ghost and occasionally appeared to be nailed to her change-over chair, she was so loath to leave it.
But after Graf faltered at 4-1 in the second set, Martinez took over.
In the German's opinion, Martinez "began to dictate" this seesawing encounter marred by five service breaks in the first set, six in the second and just one in the third, where Martinez's loss of the eighth game left Graf poised to again serve for the match.
Martinez had broken Graf when she served for the match in the 10th game of the second set, and after forcing the tie breaker, she was the dominant player there as well.
But after Graf blasted herself out of an 0-40 deficit in the seventh game of the final set, Martinez seemed to enter the preliminary stages of surrender.
It took Graf three match points to end things, but she finally cracked a slight smile when Martinez, who let out a bellow after setting up the third match point with a netted forehand, floated a backhand slice out of bounds.
Saturday's match marks the second occasion in which Graf and Sanchez Vicario will attempt to outwork, outlast and outrage each other in a French Open finale, and this is the 13th straight time they have clashed in a final.
In their career rivalry, Graf holds a 24-8 overall edge, but the Spaniard has claimed three of their last four meetings.
MATCH POINTS
On the men's side, where the seedings are in such a shambles that none of the top four players reached Friday's semifinals, fifth-seeded THOMAS MUSTER, surfing along on a 33-match unbeaten streak on clay, faces ninth-seeded YEVGENY KAFELNIKOV, and the two-time defending champion SERGI BRUGUERA, seeded seventh, takes on MICHAEL CHANG, the 1989 champion who is seeded sixth.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONAGRA INC., Omaha, completed the acquisition of the Van Camp's canned bean and Wolf Brand chili businesses from the Quaker Oats Co., Chicago, for undisclosed terms.
LAKELAND FIRST FINANCIAL GROUP INC., Succasunna, N.J., a bank holding company, said its shareholders had approved its acquisition by Valley National Bancorp, Wayne, N.J., in a stock swap valued at $27.6 million.


Random House Wins 'Huck Finn' Rights
Random House has won the battle for the right to publish a new version of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," which will include previously unpublished material from a recently discovered manuscript.
The publisher reached an agreement this week with the Mark Twain Foundation, the two sisters who found the manuscript in their attic, and the Buffalo and Erie County Public Library, which owns it.


No Headline
This is Basher-52.
I'm alive and I need help. -- CAPT.
SCOTT F. O'GRADY, before his rescue in Bosnia.  [ A1:6. ]


Risen From the Past, Precise and Polished
"Red Buttons! I haven't seen you in so long I thought we were both dead."
The subject of this observation, reportedly made in a self-service filling station in Los Angeles, quotes it early in his one-man show, "Buttons on Broadway." It's a pretty weary line, but it has particular resonance here.


A Hasty Response to Terrorism
The Senate is congratulating itself for passing the Comprehensive Terrorism Protection Act of 1995 just seven weeks after the Oklahoma City bombing.
But the Senate's hasty and ill-considered action has come at a price.
Steps designed to protect Americans' physical safety will in many cases erode their liberties.
The legislation, a grab-bag of bills proposed by the Clinton Administration and members of Congress, contains some sound provisions.
It provides, for example, more F.B.I. personnel and resources to combat terrorism, increased penalties for dealing in explosives used to commit crimes and measures to make bombs easier to trace.


Robert Vesco, Fugitive Financier, Is Arrested in Cuba, the U.S. Says
The Cuban Government has arrested Robert L. Vesco, who fled the United States in 1973 to avoid swindling charges, and has approached Washington about returning him here, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The United States has sought the financier's extradition for years on an indictment charging him with swindling mutual fund investors of $224 million.


Stroll Through the Gardens of Fashion
The Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art has dipped into its overflowing vaults and pulled out a plum of a collection.
It's not planned to illuminate any arcane fashion strain, though specialists may spot some dressmaking techniques they were not aware of.
But the aim is not so much educational as it is entertaining.
The exhibition is as lighthearted as a walk down a garden path or through a roomful of paintings by Renoir.
With a single exception, there are no hidden meanings.
The overall message is, simply, "enjoy."
The exhibition is called "Bloom" and it demonstrates without any dogmatism how fashion and flowers have been entwined since the 17th century.
This is done with embroidery, appliques, weaving and printing.
Sometimes fabrics are rolled into three-dimensional flowers, and in the ultimate expression of the genre dried flowers are encased in two layers of gauzy cloth.
The flowers are stylized, exotic or realistic.


Meat Seller Accused in Scheme
People called him Chuckie the meat man because he said he was in the wholesale meat and fish business.
But the authorities say that Charles N. Cugliari was really in the business of running a pyramid scheme that cost investors $80 million.
Mr.
Cugliari, who pleaded not guilty yesterday to fraud and money laundering charges, will go on trial July 12.


Mantle Receives New Liver As Donor Is Found Quickly
Surgeons replaced Mickey Mantle's liver ravaged by cancer, hepatitis and decades of heavy drinking -- this morning in a bid to save his life.
As Mr.
Mantle's health had deteriorated, with organ failure spreading from his liver to his kidneys, a liver donor was suddenly found overnight.
Dr.
Robert Goldstein, a transplant surgeon at Baylor University Medical Center here, said that an operation lasting six to six and a half hours had left his patient with a working liver and functioning kidneys, but still facing great risk.
"He's doing very well," Dr.
Goldstein said early this afternoon.
"We feel he should be able to improve throughout the day."


Mishima's View of Marquis de Sade
First seen here two years ago, Ingmar Bergman's stunning production of Yukio Mishima's "Madame de Sade" has returned to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where it opened Wednesday night and will be available for just two more performances, today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
I can't imagine a more exhilarating alternative to the Saturday night premiere of Disney's "Pocahontas" in Central Park, but be warned: "Madame de Sade" is being presented in the Academy's Carey Theater, which is not air-conditioned.
Yet this is a theatrical experience of such spell-binding, gimcrack-free order that it serves to refresh the senses, no matter what the temperature-humidity index.


Gussie Mae Makes It, Finally
Gussie Mae finally won a race. The victory cost him a record.


Rockets Playing on the Road Again To Test the Magic for Resiliency
The Orlando Magic learned how quickly a game can slip away, especially against the Houston Rockets.
Can the Magic recover quickly?
Or will the Rockets continue their uncanny road success during these National Basketball Association playoffs?


U.N. Moves Heavy Guns Near Sarajevo
The United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia today moved heavy artillery within range of Sarajevo for the first time, apparently signaling a readiness to respond to aggression with considerable force.
The French Army dropped the artillery reinforcements by helicopter onto positions on Mount Igman, a strategic point southwest of the city where the one Government-controlled road out of Sarajevo has come under persistent Serbian fire.
French United Nations officials said a single shell from an unknown source was fired at the drop area but caused no damage or casualties.


Getty Petroleum Corp.(GTY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Filming at a School Displeases Cortines
The Mayor's office and the New York City Schools Chancellor, ever at odds, now have new grounds for disagreement: the fact that a city public school was used as the site of a terrorist bomb scene in a new film, "Die Hard With a Vengeance."
The scene was filmed last summer at Public School 115 on West 177th Street in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan.
This was done with the required approval of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting and of the New York City Board of Education.


Administration, Burned in Past, Declines to Join Challenge to Gay Rights Ban
The Clinton Administration, which has taken some of its worst political beatings over its occasional support of gay rights, has decided not to join in the legal attack in the Supreme Court on Colorado's ban on all measures protecting homosexuals against discrimination.
Attorney General Janet Reno told reporters today that she had decided not to file a brief in the case expressing the views of the Federal Government, a position urged by many civil rights and gay advocacy groups.
As the issue was discussed in the Justice Department, officials said, the question was whether to sit out the case or join on behalf of those challenging the law.


Sentencing Reform Has Nothing to Hide
To the Editor:
"Sentencing Reform, in Secret" (editorial, June 3) criticizes the process that led to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1995 and the substance of the law.
You write that the Sentencing Reform Act resulted from "secret deals hurriedly patched together to end the budget impasse." That is untrue.


Riots by Vietnamese Erode Plan to Send Them Home
An international plan to end the 20-year sojourn of the Vietnamese boat people and force the last of them back to their homeland is in danger of unraveling after riots by the Vietnamese in detention camps across Southeast Asia.
Refugee workers say the riots show that it will be impossible to deport many of the 40,000 Vietnamese in the camps without violence.
The once-steady flow of boat people volunteering to return to Vietnam has evaporated, at least in part because of moves by Republicans in the United States Congress to offer thousands of them asylum.


Touch of Intrigue: Lukas Colts on Outside
One of them is the son of Risen Star, who won the Belmont Stakes in 1988, and the grandson of Secretariat, who won it by 31 lengths in 1973.
One is the son of Easy Goer, who won it in 1989.
One is the full brother to Go and Go, the Irish colt who won it in 1990.
And then there is the one Nick Zito calls "the horse with the funny name," Is Sveikatas, which means something like "Cheers" in Lithuanian.
But to racing people, the cheers in the 127th running of the Belmont Stakes tomorrow probably won't belong to any of those horses, but to D. Wayne Lukas and the two colts favored to win the race and to thrust him into the record books in two more roles: the first trainer to win five straight Triple Crown races and the first trainer to win the Triple Crown with two different horses.


INSIDE
Cuts Loom in New York City
New York City will receive far less in state assistance than expected, leaving an enormous task for Mayor Giuliani and the City Council as they struggle with the budget.
Page B1.
Echoes on Wall Street
As corporate takeovers rise, insider-trading inquiries are at a pace not seen since the mid-1980's.
Page D1.
Democrats' Welfare Plan
Senate Democrats unveiled a plan to revise welfare, retaining guaranteed payments to poor families but limiting them to five years.
A21.
New Microsoft Inquiry Seen
The Justice Department is reported to be scrutinizing Microsoft's plans to enter the commercial on-line business.
Page D1  Plea in Montclair Shooting
The man arrested in a shooting rampage at post office in Montclair, N.J., has pleaded guilty.
Page B1.


Downed U.S. Pilot Rescued in Bosnia in Daring Raid
United States marines staged an audacious rescue mission into the Bosnian war zone after dawn today, snatching up a missing American fighter pilot from his hiding place in the woods and helicoptering him to safety through a smattering of Bosnian Serb missile and machine-gun fire.
The Air Force pilot, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady, had been on the move stealthily in hilly woodlands for six nights before his guarded radio signals allowed rescuers to verify his survival and home in.


The Right Man Who 'Maintained His Cool'
The people who know Scott F. O'Grady are overjoyed that he survived for six days on bugs, grass and rainwater in hostile territory.
But no one is surprised.
Little more than a decade ago, he was a wide receiver and kicker on Lewis and Clark High School's football team in Spokane, Wash.
"He was one of the smaller guys on the team, and not one of the standouts," an assistant coach, Patrick Pfeifer, recalled yesterday.
"I often wondered how he stayed on the team."


Briton Suggests U.N. May Leave Bosnia
Britain's Defense Minister said today that the United Nations should withdraw its troops from Bosnia, perhaps by this fall, if Bosnian Serbs continued to challenge the United Nations mission there.
The statement by the British Minister, Malcolm Rifkind, came as NATO defense ministers met here to work out a common Bosnia strategy.


Tartabull Asks to Be Traded
Danny Tartabull is apparently tired of being criticized by George Steinbrenner, tired of sitting on the bench against certain right-handed pitchers and tired of being booed at Yankee Stadium.
Yesterday, he asked the Yankees to trade him, a club official said.
Tartabull's request is ironic because the Yankees have attempted to trade him for at least two years.
The 32-year-old Tartabull is basically a designated hitter and thus is not appealing to National League teams, and he has two years and $10 million left on a five-year, $25.5 million contract, making it even more difficult to deal him.


Shift Blocked In Rockefeller Center Stake
The shareholders of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. voted down a proposal yesterday that would have given Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company the chance to own a controlling stake in the company, which is a real estate investment trust holding a $1.3 billion mortgage on the bankrupt Rockefeller Center.
By a wide margin, the shareholders rejected a recommendation by the management that they waive the provisions of the company's charter that limit to 9.8 percent the amount of shares any one entity may own.


Corrections
An obituary on May 31 about Rabbi Milton Grafman, a civic leader in Birmingham, Ala., omitted a survivor.
She is Ida Weinstein Grafman, his wife of 64 years.


3 Are Held in Plot to Sell Material to Iraq
Three men from Queens and Long Island, apparently in collusion with a Russian general, smuggled nearly eight tons of material used in nuclear reactors from a military stockpile in Ukraine, stored most of it in a warehouse in Queens and spread the word that they would sell it to the highest bidder, Federal officials said yesterday.
The men were arrested after a yearlong sting operation in which United States Customs agents posed as Iraqi Foreign Ministry officials and European arms dealers planning to buy zirconium, a nonradioactive material that is useful in nuclear fission.
They are charged with trying to export zirconium illegally to Iraq, in violation of United Nations sanctions against Iraq, augmented by American law, which prohibit all trade with Iraq except for humanitarian items.


Small-School Idea Also Applies to Big Schools
To the Editor:
Re "Smaller, Better Schools' (editorial, June 2) and your May 22-25 series of articles: Small New York City public schools may be better, and we would welcome more, but with 50 now open, and 50 more in the works, they will still reach only a fraction of our children -- maybe 50,000 of a school population of more than one million. What about the other 950,000 children, in the 1,000 "bigger schools" we already have?


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Eyelashes Sufficient To Be Wigs
Mistress Formika (sometimes a guy named Mike) opens "Wigstock: The Movie" singing "The Age of Aquarius" in elbow-length purple gloves, a long skinny diva dress and a wig with furled braids sticking out of her head like giant Mouseketeer ears.
Partly a documentary and partly a celebration of outrageous wigginess, the film chronicles the annual drag festival that takes place in downtown Manhattan over Labor Day weekend.
The singing and lip-synching men onstage wear mountainous blue and pink wigs and sequins to spare, and the audience is almost as fantastically glamorized.
A distant cousin to the Halloween parade in Greenwich Village, Wigstock, the event and the movie, is good-natured, campy fun.
The M.C. of Wigstock is the Lady Bunny, wearing an exaggerated Barbie platinum wig and too many pairs of false eyelashes for the naked eye to count.
One of the founders of the festival, the Lady Bunny introduces unknown drag performers as well as some of the well known who have moved into the mainstream, including RuPaul and Lypsinka.


CHRONICLE
NEEN HUNT has been named executive director of the newly formed Mary Woodard Lasker Trust and executive vice president of the 50-year-old Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation, the foundation's president, JAMES W. FORDYCE, announced this week.
Dr.
Hunt was executive vice president of the United Nations Association-U.S.A. and has also been headmistress of the Calhoun School, a private school in Manhattan.


The Dry-Plate Genesis, And What It Wrought
Just when the art world seemed to be winding down for the summer, the International Center of Photography has come in with a quiet powerhouse of a show that by any measure is one of the standouts of the season.
"An American Century of Photography: From Dry-Plate to Digital" offers nothing less than an expansive, thorough recounting of the last 100 years of photography in this country, based on the great riches of a collection assembled since 1964 by Hallmark Cards.
Included in this far-ranging exhibition are examples of some of the greatest masterpieces of photography, as well as less famous but fascinating images by recognized and forgotten figures alike.
Accompanied by a beautifully produced catalogue written by Keith A. Davis, the curator of Hallmark's collection, "An American Century" will undoubtedly change many people's ideas about the shape of photographic history.


Art in Review
Mike Disfarmer  Staley Wise Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
The spare, uninflected portraits made by Mike Disfarmer in the 1930's and 40's have a surprising intimacy.
Disfarmer, who died in 1959, operated a photography studio in the rural community of Heber Springs, Ark.; typically, he depicted his customers without the frills of posing or props, recording them by natural light in front of plain backgrounds.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  ALBERT YORK, Davis &amp; Langdale, 231 East 60th Street (through June 23).
A pleasurable selection of 43 paintings, from the late 1950's to the present, by this reclusive master of the small, creamy and offbeat oil sketch.
Mr.
York's works, which can bring to mind artists as different as Delacroix and Manet, David Park and Jane Freilicher, are remarkably fresh, knowing and sometimes quite funny (Michael Kimmelman).


A Liberal Takes Half a Loaf; An Unlikely Bipartisan Hero in Hartford
State Representative William R. Dyson, for years one of the legislature's most outspoken voices for the poor, was arguing in favor of an idea he hates -- the fingerprinting of welfare recipients -- to prevent something he hates more: a nearly 50 percent cut in benefits.
It was a recent afternoon in the capital, and Mr.
Dyson, a black man who grew up in segregated rural Georgia in the 1940's, was making an anguished case to a fellow Democrat to accept fingerprinting as the lesser of two evils.


Kerrey Vows to Stall Telecommunications Bill
After laboriously stitching together agreement from industry on a sweeping telecommunications bill, Senate leaders were bogged down today by a maverick Democrat who complained that they had ignored consumers.
In an effort just short of a filibuster, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska vowed to block any agreements to limit debate and said he would keep that debate going until the bill was changed in several important ways.


Aetna Stock Climbs on Report of Sale Talks
The stock of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company rose yesterday after it was reported that the company was discussing the sale of part of its property and casualty business.
Aetna, one of the 10 largest property and casualty insurers in the nation, saw its shares climb $1.875, to $61.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Former Clinton Aide Pleads Guilty to Misusing U.S.-Backed Loan
A former aide to Gov.
Bill Clinton in Arkansas, Stephen A. Smith, today pleaded guilty to conspiring to misapply a Federally backed loan and agreed to cooperate with the Whitewater independent counsel.
Mr.
Smith's loan transaction does not involve Mr.
Clinton.
But his plea agreement gives a broader picture of the ties between some Arkansas Democrats and two politically connected lenders who are at the center of the investigation by the independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr.


Opposition on Bosnia
Hours after President Clinton celebrated the downed pilot's rescue with a cigar on a White House balcony, he faced renewed Congressional demands to change policy on Bosnia.
News analysis, page A9.


2 Are Killed in Restaurant
Two men were shot and killed yesterday by three gunmen who burst into a restaurant in Elmhurst, Queens, the police said.
The two victims, who were not identified, were eating in the Areta Pues Restaurant, a small Colombian-food cafe, with about a dozen other patrons about 1 P.M., when the gunmen entered and shot one of the men in the chest.


Private Company Narrows Its Focus to 5 Hartford Schools
A private education company that gained national attention after signing a contract last year to manage this city's entire troubled public school system has narrowed its plans and now expects to concentrate on just 5 of the system's 32 schools this fall.
Faced with fierce opposition from teachers and parents, Education Alternatives Inc., has agreed with the Board of Education to take a go-slow approach.
City officials said a company spending plan issued last month that called for hundreds of staff reductions and the possibility of larger class sizes sparked a revolt by parents and teachers that could not be contained.


Squabbling Continues After Rejection of Lease
A day after the Devils spurned a sweetened lease from the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the team's owner bluntly explained the rejection.
"It was unsatisfactory," said John McMullen.


From Democrats, Another Welfare Plan
After months of debate over Republican plans to revise the nation's main welfare program, Senate Democrats today unveiled a new counterproposal, a plan that would retain guaranteed payments to poor families but limit them to five years.
The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, outlined the proposal today, and it won immediate support from the Clinton Administration.


New York Hospitals Show a High Rate Of Newborn Deaths
A New York State Health Department study has found an unexpectedly high number of deaths among newborns in some of the city's busiest public and private hospitals.
State officials have not identified a cause for the high mortality rates, which at some hospitals are roughly 50 percent above the national average.
But they have ordered an extensive investigation that is to include a review of the medical records of many babies who died in the last two years.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a project to track shad in the Hudson River omitted the identity of the woman in the lower photo in some editions.
The woman, shown with a transmitter that is inserted into the fish, was Valerie Whaton.


Japanese Are in Rush to Sell Their Real Estate in the U.S.
Japanese companies, which unleashed one of the biggest international flows of investment ever when they flooded the United States with capital during the 1980's, are selling off many of their American assets with growing haste in a critical area, real estate, a new survey shows.
The trickle of sales of troubled real estate projects turned into a wave of auctions and negotiations last year, according to an annual survey by the E&amp;Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate Group here.
Japanese investors, according to estimates in the report, sold or were on the verge of selling $6.4 billion worth of American property last year, and could sell as much as $10 billion more this year.


House G.O.P. Narrowing Bill On Deregulation
Abandoning an effort to broadly rewrite the rules that have separated banks from the rest of the nation's financial systems, the chairman of the House Commerce Committee said today that he had been unable to broker a compromise to allow mergers between banks and insurance companies.
The decision by the chairman, Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. of Virginia, represents a setback for big insurers and banks, and for the many House Republicans whose deregulatory zeal led them to call for a dismantling of the legal barriers that have balkanized the American financial system for six decades.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the recent performance of the Lotus Development Corporation referred incorrectly to the origin of one software product, Lotus Notes.
It was created by Iris Associates, which was acquired by Lotus last year -- not by Softswitch Inc., also acquired last year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Lotus Ability to Deal May Lack Strength
As he met for a second day with Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the I.B.M. chairman, Jim P. Manzi, the head of Lotus Development, had few bargaining chips.


City Shortfall Even Worse Than Forecast
Just hours after lawmakers in Albany finally adopted a state budget, a grim reality settled over City Hall: New York City will receive $670 million less in state assistance than requested -- far less than expected even a week ago.
The shortfall left Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and leaders of the City Council staring down at an enormous and potentially contentious task: Finding other ways to plug this gaping hole in the budget with only three weeks to go before the city's new fiscal year begins on July 1.


Should She Work Or Play?
Daisy von Scherler Mayer's silly urban comedy "Party Girl" imagines bohemian life on the Lower East Side of Manhattan as a floating open-house bash at which the worldbeat never slacks and hair colors and costumes change nightly.
The area's clubs and lofts teem with exotic 20-something punks, transvestites and aspiring celebutantes of every race, sex and nationality eager to imbibe any potion that can perpetuate the fantasy.
Leading the revels is Mary (Parker Posey), a brash, self-styled diva of 24 who dresses in Gaultier and dances till the sun comes up.
Mary's friends include her sometime roommate, Leo (Guillermo Diaz), who is a club D.J.; her fashion-conscious gay buddy, Derrick (Anthony DeSando), and Rene (Donna Mitchell), a grim-faced club owner who spouts the rhetoric of the recovery movement at the most inopportune moments.


Jets' Front Office Continues to Swirl
The transformation of the Jets continued yesterday, this time to the front office.
Two longtime scouts, JOE COLLINS and DON GRAMMER, have been replaced by two former Steelers associates of DICK HALEY, the Jets' de facto general manager.
After 15 seasons, Collins has gone to the 49ers, where he will be the assistant pro personnel director, and Grammer has retired after 19 years with the Jets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For the networks, a bull market in advance sales of commercial time.
DON'T be surprised if the next network television executive you see is sporting a goofy grin and chanting an old cigarette slogan: "It's what's up front that counts."
The four broadcast networks have booked a record-breaking amount of advance sales of commercial time for the 1995-96 season.
The annual spring ritual, known as the up-front market, has always been characterized by peaks and valleys -- but this time the peak is Everest-sized.


Cigars and Conversation In the Course of Revelation
The first moments of the new film by Wayne Wang and Paul Auster remind us that Sir Walter Raleigh found a way to weigh smoke by subtracting ash from tobacco and calculating the difference.
That's easier than taking the measure of "Smoke" itself, an inviting but evanescent film that does have casualness, curiosity value and a lot of talent on its side.
Harvey Keitel, William Hurt, Stockard Channing, Forest Whitaker and Ashley Judd are among the actors breathing life into this cinematic experiment.
It incongruously combines broad strokes and contrivances with offhand chitchat from the corner store.


This Time, Young Hands Out the Honor
STEVE YOUNG, the San Francisco 49ers quarterback and Super Bowl most valuable player, returned to Greenwich, Conn., yesterday to pay tribute to his former math teacher, TERRY LOWE, and present him with the National Football League 1994 teacher of the year award.
Young nominated his former Greenwich High School advanced-placement calculus teacher for the award.
Although Young was captain of the football, basketball and baseball teams, Lowe was tough.
He accepted no excuses.
"He cared about how I did in school," Young said.
"He epitomized what great teachers are all about."


Peter Kump, Expert Chef and Cooking Teacher, Dies at 57
Peter Kump, one of the most influential figures on the American food scene as founder of Peter Kump's New York Cooking School and the James Beard Foundation, died Wednesday at his weekend home in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 57 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was liver cancer, said his son, Christopher.


School Prayer Debate Opens With Everything but Silence
Heated exchanges erupted in Congress today over one of the most contentious issues lawmakers will face, a constitutional amendment on school prayer.
Laying the legislative groundwork, the Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on the Constitution opened hearings that quickly deteriorated into sniping between Republicans and Democrats and between committee members and witnesses.


Rescue in Bosnia
The sunrise rescue of Capt.
Scott O'Grady displayed American military performance and NATO coordination at its best.
Sophisticated technology and raw courage combined to produce a happy ending to the closest American brush with death under fire in Bosnia's three-year-old war.
Whatever their views on the proper role of United States forces in Bosnia, Americans can rejoice at a rescue mission well accomplished.
Captain O'Grady himself contributed to this happy outcome.
The skills he learned in his military survival course not only helped him come through his five-and-a-half-day ordeal physically intact but also taught him how to contact NATO search teams without revealing his position to the Serbs.


Air &amp; Water Technologies Corp.(AWT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Waging Trade War With Fax and Figures
Somewhere in this city there is a lobbyist whose firm has not been hired by one side or the other in America's trade confrontation with Japan.
"There is one, I think, but no one knows his name," Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said not long ago.
And somewhere there is a facsimile machine in Washington not spitting out dire warnings of a "trade war" and totaling up the "casualties," as if the Bosnians were shooting car parts at one another.
Just today Toyota issued its latest count of the "innocent victims" of the threatened virtual embargo on Japanese luxury cars, chiefly the dealerships and employees who handle that company's Lexus line.


Duplex Products Inc.(DPX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Brake Failure Was Cited in '87 Subway Crash
The emergency brake system that the Transit Authority counts on to keep subway trains from running red lights has failed once before, transit officials said yesterday.
State investigators have said that they believe such a failure contributed to Monday's subway crash on the Williamsburg Bridge, which killed a motorman and injured 54 passengers.
But transit officials rejected any suggestion that the previous incident, in 1987, was a harbinger of this week's accident, saying that inspection and maintenance procedures had improved greatly in the last eight years.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contracts of Terry Clark and Mark Lee, pitchers, from Rochester of the International League.
Optioned Armando Benitez, pitcher, to Rochester and designated Brad Pennington, pitcher, for assignment.





Japan Announces Package To Deal With Banks' Crisis
Describing Japan's banking crisis as the worst since the Great Depression, Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura today announced a rescue package aimed at restoring confidence in the financial system, but the plan contained few concrete steps.
Although Mr.
Takemura called the package "bold and aggressive," analysts said they were skeptical that the plan would help stimulate lending and investment and thereby re-ignite the sagging economy.


Home Video
With more people collecting videos, distributors are freshening supplies of vintage items.
In stores this summer, or at least those stores that make room for older collectibles, that might mean discovering an "Intermezzo," say, or a "Compulsion" or, in September, a reissued "Magic Flute."
One might even come across an "Our Town," the 1938 drama by Thornton Wilder.
The playwright is not exactly a large video presence, but since May 22 there have been not one but two versions of "Our Town" available from Master Vision, a small New York distributor.


Now the Banks Turn Against the Elderly; A Changing Scene
To the Editor:
First banks were called "dinosaurs" by Microsoft's Bill Gates; now we're taken to task for trying to move our customers too quickly to the use of automatic teller machines, home banking and other newer technologies (front page, June 5).


Art in Review
Kurt Schwitters  Michael Werner Gallery 21 East 67th Street Manhattan Through June 30
Kurt Schwitters's last years were painful.
Condemned by the Nazis as a degenerate artist, he fled Germany for Norway in 1937, then had to leave there in 1940 after Hitler's invasion.
He went to England, where he was interned until December 1941.
Few people in the English art world seemed to know, or care, that he was a leading Dadaist, and he spent his last years in obscurity and poverty, suffering from various ailments.
A grant from the Museum of Modern Art in New York helped him somewhat, but he mostly had to support himself doing portraits and landscapes.
He died in 1948, at 60.


Overnight and Under the Stars
IT happened about 11 on a Saturday night.
Roy had already pitched the first tent of his life (Dad's first since Boy Scout days), stroked the belly of an alligator, pondered why golf courses in the desert might not be a great idea for the environment, learned that boa constrictors swallow 35-pound pigs every three weeks or so and gobbled enough free Power Ranger candy to keep him awake forever and ever.
"I'm having more fun than I've ever had in my life," my 7-year-old son proclaimed.
"I'm never going to sleep!"


Draining Simpson Session Is Cut Short
The O. J. Simpson trial was abruptly adjourned today when jurors, after a long and emotionally draining day of viewing gruesome photographs of the murder victims, could apparently continue no longer.
Photographs of the brutally slashed body of Ronald L. Goldman elicited much stronger reactions from the jury than did similar pictures of the second victim, Nicole Brown Simpson, shown in court earlier this week.
Several of the jurors seemed disturbed by the photographs of Mr.
Goldman.
Some averted their eyes and concentrated on intensive note-taking.


A Bruised Knee, a Slippery Case
A Baltimore man did indeed fall on a wet floor at the Sands Hotel and Casino here.
But the bruise on Robert Ginski's knee did not keep him out of work, the authorities said yesterday, alleging that he faked letters from his employer and doctor saying that the injury cost him $3,000 in wages.
Mr.
Ginski has been charged with forgery and attempted theft by deception.


Affirmative Action Makes Colleges Better
To the Editor:
Re your June 4 front-page article on affirmative action: A degree from a prestigious college should reflect something beyond that the holder was able to impress that college's admissions committee enough to gain admission.
Colleges are supposed to be graduating students who are more knowledgeable and better thinkers than when they entered.


For Children
Garden Design Workshop
Morris-Jumel Mansion
65 Jumel Terrace
Washington Heights
(212) 923-8008
Recommended ages: 6 to 9
Sunday


Disturbing the Peace


Getting Tough on Ex-Convicts
Since a parolee from Pennsylvania killed a Gloucester County police officer last month, New Jersey's parole system has been under scrutiny.
One parole officer told a legislative hearing yesterday that he and his colleagues believe they have very little leeway to reject out-of-state parolees who meet residency and job requirements.
"It's a source of frustration," Anthony Sgro said.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDXA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Market Place; Regulatory Alarms Ring on Wall St.
With the frenzy of merger deals and takeover battles these days, it seems like old times on Wall Street in more ways than one.
Securities regulators say they are opening investigations into insider trading at a rate not seen since the mid 1980's, the era in which Ivan Boesky, who went to jail for trading on inside information, became a household name.
Regulatory alarm bells went off again earlier this week after I.B.M. disclosed its hostile $60-a-share offer for the Lotus Development Corporation.
That bid pushed up the value of Lotus shares by 89 percent on Monday, the day it was announced, and caused regulators to begin looking into suspicious trading last week.


U.S. Envoy to Press a Wary Seoul on Atom Talks
The United States, struggling to persuade a reluctant South Korea to endorse an agreement intended to end any nuclear threat from North Korea, has dispatched a senior diplomat to Seoul to discuss the issue with the South Korean President.
American diplomats in Malaysia, the site of recent talks with the North Koreans, announced this week that after months of stalemate, they had made important progress in negotiations to end North Korea's nuclear weapons aspirations.


Sports of The Times; Bonds Could Learn From Saint Nick
HE didn't have to relive his nightmare at the free-throw line, but he did.
He could have hid behind any number of industry cliches, but he didn't.
Nick Anderson sat himself in the bleachers yesterday and patiently explained what it was like to miss not one, not two, not three, but four free throws that would have iced a game his team eventually lost.
That it was Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals, that it was televised to 164 countries, and that he was pinned down by a few dozen seekers of truth did not seem to shatter Anderson's sense of serenity or self.
When someone took the opportunity to invoke the C word, Anderson sincerely looked the fellow in the eye and said: "You know, maybe I did choke. I'm not afraid to say, in that situation, maybe I did."


Changing Plea, Man Admits Montclair Shootings
The janitor arrested in the shooting rampage at a post office in Montclair, N.J., admitted his guilt today, reversing an earlier plea.
But his terse confession in court did little to explain the mystery of his actions: Why would a man with no criminal record, who came from a religious family and aspired to be a police officer, kill four helpless people and seriously wound another, all for a few thousand dollars?
That question seemed to hang over the proceedings today in United States District Court here.
Before a room filled with relatives of his victims, Christopher Green, 29, acknowledged in almost a whisper that he had committed the murders, which jolted the prosperous suburb of Montclair into a painful reexamination of its sense of security.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Airlines, Dallas, a unit of AMR Corp., is selling $63.5 million of pass-through certificates due in 2017 through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The certificates carry an interest rate of 8.39 percent and are priced at par.
The issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by the Standard and Poor's Corp.


Zirconium: Covering for Fuel Rods
Zirconium is used in nuclear reactors to provide the cladding, or outer covering, for the cylindrical fuel rods that power a nuclear reaction.
Packed inside the zirconium cladding are pellets of uranium oxide or other fissionable materials.
Zirconium is the metal of choice in this application because it absorbs relatively few of the neutrons produced in a fission reaction and because the metal is highly resistant to both heat and chemical corrosion.


Brown-Forman (BF.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Jerry Zipkin, Who Lunched And Listened, Is Dead at 80
Jerry Zipkin, a celebrated fixture on the international social scene for almost half a century, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was lung cancer, said Harold Daitch, his lawyer.
Mr.
Zipkin, an heir to a Manhattan real-estate fortune who until his death lived in a Park Avenue building that was built by his father, was often referred to as "a man about everywhere."
He was a colorful presence at glamorous balls, parties and private dinners in this country and in Europe.
He also was a favorite escort of fashionable women whose husbands were too busy or too bored to accompany them to social events.
It is believed that the term "walker," first used by Women's Wear Daily, was coined to describe him.
He traveled widely with many female friends, and lunched with one or more on most days of the week, usually at Le Cirque or Mortimer's.
He was a longtime friend, escort and confidant of Nancy Reagan and a member of the Reagans' intimate coterie during their years in the White House, when he commuted to Washington about once a week.
He was with the Reagans the night Ronald Reagan was elected President, and he was on the phone almost daily with Mrs.
Reagan, exchanging news and gossip.
"He was the best friend you could ever have," Mrs.
Reagan said.
"I can't remember when and how I met him, but it must have been about 45 years ago. It seems that Jerry has always been part of my life."
President Reagan, she said, "didn't see as much of him as I did, but he was very fond of him."
Mr.
Zipkin, known for his sharp wit, was a confidant to many women, listening to their concerns and offering advice.
He had no hesitation in criticizing their clothes or hairdos; his comments, often barbed, whether taken seriously or ignored, were rarely resented.
"You knew he meant it lovingly," said Nan Kempner, the New York social figure, a friend for more than 40 years.
She added that he could be a devoted friend and the nicest person in the world, "if he liked you."
Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque, said: "He was nice to me at the very beginning when I was still at the Colony. He was very loyal."He added, "He could complain, but he also wrote the nicest letters."
Jerome Robert Zipkin was born in Manhattan, the son of Annette and David Zipkin.
He graduated from the Hun School of Princeton, N.J., and studied art and archeology for two years at Princeton University.
Although he was known principally as a social moth, he worked for years as his father's assistant, and after his father's death he looked after the family real-estate interests, which were later sold.
His ability to respect confidences was legendary.
The designer Bill Blass, a longtime friend, said it was one reason for his extraordinary popularity with women.
Mr.
Zipkin once said: "A woman cannot have a best woman friend. A best woman friend will do her in."
His friends admitted that he could be sharp and even rude.
Once, at a luncheon, a waiter asked if he could do anything for him.
"You can remove the lady on my right," he said.
His caustic remarks were often directed at waiters, clerks and taxi drivers.
Sometimes, they were meant as humor, which could be misunderstood.
On the way to a dinner party, he argued with a taxi driver and, the story went, left the door open when he got out.
The driver, infuriated, also got out, and knocked him to the ground.
Mr.
Zipkin said that his ribs were broken, but he didn't miss the dinner party.
One woman kept a cache of $10 and $20 bills handy when he was her escort at a restaurant.
The money was to placate the staff.
Mr.
Zipkin's eccentricities were usually excused with, "That's Jerry." He made his displeasure more than clear if his seat at a fashion show or a gala wasn't to his liking.
He frequently plucked two flowers from centerpieces at restaurants, one for his companion and the other for his lapel.
He was known, too, for taking an extra gift when party favors were given at charity events and public-relations functions.
But his own gifts to friends were frequent and often lavish.
In his last years, his immediate family consisted only of a sister, Eleanor Cervantes of Madrid, but he had several godchildren in the United States and Europe, whom he visited regularly.
In the weeks before his death, he organized items in his apartment that he wished to leave to friends.
He had each gift wrapped and labeled and wrote a message to accompany it.
Some gifts were sent before his death: a small Rodin sculpture of a hand to a friend whose hands he admired, a set of wine glasses to a woman who had admired them.
"Nobody ever gave him credit for being as bright as he was," Mrs.
Reagan said.
"His friendship wasn't just on the frivolous side. He had much more to him than that."


Mr. Clinton's First Veto
If not the shot heard round the world, President Clinton's veto of a Republican-sponsored $16.4 billion budget cut was a welcome and overdue display of White House resolve.
The money involved was minimal but the symbolism was important.
The veto suggests a willingness by Mr.
Clinton to take some risks in battling the Republican assault on his programs.
He will need to do so again if he is to salvage his Presidency and define what it stands for.


Progress on the Police Rampage
The investigation into the drunken rampage by New York City police officers three weeks ago in Washington D.C. is beginning to show results.
One officer has resigned and two others have been suspended from the force for participating in the near-riot that wrecked several hotels during a police gathering in Washington.
Police Commissioner William Bratton said yesterday that the officers' "blue wall of silence" had begun to give way and that the department was focusing on approximately two dozen officers who had run nude through hallways, trashed buildings and pulled false alarms, forcing one hotel to evacuate its guests.


No Arbitration as Twins Sign Knoblauch
The Minnesota Twins signed the last of their four arbitration-eligible players yesterday, agreeing to a one-year, $2,987,500 deal with second baseman CHUCK KNOBLAUCH, a two-time All-Star who had asked for $3,425,000, while the Twins were offering $2.55 million.
He was scheduled for a hearing today.
Minnesota hasn't gone to arbitration with a player since 1987.
Knoblauch, American League rookie of the year in 1991, earned $1,625,000 last year.


Diner's Journal
Beyond Fish, Way Beyond
Gloucester House used to be a straightforward American fish house that served 30 kinds of fish on plain pine tables at enormous prices.
Not anymore.


Art in Review
Fred Tomaselli  Jack Tilton Gallery 49 Greene Street SoHo Through June 17
Say no to drugs.
But don't say no to Fred Tomaselli's paintings, which include large quantities of drugs: chemical and botanical, prescription and over-the-counter, legal and illegal.
Mr.
Tomaselli arranges pills, stems and leaves into decorative patterns, sometimes free-standing and sometimes superimposed on painted patterns or landscapes.
The whole thing is then embedded in a thick layer of transparent resin, which from a distance makes the work look strangely like huge, glossy illustrations from a textbook or magazine.


Off Screen, a Detective Fights Drugs in Schools
CALVIN HART strode to the podium at Public School 40, his bald head shining under the lights.
Built like a missile, he looked a little scary in his gray-green suit, fairly filling up the stage.
He stroked his goatee.
"O.K., everybody stand up!" he shouted. He didn't have to do it twice.


Art in Review
Jeff Wall  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
It would be hard for Jeff Wall to top his two large and commanding images in the Whitney Biennial, and he hasn't.
These new color photographs are relatively small (although four to seven feet on a side still seems gigantic for cibachromes mounted on lightboxes).
In contrast to the more epic images at the Whitney, these focus on the predicaments of one or two individuals.
Nonetheless, these predicaments continue to gain in tension, making Mr.
Wall's art more accessible and explicitly dramatic.


Microsoft's On-Line Plan Is Scrutinized
It may not be a full-blown investigation yet, but the Justice Department is giving Microsoft's plans to enter the commercial on-line business in August a hard look.
In the last two weeks, Justice Department officials have been asking questions of executives of services like America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy and to their lawyers, some of the people questioned say.
So while Microsoft says it knows of no "open investigation" of its coming on-line service, the Microsoft Network, and the Justice Department isn't saying, the inquiries are being made even if the I-word -- investigation -- is avoided.


Chic Venue, New Owner
The Russian Tea Room, the world-famous restaurant and celebrity haunt next to Carnegie Hall on West 57th Street, has changed hands.
After four years of on-and-off negotiations, Warner LeRoy, the quintessential showman-restaurateur who owns Tavern on the Green, succeeded yesterday in buying what he called "the greatest restaurant in the country and one of the greatest in the world."


Devils' New Goal Is to Regain Their Spark
Jacques Lemaire knew it wasn't going to be easy.
He wasn't sure his players felt the same way.
That's why he gathered the Devils together today for a meeting.
"We talked about how we came up with lack of intensity at certain times," Lemaire said, referring to the Devils' rather spiritless 3-2 loss to the Flyers on Wednesday night.
"You've got to be able to live with success. When you have people telling you how great you are, you lose focus."


Lotus Chairman Is Seeking Stronger Bargaining Stance
As he met for a second day in New York yesterday with Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the I.B.M. chairman, Jim P. Manzi of Lotus Development had few bargaining chips.
While there was no comment from either company about the meeting, the view from the outside was that barring the sudden emergence of a new bidder, a takeover by I.B.M. of Lotus seemed all but inevitable.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about trading in the credit markets on Wednesday misstated the given name of the chairman of the Federal Reserve, whose comments helped send Treasury prices lower.
He is Alan Greenspan.


Seized Jerusalem Land
To the Editor:
Irving M. Gruber (letter, June 5) attempts to confuse land seizure in Jerusalem by suggesting you substitute "condemn" for "confiscate." Confiscate is the proper term since the United States and the nations of the world consider that East Jerusalem property part of the occupied land illegally annexed to Jerusalem after the 1967 war.
MICHAEL AMBROSINO Boston, June 6, 1995


Corrections
A headline yesterday about infant safety seats on airliners misstated the position of the Federal Aviation Administration in some copies.
As the article reported, the agency said that it opposed requiring babies to ride in safety seats and that certain types of restraints were risky; it did not call all safety seats a bad idea.


Unmasked German
To the Editor:
Re your June 1 news article on the German scholar Hans Schwerte, unmasked as the former SS officer Hans-Ernst Schneider:


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S.
PILOT IS RESCUED  Marines in helicopters entered the Bosnian war zone to snatch a missing American fighter pilot from his hiding place and took him to safety through a smattering of Serbian missile and machine-gun fire.
A1  FLIER IS KNOWN AS A SURVIVOR  The people who know Capt.
Scott O'Grady are not surprised that he was able to survive for six days on bugs, grass and rainwater in hostile territory.
A1  U.N.
MOVES IN HEAVY GUNS  The United Nations force in Bosnia moved heavy artillery within range of Sarajevo for the first time, apparently signaling a readiness to respond to aggression with considerable force.
A10  FUGITIVE FINANCIER HELD IN CUBA  The Cuban Government has arrested Robert L. Vesco, who fled the U.S. in 1972 to avoid swindling charges, and has approached Washington about returning him here, Administration officials said.
A1  PLAN ON BOAT PEOPLE THREATENED  An plan to force the last of the Vietnamese boat people back to their homeland is in danger of unraveling after recent riots in camps across Southeast Asia.
A3  Students wrestle with putting in context Germany's Nazi past.
A12  Cairo Journal: Egyptian belly dancers get Russian competition.
A4  National A14-22  FUROR OVER CIGARETTE STUDY  The legal assault against tobacco-makers intensified in response to the disclosure that Philip Morris conducted years of research on nicotine and found that it affected smokers' bodies and behavior.
A14  HARVARD MOVES ON  Harvard Journal: At the end of a bad year, things are beginning to return to normal at the college in Cambridge, Mass.
A14  TOUGH DAY FOR SIMPSON JURY  The O.J.
Simpson trial was adjourned early after an emotionally draining day of viewing gruesome photographs of the victims.
A18  BUDGET TALKS: JUST TALK  The conference committee on the budget met for the first time, in a session that was not meant for anything but speeches.
A20  EX-CLINTON AIDE PLEADS GUILTY  A former aide to Bill Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas pleaded guilty to conspiring to misapply a Federally backed loan.
A20  DEMOCRATS WEIGH IN ON WELFARE  Senate Democrats unveiled a plan to revise the nation's main welfare program, retaining guaranteed payments to poor families but limiting them to five years.
A21  MEDICAID AND MONEY  Washington Talk: Senator John Chafee of Rhode Island is confronting a new health care debate, one that is overwhelmingly driven by budgetary concerns.
A21  Law B9  For the bomb defendant's lawyer, another of many unpopular clients.
Metro Digest B1  CHARGES OF POLICE MISCONDUCT  One New York City officer has resigned and two others have been suspended from the force because of their participation in a drunken spree at Washington hotels three weeks ago, officials said.
A1  HIGH RATE OF NEWBORN DEATHS  A state Health Department study has found an unexpectedly high number of deaths among newborns in some of the city's busiest public and private hospitals.
A1  SMUGGLING NUCLEAR MATERIAL  Three businessmen were arrested for smuggling tons of nuclear material from a military stockpile in Ukraine, storing it in a warehouse in Queens and conspiring to sell it to Iraq, officials said.
A1  Business Digest D1  Sports B12-19  MANTLE GETS NEW LIVER  Mickey Mantle, suffering from liver cancer, underwent a transplant yesterday in Dallas as a donor was quickly found.
Doctors were hopeful but warned that the former Yankee star was still at great risk.
A1  Baseball: Owners to speed up games.
B13  Yanks and McDowell lose.
B13  Mets hang on against Giants.
B13  Basketball: Pressure's on Magic.
B16  Columns: Araton on the N.B.A.
B13  Hockey: Devils worry about overconfidence.
B18  Blackhawks stay alive.
B18  Horse Racing: Lukas has Belmont favorites.
B16  Tennis: Sanchez Vicario and Graf in French final.
B13  Obituaries B10-11  Jerry Zipkin, a fixture on the international social scene.
B11  Gen.
Juan Carlos Ongania, former Argentine dictator.
B11  Weekend C1-30  Sleepover at the Bronx Zoo.
C1  Circus Amok.
C1  For Children C4  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Madame de Sade." C3  "Buttons on Broadway." C3  "Twelve Dreams." C1  Film: "Wigstock." C5  "Liability Crisis." C10  "Congo." C17  "Party Girl." C17  Wayne Wang's "Smoke." C19  Music: P. J. Harvey.
C22  Restaurants C20  Art: "An American Century of Photography." C24  Art in Review C24  Inside Art C26  Malraux's doodles.
C28  Met costume exhibition.
C28  Books: "DiMaggio." C29  Television: TV Weekend D18  Home Video D18  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  A hasty response to terrorism.
Mr.
Clinton's first veto.
Rescue in Bosnia.
Progress on the police rampage.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: "A culture of rights."  A. M. Rosenthal: Legal and damnable.
Lawrence Chimerine and James Fallows: Japan deserves a tariff.
Patricia Meyer Spacks: The Simpson jury's right to be needy.
Chronicle B10 Crossword C28


Only a Paper Boon; Consumers Aren't Spending Their Profits From Surging Stocks
With blue-chip stocks up 16 percent since January, many Americans are a lot richer today than they were on New Year's Day.
This year's bull market, the strongest surge since late 1990, has been powered by lower interest rates and rising corporate profits.
It has already added more than twice as much to the wealth of America's households as all the money families painstakingly salted away in savings last year.
So now that signs of an economic slowdown are multiplying, the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, is acknowledging the possibility of a brief downturn this summer, and anxiety is starting to well up, shouldn't all that freshly minted wealth help make the economy safe from recession?
Maybe, but don't count on it.
When it comes to the fortune of someone like William H. Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, or the outlook for specific companies, the stock market is a powerful force.
But when it comes to determining the course of the overall economy, it is still just a bit player.


Stock Close Mixed, With Dow Off 3.46
The stock market was mixed but little changed yesterday in advance of the release this morning of the Producer Price Index.
The index will be the first major economic indicator since traders began thinking seriously of the economy as coping with a recession rather than just a slowdown that offers still-robust corporate profits.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.46 points, to 4,458.57.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks fell 0.78 point, to 532.35.
But the Nasdaq composite index, rich in technology stocks that are continuing to rally after a recent decline, rose 4.55 points, to a record 886.13.


Handleman Co.(HDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Teaching Nazi Past to German Youth
In the tranquillity of the Konrad Adenauer High School, no one has to fret about the kinds of things that worry Americans on campus, like guns or drugs, because such things do not happen here, said Heinz Wilms, a history teacher.
Since January, though, he has been nudging his 10th-grade class of 16-year-olds to confront something much more momentous than school-yard discipline: the historical progression from Hitler's rise to power in 1933 to the Holocaust.


Mets Trade Segui to Expos
The Mets announced after today's game that they had traded first baseman David Segui to the Montreal Expos for Reid Cornelius, a right-handed pitcher currently playing for Class AAA Ottawa.
The move was made to give Segui an opportunity to earn an everyday job.
Acquired from Baltimore near the close of spring training in 1994, Segui was the Mets' everyday first baseman until he went on the disabled list last June and the rookie Rico Brogna came up and played well enough to take his job.


CNN Officials to Propose a Business News Cable Service
Executives of CNN today will ask the board of its parent company, Turner Broadcasting System, to approve a new cable service offering business news on weekdays.
The business coverage, from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M., would be supplemented at night and on weekends by the CNN International channel, which is devoted to foreign news.
The service would begin in January.


For Defense Lawyer in Bomb Case, Latest in a Line of Unpopular Clients
Over the last three decades, Michael E. Tigar, a law professor at the University of Texas, has represented many of the most vilified criminal defendants.
So his assignment last month to represent Terry L. Nichols, one of two men accused of blowing up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, is hardly novel.
Like Mr.
Nichols, his other clients have been involved in cases presenting unusual or complicated legal and political questions.
And many of them have said they were victims of overzealous law enforcement.


Step Right Up! See the Bearded Person!
THREE stiltwalkers are in a dusty yard on West 134th Street in Harlem, surrounded by abandoned buildings.
The stiltwalkers wear tops with stars and multi-colored ribbons, striped pants, strange helmets with long plumes glittering in the sun.
They are ambiguous figures.
Male or female?
One has a beard.
But . . . you can't be sure.
This is the opening act of Circus Amok, an alternative circus performing in parks throughout New York City until June 18.
Now the band begins to play -- a samba on drums, trumpets, hubcaps, car springs.
The stiltwalkers dance, chasing one another around the ring until the pace becomes frenetic.
Suddenly, the stiltwalker with the beard falls backward and two roustabouts tear off the clothes, rip off the stilts.
Underneath, the figure wears a dress of fuchsia satin.
Slowly, the figure turns toward the audience.
The hair is shoulder length and wavy, the beard about three inches long.
Yet . . . the shoulders are soft, feminine.


Harvard Journal; A College and Its Graduates Move On
It was raining, but was it commencement week at Harvard University and the greatest home-run hitter of all time was not about to be rained out of this appearance, as class-day speaker.
So Hank Aaron, who grew up poor in segregated Mobile, Ala., and learned to hit baseballs by swinging at old bottle caps with a broomstick, was standing under a dripping tent in front of Harvard's Tercentenary Theatre.


Two Forecasts on Tax-Cut Plan
Senate President Donald DiFrancesco says he has no doubts: Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's income tax cut plan will be ready for her signature on June 26.
Other leading Republicans, including Robert Littell, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, are not so sure.
They would like to know more about what is happening with state revenues and Federal aid cuts before approving the last chunk of the Governor's 30 percent tax-cut plan.


On Stage, and Off
Well, that's it. The season is officially over.
As always, some grumbling follows the Tony Awards.
The push to end the telecast at 11 P.M. was so relentless that Terrence McNally's thank you speech for the Tony for best play was neverbroadcast.
The "Smokey Joe's Cafe" cast was miffed because its big number, "I'm a Woman," was dropped.
So were the scenes from the four best-play candidates.
"We went through weeks of preparation for our 30 seconds," moaned Helene Davis, who represented Mr.
McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!"


Legal Attack on Tobacco Intensifies
The legal assault against the nation's tobacco makers intensified yesterday in response to the disclosure that Philip Morris Inc. had conducted 15 years of research on nicotine and found that it affected smokers' bodies, brains and behavior.
In Congress, some Democrats suggested that Philip Morris executives might have deceived the public.
They asked the Justice Department to look into possible charges against company executives and asked the cigarette maker to turn over its research documents to the Food and Drug Administration.


Welcome Mat for Foreign Banks
A cold war-era law that forbids foreign banks to open offices in New Jersey took two big steps toward the scrap heap of history yesterday as committees in the State Senate and Assembly approved bills that would remove restrictions.
The legislation got a big push from officials in Hudson County who believe that Jersey City, already a budding financial center, could see an influx of jobs and tax revenue.


Maxxim Medical Inc.(MAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Now the Banks Turn Against the Elderly To the Editor:   Once again, senior citizens are being singled out as freeloaders (front page, June 5).


High-Tech Gorillas vs. Dumbed-Down Scientists
The endangered species about which viewers of "Congo" will be most worried is the Michael Crichton thriller.
This 1980 best seller is one of the last remaining Crichton novels (after "The Andromeda Strain," "The Terminal Man," "Rising Sun," "Disclosure," etc.) not yet recycled into movie material, and now it meets a dubious fate.
This glib, overheated film about vicious primates delivers little suspense, nor are there signs of the 65 cited volumes and articles that turned Mr.
Crichton's book into such a learning experience.
Also missing is the inspired showmanship with which the author's paranoid naturalism was exploited in "Jurassic Park."
"You're gonna take her back to the farm now that she's seen Paree?" someone in this film asks about Amy, the precociously chatty animal in its story.
The same question could be asked about the audience: Once they've seen velociraptors dashing through the kitchen, are they just too jaded for killer gorillas?


Hill, Holliday Chairman to Retire
George J. (Jay) Hill 3d, chairman and partner of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston, said yesterday that he would retire from his active role at the agency he helped to found 27 years ago.
"It's been a great run," Mr.
Hill said.
"I have decided that the time has come to pursue some more personal dreams." Mr.
Hill, 62, who is a copywriter, formed the agency in 1968 with Jack Connors, now its chief executive; Alan Holliday, who left three months after, and Steve Cosmopulos, who left in 1978.
The agency has almost 400 employees and billings estimated at $325 million from clients like the Bank of Boston and the Gillette Company.


The Director Emulated By Bergman
When Ingmar Bergman was a fledgling artist, he scribbled a story in a blue notebook.
That schoolboy fiction, based on his torturous final year at school, became his first produced screenplay, "Torment," a 1944 film directed not by Mr.
Bergman but by Alf Sjoberg.
The young Bergman was thrilled to be in such hands.
Though little known in the United States even now, Sjoberg (1903-1980) was one of the masters of the underrated Swedish cinema, and his career as a theater director and as a writer and director of films was a model for Mr.
Bergman's.
From today through June 27, as part of the continuing Bergman Festival, the Museum of Modern Art is presenting "Alf Sjoberg: Film Maker," a rich series of all 18 films by the director, whose psychologically shrewd, visually dramatic works deserve rediscovery.


Maybe They Just Like 3-Card Monte?
With a 25-pound stone owl, summons books and lots of dis -- as in disrespect and disdain -- New York City opened a new offensive yesterday against an old foe: the pigeon.
At the outset of Operation Stool Pigeon, as the campaign was called by the Department of Sanitation, the objective of the land-based forces was to reclaim Times Square from the squadrons of birds that have defaced signs and sidewalks with their droppings, and to interdict their supply lines by warning pigeon feeders to cease and desist or face fines as high as $250.


Ernst Home Center Inc.(ERNS,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 29


The Baseball Hero Beyond Mere Fame
DIMAGGIO The Last American Knight By Joseph Durso Illustrated. 272 pages.
Little, Brown. $22.95
Joltin' Joe.
Joe D. The Yankee Clipper.
DiMag.
For a child in the bleachers of Yankee Stadium, to watch him catch fly balls with his graceful strides, admiring the way he glided around the base paths, in awe of his unique wide stance and long swing, was to watch a god.
That child's view of Joe DiMaggio was shared by adults -- fans, sportswriters, hangers-on.
He did one thing wonderfully: he played baseball.
For that, our culture rewarded him by everlastingly regarding him as a hero.
Joseph Durso, a sportswriter for The New York Times, has written a biography of Joe DiMaggio, tracing him from San Francisco to his career with the Yankees, through his marriage to Marilyn Monroe and into his retirement years.
The subtitle of his book is taken from a comment by the journalist Bob Considine, "Joe DiMaggio is the last American knight." If so, knighthood was bestowed upon a man who appears to have been Garbo in pinstripes.
By this account, DiMaggio was unexceptional and remote off the playing field.
A fellow ballplayer, Eddie Lopat, is quoted as saying: "He's one of the loneliest guys I ever knew. And he leads the league in room service."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.15
4.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.58
4.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.49
4.48
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.18
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.61
6.55
7.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.61
7.56
8.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.87
6.16
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Even the Padres' Worst Batter Prospers as Harnisch Hands Out Hits
Joey Hamilton had not managed a hit in any of his 57 major league at-bats.
Even though Hamilton is a starting pitcher for the San Diego Padres, his ineptitude was so legendary that fans at Jack Murphy Stadium teased him each time he walked to the plate.
Tonight Hamilton got a hit. And a hard one at that.


U.S.O.C. Likely to Pick Former N.C.A.A. Leader
The United States Olympic Committee's worst-kept secret is that Dick Schultz is expected to be named executive director, in perhaps as soon as two weeks.
The U.S.O.C. has called a meeting of its 19-member executive committee in Boston for June 23, Olympic officials said yesterday, at which time the committee is expected to choose between Schultz and Mike Jacki, the other finalist for the job.
Jacki, the former president of the United States skiing and gymnastics federations, has considerable marketing experience but is still the underdog.


METRO DIGEST


Mobutu, Zaire's 'Guide,' Leads Nation Into Chaos
For the three decades that the West backed Zaire's dictator, President Mobutu Sese Seko, one rationale was consistently invoked: Whatever his evils Mr.
Mobutu, a wily billionaire, was the only figure who could bind this vast, chaotic country together.
But with the cold war over, the West is no longer interested in supporting a once strategic ally.
And the outside world is awakening to the fact that far from being held together, Zaire, which is as large as the United States east of the Mississippi, is drifting dangerously close to disintegration.


Edith Hooper, 85, A Collector of Art And Philanthropist
Edith Ferry Hooper, a philanthropist who supported art and educational institutions in Baltimore, died on May 27 at the Brightwood Retirement Community in Brooklandville, near Baltimore.
She was 85 and lived until recently in North Baltimore.
Mrs.
Hooper was born and reared in Grosse Pointe, Mich., the daughter of Dexter Mason Ferry, an insurance executive who was the founder of the Ferry Seed Company, and Jeanette Hawkins.
She was a graduate of Vassar College.


Secretary General Asks to Increase Peacekeeping Forces
At the request of Britain, France and the Netherlands, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali formally recommended today that the United Nations expand its military force in the Balkans by 12,500, to include the reinforcements of rapid-response brigades those countries are sending to Bosnia.
The Europeans, backing away from initial suggestions that new troops would be under the command of their national armies instead of United Nations officers, proposed in meetings here Wednesday that the rapid-response force would be "an integral part of the existing United Nations peacekeeping operation," according to a summary of the proposals released today.


Eisenhower Fought For Every '52 Delegate
To the Editor:
Your June 3 article about House Speaker Newt Gingrich's interview with Business Week relative to the possibility of his running for President states that Dwight D. Eisenhower "returned from France in 1952 and won the Republican nomination for President by virtual acclamation."


Ithaca's Honors Program Benefits All Students
To the Editor:
Re your June 4 news article on the proposed merger of honors and Regents classes in the Ithaca, N.Y., high school and the fear that the merger will water courses down:


Timber Country Is Scratched From Belmont
The march of the Team Lukas horses toward a Triple Crown sweep suffered a major setback yesterday when Timber Country, the winner of the Preakness and the early 6-5 favorite for today's Belmont Stakes, was withdrawn because of a fever.
The colt's illness dramatically lowered the chance that D. Wayne Lukas could win the race, even though his other horse, Thunder Gulch, won the Kentucky Derby.
And it threw the $697,400 classic wide open, with outside colts now given an unexpected shot at victory.


Smucker (J.M.) Co.(SJM.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Armed Robber Is Killed in Gunfight With Police
An armed robber was shot and killed yesterday by police officers in Queens during a wild afternoon gunfight in which more than 60 shots were fired, riddling a residential street with bullets, the police said.
In a separate incident several minutes later, as the gunman was being taken by ambulance to Mary Immaculate Hospital, shots erupted again in a park near the hospital, in what the police described as a dispute between two groups of youths.
No one was hit by the bullets, but a woman who heard the shots ran from the park and was struck and injured by a car, detectives said.


ROCK
Reunion Within a Reunion And a Wish for Tenderness  General Public Limelight


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 13


Reactors Under Federal Scrutiny
The U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission started a new inspection of Public Service Gas and Electric Company's twin 1,100-megawatt reactors yesterday, two days after the Salem II unit was shut down with safety-system problems.
The Salem I unit has been out of service since May 16 for unscheduled maintenance problems.
"This incident has brought things to a head," said an N.R.C. spokesman, Victor Dricks, who called Wednesday's shutdown "the latest in a series of troubling incidents at the site."


Corrections
Stock options tables in Business Day yesterday reflected Wednesday's trading rather than Thursday's in some copies. (The correct version is recognizable by the "Most Active Options" listing, which shows the price of the Lotus Development Corporation as 63 1/2.) Readers wishing corrected copies of the tables may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Companhia Siderurgica Nacional reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Turner Looks At Offer for King World
The Turner Broadcasting System is again considering a proposal to acquire King World Productions for nearly $2 billion.
The matter was discussed yesterday at a regularly scheduled Turner board meeting, but the talks were tabled for further consideration, according to an executive familiar with the discussions.


Once Again, Sex Abuse By Employee At a School
A school security guard has been charged with the statutory rape of a 15-year-old sophomore who is now pregnant, and officials acknowledged yesterday that he continued to patrol the halls of Canarsie High School for more than three weeks after school officials first learned of the allegations.
Alvin Williams, a 33-year-old school safety officer, was arrested on Thursday and arraigned yesterday on charges of third-degree rape and third-degree sodomy, the police said, for having had sex with the student twice in his East New York apartment.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Singer and Accompanist Make a Point of Equality
Music of the Americas Americas Society


It's Spring, Time to Pick Strawberries and Dance


Taiwan's President Tiptoes Around Politics at Cornell
His countrymen wanted to hear him talk about the symbolism of his landmark visit to the United States, the significance of the trip for Taiwan's international image, the effect of it all on American-Chinese relations.
But President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan, while sounding a few familiar themes about Taiwan's rapid economic expansion and steady democratization, preferred to talk about the things one might expect to hear at a class reunion: How he missed his days as a doctoral student in agricultural economics at Cornell University here.
What he had been doing since his graduation in 1968.
And how he appreciated the chance to come back.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about John Presper Eckert, co-inventor of what many historians consider the first electronic digital computer, misstated the affiliation of Dr.
John V. Atanasoff, another computing pioneer.
It was Iowa State University, not the University of Iowa.


Spirits Good, Reeve Shows More Signs Of Movement
The wife of Christopher Reeve said today that the actor had begun therapy for his paralysis and had been watching hockey on television.
In addition, doctors at the University of Virginia Medical Center, where Mr.
Reeve, 42, has been treated since his riding accident on May 27, reported that he had made some unexpected progress.
They said that while he was still unable to breathe without a respirator, he did show signs of some movement on both sides of his body.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a student's attempt to give a commencement speech at Martha's Vineyard Regional High School about her experience of rape referred incompletely to the charge to which a fellow student pleaded guilty in the case.
The youth, Keith Devine, pleaded guilty to the rape of a child under the age of 16 -- a charge similar to statutory rape -- and to performing unnatural and lascivious acts.
He did not simply plead guilty to rape.


For Mercy College Teachers: Recruit a Student, Get a Raise
Like many other businesses facing a fiscal crunch, Mercy College in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., decided this spring that it had to boost sales -- namely the number of students it enrolled.
And so the college came up with an audacious incentive system unheard of in academia: it ties the salaries of its professors to their ability to boost enrollment.
Like Wall Street investment bankers pushing for annual bonuses, Mercy's professors would receive 7 percent raises if they helped recruit and retain enough students to raise enrollment by about 400.
On the other hand, if enrollment remained flat, salaries would fall 7 percent.


Private Review of Homeless Program Is Planned
The Grand Central Partnership, faced with government inquiries into a program it operates for homeless people, said yesterday that it had retained a well-known advocate for homeless services to review and recommend changes in its program.
The advocate, Robert Hayes, is a lawyer who was instrumental in pressuring the city to provide services for homeless people during the 1980's.


Dispute Over Taxes and Building At Cornell University Is Resolved
A five-month dispute that had blocked virtually all construction at Cornell University has ended with the Mayor of Ithaca, N.Y., relenting on demands that the university pay the city more money in lieu of taxes.
Last month, construction workers demonstrated outside Ithaca City Hall to protest the Mayor's stand, saying it was costing them jobs.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Love Ties Course Record, Takes Lead
Davis Love 3d shot an eight-under-par 63 yesterday, matching the course and tournament record, for a total of 11-under 131 and a two-stroke lead over Scott Hoch after two rounds of the Kemper Open.
Love's 63, which included a double bogey, bogey, eagle and nine birdies, tied the Kemper mark set by Ted Schulz in 1991 and matched by David Toms in 1992 on the TPC at Avenel course in Potomac, Md.
Hoch shot a bogey-free 65.
Tom Kite (68), Wayne Grady (69), Robert Gamez (70) and Phil Blackmar (68) were tied for third at 135. (AP) KESTNER WINS LONG ISLAND OPEN: Darrell Kestner of the Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., set a tournament record of 199 on rounds of 64-69-66 to win the Roslyn Savings Bank Long Island Golf Association Open at the Bethpage State Park Red Course.
Kestner, who finished 11 under par, won by five shots.
BASEBALL  Southern Cal Advances to Final Game
Gabe Alvarez had a record-tying five hits and three runs batted in last night to lead Southern Cal past Miami, 7-3, and into the College World Series championship game.
Sixth-seeded Southern Cal (49-20) advanced to today's title game against top-seeded Cal State-Fullerton (56-9).
The Trojans have won titles in their last seven trips to Omaha, but the last of those was in 1978.
U.S.C. will meet Fullerton for the third time this season.
The Titans won by 10-9 in Fullerton, while U.S.C. won by 7-4 at home.
Alvarez's fifth hit of the game, a single in the ninth, tied the College World Series record of five in a game shared by a number of players.
The last of those was Arizona State's Barry Bonds in 1984. (AP) SOCCER  United States Clinches Quarterfinal Berth
The United States clinched a berth in the quarterfinals of the Women's World Cup yesterday when the European champion, Germany, routed Brazil, 6-1, and Sweden beat Japan, 2-0, in Helsingborg, Sweden.
Germany and Sweden also clinched spots in the quarterfinals, as did China, which is tied with the defending champion, the United States, for the Group C lead.
The United States plays Australia today. (AP) ROAD RACING  Kenyans Favored in Mini Marathon
Two Kenyans loom as the runners to beat today in the Advil Mini Marathon, a 6.2-mile run that follows a looping course through Central Park.
About 6,000 runners, including the basketball star Rebecca Lobo, are expected to take the starter's gun at 9:30 A.M.
But Tegla Loroupe and Delillah Asiago were getting most of the attention yesterday when the runners were asked who appeared to be the favorites.
"The two Kenyan girls by far," declared Lisa Ondieki, who won the 1992 New York Marathon in a record 2 hours 24 minutes 40 seconds.
"They're breaking course records wherever they run."
Loroupe, who won last year's New York Marathon, won the Mini Marathon in 1993.
Asiago won the Mini Marathon in 1991 as a 19-year-old and recently set a world record of 38:19 at 12 kilometers.


Corrections
The Advertising column on the Media Business page yesterday, about the leading broadcast television networks' booking of $5.6 billion in advance sales of commercial time for the 1995-96 season, misstated the number of commercials the amount would have bought during Super Bowl XXIX.
It is 5,600 30-second commercials, not 5.6 million; the 5,600 would have run for 1.94 days, not 1,944.
The column also referred incorrectly to the Olympics Games scheduled for 1996.
They are Summer Olympics; the next Winter Olympics are in 1998.


U.S. Bonds Take Plunge On a Rumor
Prices of Treasury securities, already beaten back by the fading prospects that the Fed would ease credit, were battered again yesterday, as traders speculated that the Japanese might curtail future purchases of United States Government securities.
However, the Japanese rumor may have served as an excuse for investors to sell in a market that has run too far, too fast on anticipation that the economy will continue to slow, analysts said.
No one saw it as indicative of a major new direction in the market.


U.N. to Withdraw Over Half Of Military Force in Rwanda
The Security Council voted unanimously today to cut by more than half the number of United Nations troops in Rwanda after the Rwandan Government asserted that they are no longer needed or wanted.
The move will reduce the United Nations force in Rwanda, which now numbers nearly 5,600 troops, to 2,330 soldiers within three months, and to 1,800 within four months.


Players Ready To Cooperate
The desire to speed up baseball games has created a cooperative spirit between clubs and players unparalleled in recent years.
A day after the owners voted unanimously to implement steps to shorten games, the league presidents, Len Coleman and Gene Budig, met yesterday with Players Association officials to discuss the changes.
The most significant change affecting players that the clubs want to put in effect after the All-Star Game next month deals with umpires enforcing existing rules to keep hitters in the batter's box.


Expect Suspensions, Even Dismissals, Bratton Warns
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that more officers had begun to identify colleagues who took part in a drunken rampage in Washington three weeks ago and that more suspensions, and even dismissals, were expected in the next few weeks.
"I fully expect that there will be discharges," Mr.
Bratton said at a news conference.
"You can bet on it."


Save the Job Corps
The Federal Government finances a dizzying array of education and training programs.
Chairman Nancy Kassebaum of the Senate Labor Committee will propose a bill next week to combine 70 or so training programs into a block grant, giving the money to the states to help low-skilled or unemployed workers.
Dismantling may make sense for marginally effective programs, but it makes no sense for the Job Corps, a uniquely successful program for disadvantaged youths.
The Kassebaum bill is expected to preserve the Job Corps, but risk its future by turning it over to the states to run.
The Job Corps serves more than 60,000 youths between the ages of 16 and 24 at 110 centers around the country.
The program is expensive, about $1 billion a year, or about $20,000 per participant.
That is much higher than other programs, but consider the reasons.
The Job Corps is a residential program, providing enrollees room, board, counseling, social skills instruction, education, vocational training and job placement services.
Getting youths out of destructive home environments is the key.
Over 80 percent of Job Corps enrollees are high school dropouts.
Nearly half are on welfare and less than half read at better than an eighth-grade level.


Mantle Has Follow-Up Operation
Mickey Mantle, gamely recovering from Thursday's liver transplant, went back to the operating room early this morning so doctors could stanch internal bleeding.
In a half-hour operation at Baylor University Medical Center here shortly after midnight, his surgeon, Dr.
Robert Goldstein, applied a single stitch to the underside of Mantle's diaphragm where his old liver had been attached.
A blood clot that surgeons had formed during the transplant had broken.


Tipasa Journal; Algerian Anti-Terror Force Can Instill Terror, Too
"Our mission is to make people feel secure," the commander of an armored Nissan patrol said.
He was going nearly 100 miles an hour on a stretch of Mediterranean road toward this seaside resort as his men signaled cars to make way for a convoy of the so-called ninjas, the strike force used to combat Muslim militants.
But there was nothing reassuring about the sight of the antiterrorist army unit.


DANCE
A Day for Romeo-Watchers As Two Make Their Debuts  American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House


Block that Raid, Mr. McCall
While passing its budget this year, the New York State Legislature came up with some exotic fiscal gimmicks to pay for expenses.
Few were more brazen than the lawmakers' raid on a $360 million pool of money called the Supplemental Reserve Fund.
The State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, has the authority to try to block the raid in court.
He should do so.
The case bears scrutiny because New York City may be tempted to try something similar to reduce its own budget deficit.
The state and city have many contingency funds on their books, set aside for emergencies or expenses that accrue over time, like pension costs.
These funds should always be restricted to their original purposes and not raided to balance the general budget.
The Supplemental Reserve Fund was established more than two decades ago to pay for future extra benefits for people already retired whose pensions have eroded over the years because of inflation.


Chic by H.I.S. Inc.(JNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 6


Baby Is Killed in Car Crash
A 14-year-old boy was arrested yesterday on charges of aggravated manslaughter after he hit another car, killing an infant and injuring three teen-agers, the police said.


ROCK
Songs of Excess and Heroism, With a Dash of Bach on the Organ  Boston Jones Beach Theater


15 Are Arrested in Drug Sweep
More than 50 officers from city, county and Federal agencies raided five public housing projects yesterday morning and arrested 15 people on drug charges.
Hudson County Prosecutor Carmen Messano said the raids followed a two-month investigation during which undercover officers made 34 purchases of cocaine and heroin from those arrested.


Corrections
Stock options tables in Business Day yesterday reflected Wednesday's trading rather than Thursday's in some copies. (The correct version is recognizable by the "Most Active Options" listing, which shows the price of the Lotus Development Corporation as 63 1/2.) Readers wishing corrected copies of the tables may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Gen. J.C. Ongania, Ex-Argentine Dictator, 81
Gen.
Juan Carlos Ongania, a cavalryman who was Argentina's repressive President from 1966 to 1970, died on Thursday at the Military Hospital in Buenos Aires.
He was 81 and lived in a suburb of Buenos Aires.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.
He had suffered a stroke in May that had left him paralyzed and unable to speak.


CHRONICLE
Brother DONALD SULLIVAN is not a man who would overstay his welcome.
He has been the president of St.
Francis College in Brooklyn for 26 years, and when the board of trustees approached him to stay on for another five years, he said thanks, but no.
"I have always felt that it is possible to leave a little too early and possible to leave a little too late," Brother Donald, 64, said yesterday.


Bratton Expects More Dismissals
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that more officers have begun to identify colleagues who took part in a drunken rampage in Washington three weeks ago and that additional suspensions, and even dismissals, are expected in the next few weeks.


Thomas Cabot, 98, Capitalist And Philanthropist, Is Dead
Thomas D. Cabot, a hardy industrialist who spent 40 years building a great family fortune and 30 years hiking, skiing, canoeing, yachting and giving away money, died on Thursday at his home in Weston, Mass., the Boston suburb where he lived for 75 years.
He was 98.
In a Boston Brahmin society where it has been said that the Lowells speak only to the Cabots and the Cabots speak only to God, Thomas Dudley Cabot served on so many boards, belonged to so many lunch clubs and had so many irons in the fire that he had neither the time nor the inclination to snub anybody.


ROCK
Reunion Within a Reunion And a Wish for Tenderness  General Public Limelight


Clay Cruisers Reach Final: It's Muster Against Chang
Michael Chang did it by putting mind over the possibly daunting matter of trying to dethrone the French Open's two-time defending champion.
Thomas Muster, the great grunter and growler, did it by making his opponent feel like a pipsqueak caught in the sights and soundtrack of a howitzer.


Not First Gene Patent
To the Editor:
In your article on advances in gene therapy (Business Day, June 1) you note that a recent patent "in effect marks the patent office's recognition of the technology's usefulness."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  SURPRISE ATTACK IN BOSNIA
NATO and Administration officials acknowledged that intelligence and planning failures had contributed to the downing of an American pilot over Bosnia last week.  1  WELCOME FOR RESCUED PILOT
Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady came back to Aviano Air Base, cheered as a hero by flag-waving children and embraced by his pilot buddies.  1  DRUG KINGPIN SEIZED
The Colombian police captured a leader of the powerful Cali cocaine cartel, Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, during a raid in the southwestern Colombian city.  1  JAPAN AND U.S.
SPLIT ON IRAN
The Japanese Government has told Washington that Tokyo will refuse to join its embargo on oil trade with Iran.  1  ZAIRE IN RUINS
The outside world is awakening to the fact that under President Mobutu Sese Seko's long rule, Zaire has drifted dangerously close to disintegration.  1  DEAL ON BLACK SEA FLEET
Russia and Ukraine signed an agreement on the Black Sea Fleet, easing relations between the two most important countries of the former Soviet Union.  3  Taiwan's President speaks at his Cornell reunion.  4  Tipasa Journal: Algeria's anti-terror force can instill terror too. 2  National 6-9  A PLACE OF HEALING HEALS ITSELF
The Eagleton School, an institution for emotionally scarred boys, begins to recover from a tornado that hit Massachusetts last week.  7  A MACABRE DEATH SCENE
The Los Angeles County chief coroner gave a detailed description of Ronald Goldman's death to the jurors in the O. J. Simpson trial.  7  RULING IN SEX DISCRIMINATION CASE
A Federal judge approved an out-of-court settlement in a threatened sex discrimination case against the Central Intelligence Agency.  7  TAKING FOOD FROM THEIR TABLE
The chairman of the Agriculture Committee rejected giving the states responsibility for school lunch or food stamp programs.8  ANTI-REGULATION LEGISLATION
Senator Bob Dole is close to an agreement with a Democratic ally on a bill that would curb Federal regulatory powers.  8  A NEW BALANCED BUDGET PROPOSAL
White House advisers are divided over how soon President Clinton should present his 10-year balanced budget proposal to the public.  8  'NIGHTMARES OF DEPRAVITY'
Religion Journal: Bob Dole reaped the headlines but the Roman Catholic Church has long opposed cinematic sex and violence.  9  Metro Digest 21
Reacting swiftly to the lacerating effects of the new state budget on the city, the Mayor proposed $100 million in new cuts to the Board of Education, the city hospital system and local welfare programs.  1  Business Digest 33  Sports 26-32  GETTING ON TRANSPLANT LIST
Gen.
Juan Carlos Ongania, former Argentine dictator.
Edith Ferry Hooper, supporter of arts and education.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Save the Job Corps.
South Africa shows the way.
Block that raid, Mr.
McCall.
The food fight.
Letters  Russell Baker: All in what family?
Bob Herbert: Welcome home, convicted molester.
James Howard Kunstler: They came, they conquered, they closed.
Joseph D. McNamara: N.Y.P.D. white.
Hugh Downs: Polio isn't dead yet.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 15  Crossword 14


Mary Doyle, Actress, 63
Mary Doyle, an actress in theater, films and television, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 63.
The cause was lung cancer, said her daughter, Ruth A. McQuiggan Rosenbloom.


President of A.F.L.-C.I.O. Is Reportedly Set to Retire
Lane Kirkland, who has been president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. since 1979, has decided not to run for re-election, union officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Kirkland's decision to retire, at the age of 73, when his term ends in the fall reverses his earlier announcement that he would stand for re-election despite the efforts of more than a dozen unions in the 13.3 million federation to replace him.


Market Responds to Northeast Pollution
To the Editor:
On June 1, Merck &amp; Company, with Public Service Electric &amp; Gas, the Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, unveiled a cooperative new emission reduction program.
Your June 1 article minimized its significance.


Tartabull Suggests a Trade
Danny Tartabull has taken all he can of George Steinbrenner's sharp tongue and is open to a trade as soon as a deal can be worked out.
"If he's disappointed, then get somebody else in here who can satisfy him," Tartabull said before the Yankees and the Seattle Mariners opened a three-game series last night at Yankee Stadium.
"If there's continuing disappointment in me, maybe something can be done. Maybe a new surrounding might be fine for me."


Jung, the Introvert, Would Never Lead a Cult
To the Editor:
Re "Scholar Who Says Jung Lied Is at War With Descendants" (front page, June 3):


No Headline
"You have to pass the critical wallet biopsy. Let's say I find out I need a liver transplant. I go to the medical center and before I get any tests done, the business office talks to me." -- DR.
ARTHUR CAPLAN, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania.  [ 29:4. ]


A Prince Charming?; Disney and the City Find Each Other
It is not, at first glance, a marriage made in heaven: the Walt Disney Company, the entertainment giant with the family-values image, and New York City, the hard-edged metropolis.
But a match it appears to be.
For the last two years, Disney and New York have been courting, and all signs suggest that flirtation is turning into commitment.


Rock-and-Roll Finds A Fancy Publisher
In the early 1970's, when Brian Roylance was working for a publisher in London, he used to spend his lunch hours indulging a passion for nautical logs at the Public Records Office.
While perusing Capt.
William Bligh's log from the Bounty one afternoon, it occurred to him that there might be a market for a facsimile edition.
Having studied the techniques of traditional bookmaking at the London College of Printing, he produced a handbound volume in an edition of 500, which sold out quickly.
More naval logs and correspondence facsimiles followed, as did editions of Lewis Carroll's illustrated manuscript of "Alice's Adventures Under Ground" and Charles Dickens's handwritten version of "The Cricket on the Hearth." By the late 1970's, Mr.
Roylance and his Surrey-based company, Genesis Publications, had a steady list of subscribers, among them the New York Public Library, which has bought almost all his books.


South Africa Shows the Way
South Africa, which once led the world in executions, has abolished the death penalty by unanimous vote of its new Constitutional Court.
The courageous decision leaves the United States in a dwindling company of democratic countries with the dubious distinction of executing their citizens.
This first important decision by South Africa's highest court is distinguished for its legal reasoning and fidelity to the country's democratic aspirations.
The 11 judges -- racially diverse and reflecting the population's Afrikaner, British and black heritage -- captured the character of a country that has shed its legacy of racial division and authoritarian rule.
They concluded that South Africa's 1993 constitution places high value on the human rights of life and dignity that were so traduced during generations of apartheid.


Many Sources for an Argentine Composer
Guillermo Klein, a young Argentine composer who is leading a big band at Smalls every Sunday this month, can be abrupt.
His show this week opened with one large brusque chord that immediately died, leaving silence.
Sudden riffs burst from nowhere.
What had been background noise emerged as the beginning of an electronically distorted saxophone solo.
Mr.
Klein's orchestra, which draws from the cliched music written for 1960's television and movies, from Steve Reich-style Minimalism, from polychordal harmony and occasionally from mainstream jazz, is unlike any working in New York.
There are jokes in the music, as well.
At the end of one piece Mr.
Klein played two corny organ chords, making explicit the tunes' connections to a 1960's style.
The music owes something to the electronic experiments of 1960's rock-jazz, with the horn soloists playing through amplification.
Mr.
Klein manages to make it all sound sincere.


Jung, the Introvert, Would Never Lead a Cult; Sheds New Light
To the Editor:
In your June 3 front-page article on the conflict between Richard Noll and the Jung family you state that the family "blocked the publication of a book on Jung." This is not true.


Nets Taking Look at Respert
One year after passing on Wesley Person, the Nets still covet a shooting guard and will work out Shawn Respert of Michigan State on Monday.
Respert is listed at 6 feet 3 inches, but most experts attending the National Basketball Association pre-draft camp in Chicago this week believe that he is about 6-1.
Still, Respert is one of several players the Nets are counting on to be available when they select No. 9 in the June 28 draft.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Mark Whiten, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Joe Hudson, pitcher, from Trenton of the Eastern League.
Designated Tuffy Rhodes, outfielder, for assignment.
Sent Brian Looney, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Juan Labron, outfielder.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Mike Fetters, pitcher.
Placed Turner Ward, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
National League LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Traded Rafael Bournigal, shortstop, to the Montreal Expos for John Foster, pitcher.
Assigned Foster to their rookie camp in Vero Beach, Fla.
NEW YORK METS -- Assigned Reid Cornelius, pitcher, to Norfolk of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Jeff Barry, outfielder, from Binghamton of the Eastern League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Ken Hill, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Carolina Leauge WILMINTON BLUE ROCKS -- Loaned Kortney Paul, catcher, to Lethbridge of the Pioneer League.
Northern League NL -- Named Brad Brooksbank director of media relations.
Northeast League ALBANY-COLONIE DIAMOND DOGS -- Signed Chris Newcomb, pitcher, and Dan Gray, catcher.
Prairie League MINNEAPOLIS LOONS -- Signed Brian Sutter, catcher-infielder.
Released Eric Lovdahl, pitcher.
Basketball  United States Basketball League JERSEY TURNPIKES -- Activated Dan O'Sullivan, center, from the taxi squad.
Placed Brent Dabbs, center, on the taxi squad.
FLORIDA SHARKS -- Activated Stanley Jackson, guard, from the taxi squad.
Placed Jerome Robinson, guard, on the taxi squad.
MEMPHIS FIRE -- Signed Rob Renfroe, center.
MIAMI TROPICS -- Released Eric Johnson, guard.
Activated Orchiel Swaby, forward, from the taxi squad.
Signed Malcolm Ruckaby, guard, and placed him on the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Named Dan Ruiz assistant trainer.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Ryan Grigson, offensive tackle.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Zack Abraham, wide receiver, and Ron Lewis, offensive guard.
Released Craig Dubose, linebacker; Barry Dillard, defensive back; Brad Fichtel, center; and Doug Thomas, wide receiver.
Canadian Football League BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Rob Prodanovic, defensive end.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Released Gill Carillo, running back.
Signed Freeman Baysinger, wide receiver.
Arena Football League ALBANY FIREBIRDS -- Activated Mike Green and David McLeod, wide receivers-defensive backs, from the exempt list.
Waived Nuygen Pendleton, wide receiver-defensive back, and Dwayne Ware, defensive specialist.
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Activated Craig Barr, fullback-linebacker, and Cedric Tillman, wide receiver-defensive back, from the exempt list.
Placed Brad Clark and Milton Vaughn, wide receivers-defensive backs, on injured reserve.
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Activated Bill Stewart, fullback-linebacker, from the refuse-to-report list.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Activated Alvin Ashley, wide receiver-defensive back, from the refuse-to-report list.
Placed Matt Vogler, quarterback, on injured reserve and Quentin Knight, lineman, on the refuse-to-report list.
Signed Tony Missick, wide receiver-defensive back, and Charles Puleri, quarterback.
Waived Darian Bryant and Bryan Moore, wide receivers-defensive backs.


Employees Watch Stock Surge As Management Forbids Sales
For employees of Lotus Development, the company's fall from Wall Street grace has been a painful one.
Many are also shareholders, through various company plans, and until I.B.M. offered $60 a share, Lotus stock was selling for less than it was fetching five years ago.
And it is still below its peak of more than $86, reached in March 1994.
So it is understandable that some Lotus employees might want to sell at least some shares, in case the stock tumbles once more, should the Lotus board decide to fight I.B.M.'s takeover and also manage to fight off any other suitor.


ITT Selling The Rest of Subsidiary
Completing a process it announced last September, the ITT Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell the remaining assets of its ITT Financial Corporation subsidiary for about $5.5 billion.
The company said it had signed agreements with "a number" of buyers to sell the assets of the ITT Residential Corporation, an originator of first mortgage loans; the financial reinsurance business of the Lyndon Insurance Group, and ITT Financial's portfolio of real estate loans and properties, most of which are in Southern California.


Vera A. Ries, 86, Collector of Books
Vera Aberle Ries, whose living room was lined from floor to ceiling with one of the country's richest private collections of early children's books, died at her home in Forest Hills, Queens, on Monday.
She was 86.
Mrs.
Ries's husband, Ludwig, began the collection in 1958 with trips to New England villages to rummage at antique stores and thrift shops.
Mrs.
Ries continued the search after his death in 1968, working mainly through catalogues.


State Plans to Buy Hilltop Tract
Hilltop, the 325-acre tract of wooded land that Essex County is selling off to help balance its budget, would be bought by the state under terms of a bill introduced by State Senator Robert Littell, a Republican from Franklin.
The bill proposes that the state buy the tract -- which covers parts of Verona, Cedar Grove and North Caldwell -- for $32.5 million out of unused Green Acres funds set aside for water supply protection.


Corrections
The Advertising column on the Media Business page yesterday, about the leading broadcast television networks' booking of $5.6 billion in advance sales of commercial time for the 1995-96 season, misstated the number of commercials the amount would have bought during Super Bowl XXIX.
It is 5,600 30-second commercials, not 5.6 million; the 5,600 would have run for 1.94 days, not 1,944.
The column also referred incorrectly to the Olympics Games scheduled for 1996.
They are Summer Olympics; the next Winter Olympics are in 1998.


In Hartford, Both Parties Find Reasons for Peace
In the final weeks of the legislative session that ended early Thursday, lawmakers were touting the bipartisan spirit of cooperation so much that Gov.
John G. Rowland referred to it as a "lovefest."
Both Democrats and Republicans could not stop talking about how remarkable it was that the two parties worked together to produce a fiscally conservative budget that provided a small tax cut.


Balkan Update
Capt.
Scott O'Grady returned to AVIANO AIR BASE in ITALY yesterday, thanking God and the United States Marines for his rescue Thursday from Serb-held territory Bosnia.
In WASHINGTON, the White House rejected a Bosnian request that the United States violate the a United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia, and said President Clinton would veto any legislation intended to force such a change in policy.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a student's attempt to give a commencement speech at Martha's Vineyard Regional High School about her experience of rape referred incompletely to the charge to which a fellow student pleaded guilty in the case.
The youth, Keith Devine, pleaded guilty to the rape of a child under the age of 16 -- a charge similar to statutory rape -- and to performing unnatural and lascivious acts.
He did not simply plead guilty to rape.


CNN Is Backed On New Service
The board of Turner Broadcasting approved a request yesterday by CNN to initiate a new financial news service in January to be called CNNFN.
The move came despite open threats from NBC to begin an all-news channel to compete directly with CNN if it began a service to compete with NBC's own financial news channel, CNBC.


Changing a Light Bulb, the Hard Way


Gore Tells Bosnian Premier U.S. Won't Lift Arms Embargo
The White House today rejected a request by the Prime Minister of Bosnia that the United States lift an arms embargo against his Government, and said President Clinton would veto any legislation intended to force such a change in policy.
In a 45-minute meeting between Vice President Al Gore and the Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, the Administration signaled its determination to adhere to the United Nations embargo and to support a United Nations peacekeeping presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite growing Congressional opposition.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about John Presper Eckert, co-inventor of what many historians consider the first electronic digital computer, misstated the affiliation of Dr.
John V. Atanasoff, another computing pioneer.
It was Iowa State University, not the University of Iowa.


A.F.L.-C.I.O. Chief Now Plans to Retire
In a reversal of an earlier vow, Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. since 1979, has decided to retire, union officials said.
Last fall, Mr.
Kirkland announced that he would stand for re-election despite the efforts of more than a dozen unions in the 13.3 million-member federation to replace him.


CHRONICLE
LADY BIRD JOHNSON, 82, was back in the thick of Washington this week, and the city showered her with affection and accolades.
On Wednesday, she received the Honor Award of the National Building Museum at a black-tie dinner that brought more than 500 friends from the worlds of business, government and horticulture to the museum's Great Hall.
She received the award for her leadership in campaigns to beautify roadways, parks and urban plazas.
Among the speakers were Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York; former Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas, and Mrs.
Johnson's granddaughters Catherine and Lucinda Robb.


A Musical Gathering In Memory of a Peer
A musical tribute to the pianist and composer Joseph Villa is to be presented at Bargemusic, at the Fulton Ferry Landing, Furman Street, under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Mr.
Villa, who was heard regularly as a recital accompanist and also made several solo recordings, died on April 13.
The performers are to include David Shifrin, clarinetist; Ida Kavafian and Teddy Arm, violinists; Paul Coletti, Toby Hoffman and Steven Tenenbom, violists; Fred Sherry, Christopher Costanza, Daniel Gaisford, David Heis and Warren Lash, cellists; Janina Fialkowska, David Oei, Hannah Reimann and Andrew Axelrod, pianists, and Constance Bevon, mezzo-soprano.


The Food Fight
"Is it opportunity to operate one pushcart your entire life?" asks Christopher Ferencsik, vice president of the Big Apple Food Vendors Association.
"Where is that going to lead you?"
Some of the people buying hot dogs and falafel might have a good answer.
Pushing a cart gave their grandparents a foothold in America.
Pushing a cart can give the latest generation of immigrants a foothold, too.


COMPANY NEWS
BARNETT BANKS INC., Jacksonville, Fla., named Richard H. Jones chief asset management executive.
H.
B.
FULLER CO., St.
Paul, said it had named Walter Kissling, its president and chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive.
He succeeds Anthony L. Andersen, who had been chief executive since 1974.
Mr.
Andersen remains chairman.
TRANSAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, named Thomas J. Cusack, a senior vice president, chief executive of Transamerica Life Cos.
UNITED STATES SHOE CORP., Cincinnati, said Bannus Hudson, its president and chief executive, had resigned.
The company has been acquired by Luxottica GroupS.p.A. of Milan, Italy.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about a guilty plea in the killing of four men at a post office in Montclair, N.J., misstated the given name of one victim.
He was Scott Walensky, not Ernest.
The caption also misidentified the site where the wives of three victims were photographed.
They were at a news conference, not in a courtroom in Federal District Court in Camden.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENICOM CORP., Chantilly, Va., a computer network parts, printer and related services company, said it had ended talks about acquiring a desktop printer business from an undisclosed company.
MITY-LITE INC., Orem, Utah, a maker of multipurpose furniture, agreed to buy Fixtures Manufacturing Corp., Kansas City, Mo., another furniture maker, for $18 million in cash and stock.
SMITHFIELD COS., Portsmouth, Va., a food processing concern, will sell its Bunker Hill Foods division to closely held Castleberry/Snow's Brands Inc.
Augusta, Ga., for $12.9 million.
WESTWOOD ONE INC., Culver City, Calif., a radio programing distributor, said it planned to buy as much as $15 million of its common stock outstanding in the open market and through negotiated transactions.


Observer; All in What Family?
Which family are we talking about in this debate about family values?
Is it the Gambino family?
Of course not.
Could it be the House of Atreus?
Don't be absurd.
I don't think it is the Oblonsky family either.
Too unhappy, the Oblonskys, so distinctively unhappy that they made Tolstoy say that "every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way."


New AIDS Guide Approved By State, Angering Bishops
Over the objections of Catholic bishops, the State Board of Regents today approved a new H.I.V.-AIDS instructional guide that says teaching about the proper use of condoms can reduce the risk of contracting the deadly virus.
The guide, which will be circulated to all public schools this fall, emphasizes that teachers must tell students that abstinence is the best way to avoid AIDS.
But the new guide, unlike the 1987 guide it will replace, includes detailed information about how and what types of condoms can be used to reduce the risk of transmitting H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


An Awfully Calm Locale For Such an Awful Cargo
As it turned out, the tons of Ukrainian zirconium that was said to have endangered the peace of the world had lain for months on a quiet street in Queens where Woodside runs into Maspeth.
Who would have thought it?


Robert H. Ganz, 65; Packaging Executive
Robert H. Ganz, an inventor and head of a New Jersey company whose specialized packaging machinery is sold worldwide, died on Tuesday at Hackensack Medical Center.
He was 65 and lived in Saddle River, N.J.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Producer Prices Show No Inflation, Reflecting Slowdown
Reflecting a slowing economy, inflation at the producer level disappeared again in May, as price declines for food and some energy products offset increases for other types of finished goods, Government figures showed today.
Price pressures also eased at earlier stages of the production process, with the Producer Price Index for such intermediate components as bolts of cloth posting its smallest rise in a year.


Imperial Holly Corp.(IHK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about House passage of a foreign aid bill misstated a provision on Tibet.
The bill would create the position of special envoy to Tibet, but it would not require the President to recognize Tibet as a sovereign nation.


JAPAN TELLS U.S. IT WILL NOT JOIN EMBARGO ON IRAN
In a sharp rebuff to the Clinton Administration, the Japanese Government has told Washington that Tokyo will refuse to join its embargo on trade with Iran, undercutting the American effort to isolate Teheran economically for its sponsorship of terrorism and its suspected pursuit of nuclear weapons.
Britain, France and Germany have already told the White House that they will not join in the embargo.
But because Japan is such a large customer -- it purchases 400,000 barrels of oil a day from Teheran -- its participation was crucial if the trade embargo was to have anything more than symbolic effect.


Corrections
Articles on May 30, May 31 and June 1 about a woman who lost both legs after chasing a mugger in the Van Wyck Boulevard subway station in Queens misstated its address.
The station is at Queens Boulevard and Main Street, at 84th Road -- not at Queens Boulevard and 84th Street.


School Is Rebuilding, In Wood and in Spirit
Lynne Anti, a nurse at the Eagleton School here, spends her working life comforting and caring for the emotionally scarred boys who are sent to this specialized institution in the wooded Berkshire hills.
But the familiar rhythms changed last week, on the night a rare tornado tore through western Massachusetts and took the lives of three people from this small, close-knit school and left its 21-acre campus a ruin of splintered trees, roofless buildings and shattered tranquillity.


Bankruptcy Judge Blocks Move on Rockefeller Center
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday blocked an attempt by Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., which holds a $1.3 billion mortgage on Rockefeller Center, to wrest control of the trophy property from its owners.
The judge denied a motion to cut short the exclusive right of the owners, two partnerships controlled by the Mitsubishi Estate Company Ltd., to propose a plan of reorganization during the first 120 days after they filed for bankruptcy protection on May 11.


World News Briefs; Egypt and Israel End Their Political Chilliness
As Secretary of State Warren Christopher looked on with satisfaction, the leaders of Egypt and Israel met today and declared an end to a cloudy patch in their relations that had cast a shadow over efforts to find peace in the Middle East.
"There is no problem between us and Israel," President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt declared as Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Mr.
Christopher stood beside him.
"We cooperate so that the peace process will continue."


Take Me Out of This Ballgame
It is not that the Yankees took him out of the ballgame, says a former replacement player, Doug Cinnella.
It is that they did not pay him in full.
Mr.
Cinnella, of Paramus, sued the Yankees in Superior Court.
He wants $20,000 that he claims his contract guaranteed if he was released after Opening Day, which the complaint says was officially April 2 -- though the season did not actually begin until later because of the strike.
A Yankee spokesman declined to comment.


Labor Complaint Filed Against Murdoch
The New York office of the National Labor Relations Board filed a complaint yesterday against Rupert Murdoch's publishing company, the News Corporation, asserting that it violated labor laws when it dismissed 287 unionized employees of The New York Post as a result of a strike in 1993.
The Post will now be required to defend itself at an administrative hearing.
It could ultimately be held liable for millions of dollars in back pay for dismissed workers.
The paper could also be required to reinstate the workers and to reopen negotiations with their union, the Newspaper Guild of New York.


Russia and Ukraine Settle Dispute Over Black Sea Fleet
The leaders of Russia and Ukraine signed an agreement today that should conclude their bitter dispute over the Black Sea Fleet, improving relations between the two most important countries of the former Soviet Union.
The issue of the old Soviet fleet and naval base at Sevastopol, Crimea, has done much to fan nationalist tensions between Moscow and Kiev since the Soviet Union died in 1991.


Investors See Trouble; Fed Doesn't
With the economy slowing sharply, investors see more trouble ahead.
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, doesn't.
That stark disagreement -- over whether the economy may be sinking into recession or will right itself -- was underscored by today's turmoil in the bond market and a 34-point tumble in the Dow Jones industrial average.
In fact, stock and bond prices have fallen for three straight days since Wednesday, when Mr.
Greenspan disappointed investors who were counting on the Fed to give the economy a quick shot in the arm through a rate cut.
He said he was not particularly worried about the long-term health of the economy, although he acknowledged the possibility of a brief recession.


World News Briefs; U.S. Asks Cuba To Return Financier
The Administration said today that it had asked Cuba to return Robert L. Vesco, the indicted financier who fled fraud charges in the United States two decades ago, but it insisted it would not provide Havana with anything in exchange.
Cuba informed the United States last Friday that it had arrested Mr.
Vesco, 59, on charges of taking actions offensive to the interests of the Cuban people, and asked for information about his crimes here.


Clinton Moves Closer to a Detailed Plan to Balance the Budget, Officials Say
President Clinton is inching closer to proposing his detailed way to balance the Federal budget in 10 years, Administration officials and Congressional Democrats said today.
But his advisers remain sharply divided over whether it is too soon to begin such compromising with Republicans.
The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that in recent days Mr.
Clinton had intensively reviewed options for balancing the budget by 2005, while preserving his spending priorities.
They said such options included cuts of $100 billion to $150 billion in the growth of Medicare spending, roughly half the size of reductions envisioned by the Republicans.


Many Lotus Workers Seem Pleased to Have a Suitor Come Calling
I.B.M.'s hostile bid for the Lotus Development Corporation has met a decidedly unhostile reception in the offices and corridors of the target company.
In fact, while Jim P. Manzi, the chairman of Lotus, was reportedly livid at the bid, many of his employees were delighted, company insiders said.
Many stand to get a lot richer from the surge in Lotus's stock price; some see a reprieve from the threat of layoffs, and just about everybody recognizes the benefits of joining forces against a common foe, the Microsoft Corporation, company insiders said.


A Hero's Precinct Is in Hot Water
One of the names listed in Washington at a memorial for officers who have died in the line of duty is that of Edward Byrne, who seven years ago became a symbol of the fight against crack cocaine.
In 1988, his slaying by drug dealers unified police officers in a way that even the worst cases seldom do.
The 103d Precinct in Jamaica, Queens, where Officer Byrne worked, became the focus of intense news media interest, and the street where the squat station house sits was even renamed in his honor: Police Officer Edward Byrne Avenue.


Repap New Brunswick Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pilot, Back at Base, Thanks God and His Rescue Crews
Looking sometimes jubilant and sometimes tense after his six-day ordeal in Bosnia, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady arrived at his base today for a hometown-style welcome, cheered as a hero by flag-waving children and embraced as a sorely missed friend by his fellow pilots.
"Right off the bat, the first thing I want to do is thank God," said the 29-year-old captain, fighting back tears as he stood on a podium inside an airplane hangar where hundreds of Air Force personnel and their families had gathered.


Dole and Democrat in Talks On Regulatory Overhaul
Eager to curb Federal regulatory powers, Senator Bob Dole is close to agreement with an influential Democratic ally on a bill that Mr.
Dole may bring to the Senate floor next week, Senate aides said.
Mr.
Dole, a Kansas Republicanwho, as majority leader, is the bill's most powerful sponsor, has been negotiating all week with Senator J. Bennett Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat who is a longtime proponent of regulatory changes and who Mr.
Dole has said might draw enough support from other Democrats to head off a filibuster.


Sound Builds Bridges Between U.S. and Asia
The Asia Society's "Cross Overs" festival, which continues through tonight, started off well on Tuesday at the Asia Society (725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street).
The Jon Jang Sextet turned in a performance that did exactly what the festival meant it to do: merge the sound of Asia with the sound of America, in this case the sound of jazz.
Mr.
Jang, a pianist based on the West Coast, brought together James Newton on flute, David Murray on saxophone and bass clarinet, Santi Debriano on bass and Billy Hart on drums with Jiebeng Chen, a Chinese erhu player.
The erhu is a small, two-stringed bowed instrument that sounds a bit like a violin, and Mr.
Jang used its sound to add graceful pentatonic melodies, redolent of Chinese classical music, to a jazz rhythm section.
It worked: Mr.
Jang's rhythm section swung mightily at times, moving from meter to meter and changing tempos and even moving into free time, while the horns and erhu worked their way through the melodies.


New York Homeowners Bear a Double Burden
To the Editor:
Re your June 3 news article on a proposal by Peter F. Vallone, Speaker of the New York City Council, to raise taxes on rental homes, and "Back to You, Mr. Mayor" (editorial, June 6):


Driver Is Aching But Status Is Unclear
The Devils may be heading into Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Flyers Saturday afternoon without a key defenseman.
Bruce Driver left the ice early here at Byrne Meadowlands Arena this afternoon, dressed quickly and took off saying he was not feeling well.
Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire, describing it as a "little problem," said it was an injury.
And Driver was seen leaving the locker room holding what appeared to be an ice pack or a heat pad to his upper left thigh -- suggesting that if there is an injury, it might be groin-related.


Houston Takes Total Control With a Crushing Victory
The Houston Rockets played like a team of destiny.
The Orlando Magic looked like a team in trouble.
Playing superb basketball, and threatening to turn the National Basketball Association finals into a one-sided affair, Houston rolled to a stunning 117-106 victory tonight to take a 2-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game championship series.
It was the seventh consecutive road victory for the Rockets during the playoffs, an N.B.A. record.
And led by the one-two punch of Hakeem Olajuwon (34 points) and Sam Cassell (31 points), the Rockets delivered a crushing blow to a young Magic team that looked overmatched by the defending champions.


U.S. WAS UNAWARE ON SERB MISSILES, OFFICIALS ASSERT
As the Clinton Administration celebrated the flawless rescue of an American pilot in Bosnia, NATO and Administration officials acknowledged today that intelligence and planning failures contributed to the downing of the F-16 fighter in the first place.
Gen.
John Shalikasvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other senior military officials have said in testimony before Congress this week that NATO did not expect such an attack because there was no intelligence indicating that the Bosnian Serbs had deployed sophisticated surface-to-air missiles in the area.


Bikers Should Have Trails of Their Own
To the Editor:
Re Robert Plant's June 6 letter on your May 30 news article about the dispute between hikers and bikers in our parks:


Colombian Drug Lord Captured In Police Raid in His Hometown
A principal leader of the Cali cocaine and heroin ring in Colombia, regarded as the world's largest drug-trafficking gang, was captured yesterday in a raid on a luxurious house in the southern city of Cali, Colombian Government officials said.
The officials said the raiding party had been on the verge of leaving the white stucco house without finding the man, Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, when some officers discovered him hiding in a secret compartment.


Surgery for Mantle
One day after he underwent a liver transplant, Mickey Mantle was brought back to an operating room, where doctors stanched some internal bleeding.
The doctors said his liver was working well, and that he was alert enough to watch news about his condition on television.
Article, page 27.


Bridge
The International Team Trials, which began Thursday in Las Vegas, Nev., have a new, larger format.
Instead of including only teams that have won one of the four national championships, they are open to all who can afford travel, rooms and entry fees.
Two teams will qualify for the World Championships in Beijing in October.
Captains of the top-seeded teams are: 1.
Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C.; 2.
Jim Cayne of Manhattan; 3.
Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.; 4.
Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan; 5.
Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J.; 6.
Andy Goodman of San Francisco; 7.
Cliff Russell of Miami.


Corrections
Articles on May 30, May 31 and June 1 about a woman who lost both legs after chasing a mugger in the Van Wyck Boulevard subway station in Queens misstated its address.
The station is at Queens Boulevard and Main Street, at 84th Road -- not at Queens Boulevard and 84th Street.


At Simpson Trial, Coroner Offers More Details of Goldman's Struggle
Trapped and frantically fighting, Ronald L. Goldman was slashed and stabbed more than two dozen times before succumbing, the chief coroner of Los Angeles County told jurors today in the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Describing the death scene in vivid detail, the coroner, Dr.
Lakshmanan Sathyavagiswaran, told jurors that Mr.
Goldman was cornered by his assailant in a tight, enclosed area outside Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium, and that the knife wounds he suffered were probably inflicted in less than a minute.


Pier 1 Imports Inc.(PIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Microsoft Defends Its On-Line Plans
The Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that despite a Justice Department investigation it had no intention of altering its plans for entering the fast-growing computer on-line services business in August.
The Justice Department is looking at whether Microsoft's plan to bundle the access software for its on-line service onto the upgrade of its popular Windows operating system, due in August, would give the big software company an unfair advantage in the on-line business.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(FMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 20


Corrections
An article yesterday about House passage of a foreign aid bill misstated a provision on Tibet.
The bill would create the position of special envoy to Tibet, but it would not require the President to recognize Tibet as a sovereign nation.


Giuliani Is Seeking New Cuts in Schools And Social Services
Reacting swiftly to the news that the state budget provides far less aid than New York City requested, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday proposed deep new cuts to the Board of Education, the city hospital system and local welfare programs, many of which benefit the poor.
And as he began formal negotiations with leaders of the City Council yesterday, the Mayor removed from the table $240 million in threatened cuts to mostly middle-class programs like libraries, cultural institutions, trash pickups and day care.


Service for Robert Towers
A memorial service for Robert Towers, the novelist, critic and professor of writing at Columbia University, will be held tomorrow at 4 P.M. in St.
Paul's Chapel on the Columbia campus at Amsterdam Avenue and 117th Street.
Mr.
Towers died at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on May 2 at age 72.


Dow Tumbles 34.58 Points As Hopes Dim for Rate Cut
The stock market turned sour yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping 34.58 points, to 4,423.99, as traders saw increasing evidence of an economic slowdown but without the prospects of a cut in interest rates that would help lift sagging corporate earnings.
Traders were so troubled by the outlook that they ignored surprisingly good news on the inflation front.
The Government reported no change in producer prices for May, thus making a mild inflation report for consumer prices likely next Tuesday.


How Long-Life Milk Tastes: A Bit Less Sweet, Creamy
Various types of Parmalat's long-lasting milk, which is superheated and packaged in aseptic cartons, were tasted for Business Day by Florence Fabricant, who contributes food articles to The Living Section.
When Parmalat's long-life milk made its debut in the United States about two years ago, it had a flavor that suggested cooked or boiled milk.
That taste was evident even when the milk was well chilled or chocolate-flavored.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about a guilty plea in the killing of four men at a post office in Montclair, N.J., misstated the given name of one victim.
He was Scott Walensky, not Ernest.
The caption also misidentified the site where the wives of three victims were photographed.
They were at a news conference, not in a courtroom in Federal District Court in Camden.


INSIDE
Warning on Air Traffic
New York City's air-traffic system is beset by problems that make it far too vulnerable to breakdowns, the F.A.A. reported.
Page 21.
Wall of Silence Crumbling
More New York City officers are identifying colleagues who took part in a drunken rampage in Washington, the commissioner said.
Page 23.
Raises for Recruiting
At Mercy College in Westchester, professors' salaries are tied to their ability to boost enrollment.
Page 21.
Rockets Win Again
With Sam Cassell leading the way, Houston takes a 2-0 lead over Orlando in the N.B.A finals.
Page 27.


In America; Welcome Home, Convicted Molester
In some communities a convicted sex offender can expect to be ostracized.
But if the offender is a former heavyweight boxing champion and the community is Harlem, he can look forward to a gala welcome-home celebration.
A so-called "welcoming committee" was formed to take part in a program at the Apollo Theater June 20 for the famous rapist, bully and longtime tormentor of women Mike Tyson.
Among those listed as members of the committee were Representative Charles Rangel; the former Manhattan Borough President and chairman emeritus of Inner City Broadcasting, Percy Sutton; Assemblyman Al Vann; the singer Roberta Flack, and the Rev.
Al Sharpton.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.08
4.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.59
4.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.53
4.51
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.38
6.26
7.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.72
6.61
7.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.68
7.61
8.14
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
5.92
6.16
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


2 Nutrition Programs Win Crucial Backing in Senate
The chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee broke with fellow Republicans in the House today and rejected the notion of giving the states responsibility for the school lunch program.
The chairman, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, also turned down pleas from some Republican governors who want Washington to replace food stamps with direct cash payments to the states.


Business Digest
Treasury Market Slumps For Third Day in a Row  Prices of Treasuries took their worst beating since September amid speculation that the Japanese might curtail future purchases of United States Government securities.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.72, up from 6.61 percent on Thursday and 6.53 percent at the beginning of the week.
Some analysts said the rumor might have served as an excuse for investors to sell in a market that has run too far, too fast on anticipation that the economy will continue to slow.
No one saw the trading as a sign of a major new direction in the market.  [ Page 36. ] The stock market turned sour, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping 34.58 points to 4,423.99, as traders saw further evidence of an economic slowdown but without the prospects of a cut in interest rates that would help lift sagging corporate earnings.
The traders were so troubled by the outlook that they ignored surprisingly good news on the inflation front.
For the week the Dow was down 20.4 points.  [ 37. ] Share prices plunged in Tokyo to the lowest level in nearly three years, amid discouragement over the economic outlook and the Government's rescue plan for the banking industry.
The Nikkei fell 398.12 points, or 2.6 percent, to 15,044.18, its lowest close since Aug. 19, 1992.
The latest development to pull down stocks was the release of the central bank's quarterly survey of Japanese business sentiment, which found that businesses had become more optimistic, despite the strong yen.
That seemed to depress the market, analysts said, because it would deter the central bank from cutting interest rates to stimulate the economy.  [ 34. ] The dollar dropped sharply on a rumor that large Japanese investors were selling United States securities.
The books sell for hundreds of dollars each.  [ 11. ]


DANCE
A Day for Romeo-Watchers As Two Make Their Debuts  American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House


DANCE
Students Make Debuts in Ballets By Balanchine and Bournonville  School of American Ballet Juilliard Theater


Religion Journal; Taking On Hollywood, Long Before Dole
When it comes to critiquing Hollywood, a politician like Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, may reap headlines, as Mr.
Dole did in abundance last week when he attacked the movie and recording industries for creating "nightmares of depravity."
But excessive cinematic sex and violence have been a more enduring concern to officials of the Roman Catholic Church, who aspire to speak with a higher moral authority than do Presidential candidates and to do so in a way not tied to election cycles.


CHRONICLE
LADY BIRD JOHNSON, 82, was back in the thick of Washington this week, and the city showered her with affection and accolades.
On Wednesday, she received the Honor Award of the National Building Museum at a black-tie dinner that brought more than 500 friends from the worlds of business, government and horticulture to the museum's Great Hall.
She received the award for her leadership in campaigns to beautify roadways, parks and urban plazas.
Among the speakers were Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York; former Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas, and Mrs.
Johnson's granddaughters Catherine and Lucinda Robb.


Yankees Absorb Another Pounding
It was the Seattle Mariners' turn to beat up the Yankees last night.
They pounded three home runs en route to an 11-1 victory that would have been embarrassing if it wasn't becoming routine.
In losing for the 14th time in 17 games, the Yankees allowed three home runs in a game for the 10th time this season and their total number yielded rose to 54.
The Mariners also benefited from a six-run fifth inning off the Yankee starter Melido Perez (3-3).
Tim Belcher improved to 3-0, working seven innings for the Mariners.


Free Tickets for Municipal Workers
Not everyone who got tickets to today's "Pocahontas" extravaganza in Central Park did so through the public lottery.
As part of its arrangement with the Walt Disney Company, the city received 1,200 of the free tickets, which were distributed to city officials and other employees, as well as their families.
Colleen Roche, press secretary to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said the city received 200 V.I.P. tickets, which allow special access to the site.
Of those, she said, 80 were given to nonprofit groups, 15 went to the Parks Department and the balance were given to employees of the Mayor's office and various mayoral agencies.


Hard Bop, Still Alive And Kicking
The double bill at the Blue Note, which is running through tomorrow and features the saxophonist Jackie McLean and the trumpeter Terence Blanchard, is a perfect example of how music often written off as hard bop is in reality variegated, with all sorts of stripes and colors.
And it also shows how the younger generation of musicians -- Mr.
Blanchard is the example -- have come up with a style radically different from that of the masters from whom they supposedly stole the fire.
The 63-year-old Mr.
McLean is one of the last surviving members of a group of musicians who grew up in Harlem under the musical shadow of Charlie Parker and Thelonious Monk.
He's a second-generation be-bopper, and like many of his peers, he has significantly expanded his personal language and the resources he brought to bear on be-bop.
As early as 1955 he was experimenting with nonchordal improvisations, and in the early 1960's he not only incorporated some of the younger musicians on the jazz scene into his band, including Tony Williams and Herbie Hancock, but he also explored the sleek sound of modalism as well.


With Hop and a Skip, Cassell Starts Rockets
Anfernee Hardaway remembers seeing a red blur bolt past sometime in the second quarter.
The blur squirmed, skittered, scooted and scored.
And then did it again.
"Whatever it was, it wasn't easy to guard," Hardaway said.
That water bug in high tops, Sam Cassell, was not merely hard to see in Game 2 of the National Basketball Association championship series tonight.
He was hard to contain.


A Hazardous Stroll in Bosnia


Hunters Can Do More To Stop Gun Violence
To the Editor:
In "Hunters Are Not Gun Nuts" (Op-Ed, June 3), Terry McDonell, editor of Sports Afield magazine, bridles at criticism of hunters that portrays them as murderers or "mean-spirited rednecks." He describes hunters as dedicated conservationists who deeply appreciate the natural wilds.
He says such hunters distance themselves from the citizen militias and support the Brady bill.
But that is not enough.


Getting on a Transplant List Is the First of Many Hurdles
Mickey Mantle's swift progression from deathly ill patient to liver recipient made the organ transplant process look easy.
But for the 4,659 Americans waiting for livers and the thousands more waiting for hearts, lungs, kidneys, intestines and pancreases, the hurdles they must leap are so many and, often, so onerous, that the wonder is that many get organs at all.


Clinton and Gingrich May Join in a Forum
Speaker Newt Gingrich today seized on a semi-serious invitation from President Clinton and pronounced himself "happy" to join the President in a public discussion of issues when both men are in New Hampshire on Sunday.
A spokeswoman at the White House said tonight that officials there would discuss the possibility further and make an announcement on Saturday.


F.A.A. Faults An L.I. Center For Air Traffic
The system that is supposed to keep airplanes from colliding over the New York City area is beset by problems, from aging computers to a serious shortage of trained technicians, that have made it far too vulnerable to breakdowns, officials at the Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday.
At one point last May 19, the system's air traffic controllers, who work at the New York Center in Ronkonkoma, L.I., lost all radio contact with some highflying airplanes they were supposed to be directing because a Nynex technician inadvertently disconnected 29 telephone lines, according to a report released by the F.A.A.


Past Upstages Present at Venice Biennale
The centenary edition of the Venice Biennale opens to the public on Saturday, but the verdict is already in from many of the museum directors, curators, gallery owners, collectors and art critics who crowded the exhibition's three preview days: the past seems to be faring better than the present.
In the Giardini di Castello, the shaded gardens where 41 national pavilions are showing works by their own contemporary artists, only a handful of exhibitions appeared to stir much excitement, although those by the American video artist, Bill Viola, and the Australian photo artist, Bill Henson, were among them.


Insult to Veterans
To the Editor:
Your June 6 news article on disabled veterans fighting to regain the right to peddle in midtown Manhattan states that Thomas Cusick, Fifth Avenue Association president, "added that crime on Fifth Avenue has fallen 43 percent since the veterans' departure." He impugns the integrity of a class of citizens who patriotically and bravely served their nation.
JOHN L. BEHAN  Director, State of New York Division of Veterans' Affairs Albany, June 6, 1995


Judge Approves $1 Million Agreement in Sex Bias Case at C.I.A.
A Federal judge today approved an out-of-court settlement in a threatened sex discrimination case against the Central Intelligence Agency.
Judge Albert Bryan Jr. of Federal District Court rejected appeals by some of the plaintiffs, who are all women, that the $1 million to be paid by the agency was inadequate.
In his ruling the judge spared the C.I.A. the embarrassment of having allegations against it laid bare in open court.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS -- Unchilled Milk: Not Cool Yet; U.S. Proves to Be a Difficult Market for Parmalat
Domenico Barili delights in describing his visits to American supermarkets, where he discreetly watches shoppers examine his milk cartons.
"They'll pick them up, turn them in their hands with a puzzled look," he said, rotating an imaginary container in his fingers.
"But to say that milk can be preserved without refrigeration for six months -- then it can't be milk!"


Sisters Attacked During Robbery
Two elderly sisters were critically injured early this morning when two young men, both of them neighbors of the women, broke into their house, demanded money and beat them with a lead pipe, the police said.
The sisters, Elena and Matilda Napolitano, both in their 70's, were sleeping in the bedroom of their house at 13 Argyle Drive in Shirley, when the young men, who had been drinking vodka, entered the house through a window around 2 A.M., the police said.


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Case in Montclair Prompts Bills To Tighten Death Penalty Law
Two Congressmen from New Jersey introduced bills today that would tighten the Federal death penalty statute, responding to criticism of the law arising from the case against the man who killed four people at a post office in Montclair, N.J.
The legislation is intended to address what the United States Attorney for New Jersey, Faith S. Hochberg, said was a loophole in the current law that might have allowed the man who admitted the slayings, Christopher Green, to escape the death penalty.


Sports of The Times; Magic Needs Some Tough Knicks 'D'
ALL that was missing from these National Basketball Association finals earlier this week were league-licensed buttons that read: "Ban The Knicks." Who now will be the first to stand up to ask where have they gone?
Well, maybe not the Knicks themselves, but their defensive passion, their uncanny ability to squeeze, for better or worse, every last minute from a playoff series.


From a Wreck to a Fish Haven
"Big Mama," an 85-foot old tugboat, was blown up and sunk off the coast in 95 feet of water yesterday in hopes that it will become a feeding station for fish.
Like 80 other vessels that have been deliberately sunk in New Jersey waters since 1983, the wreck is supposed to attract sea bass, cod, bluefish, lobster, mussels and crabs.
But not everyone is convinced that this is a good idea.
"The only question is whether these artificial reefs are increasing (ocean) productivity or are simply making it easier to catch fish," said Dery Bennett, director of the American Littoral Society, a environmental organization.


World News Briefs; Conservatives Defeat Socialists in Ontario
The Progressive Conservative Party, promising tax and spending cuts and radical changes in social policy, have swept out the socialist New Democrats to take control of the provincial government in Ontario.
The comfortable majority for the Progressive Conservative leader, Mike Harris, in the election on Thursday wrenches Canada's richest and most populous province sharply to the right.


Crowd Control at Sentencing
Hoping for more order in the court, Federal Judge John C. Lifland agreed to a request by marshals to schedule two separate days for the sentencing of two city councilmen convicted of bribery.
When a jury returned the verdicts in March against Gary Harris and Ralph T. Grant Jr., the courtroom erupted with protests and sobs from their supporters, some of whom had to be escorted out.
"It's easier to control a crowd when it's split between two days," said Charles L. McNeal, the acting United States Marshal in Newark.
Mr.
Grant will be sentenced on June 26 and Mr.
Harris on July 6.


Emerson Radio Corp.(MSN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bagpipe Echoes Ride On Shinnecock Wind
To stand on the first tee at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, ocean wind at your back and all the rills, hills and thrills of the old course arrayed before you, is to feel the weight of golf history.
In the mind's eye you can see that breeze forming back in Scotland, maybe off Ailsa Craig or Bass Rock, then churning south and east, across the Atlantic, riding the foam until it boils ashore, home again.
There is a genuine sense of the auld sod at this special place where the 95th United States Open will be played this week.
You can breathe it, see it, touch it.
This is American golf with a heavy burr, an uncommon spot on the eastern end of Long Island that speaks pure golf.
From the stolid, understated elegance of the oldest clubhouse in America, standing for more than a century as a sentinel on the hill, to the sandy soil and the dunes on which the golf course sprawls, this is arguably the nearest thing to true Scottish links golf in America.


Children With Disabilities Get a Chance at Camping
Below an overcast sky, where the June sun fidgeted occasionally behind the mass of gray clouds, Charles Anthony Wells, 8, contemplated the strategy for his first attempt at fishing, on a pond at the Fresh Air Fund's Camp Hidden Valley.
"The bigger the bait, the bigger the fish," he reasoned.
And after two hours, Charles's approach had clearly paid off: he caught eight sunfish and bluegills, all of which he carefully released back into the pond.


At Ballet Theater, the Old and the New
AT THIS WRITING, I HAVE survived six American Ballet Theater performances of "Giselle," four of "La Bayadere" and two of "Romeo and Juliet." Unlike the paying public, which, as ticket sales prove, prefers such evening-long story ballets, I think there is something to be said for mixed bills.
Few in the audience, for instance, see the same three-hour work several days in a row.
It is a tribute to Ballet Theater's dancers that these touchstones of classical dancing always looked fresh.
The company's season at the Metropolitan Opera House -- it still has a week remaining -- has been lively, surprising and rich.
The programming has struck just the right artistic balance.


Saying Farewell to Roy Wingate
They gathered on Lenox Avenue under a hammering June sun, embracing one another in dark suits and broad-brimmed straw hats and trading memories about Livingston Leroy Wingate, the Harlem civic leader and retired State Supreme Court justice who died on May 30 at 79.
Some 400 people, including Representative Charles B. Rangel, former Mayor David N. Dinkins, former Manhattan Borough President Percy Sutton and the Rev.
Al Sharpton, filed into Mount Olivet Church to bow their heads to their friend.


Mara P. Tuohey and Tad Neafsey
Mara Picone Tuohey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
P.
Richard Tuohey of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Terence Edward Neafsey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Neafsey of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Kevin M. Smith performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Neafsey, 29, is an associate at Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, the New York law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the vice president and general counsel of John P. Picone Inc., a general contracting firm in Lawrence, L.I.


After Rao's Fire, A Sad Requiem, Good Memories
Nora Ephron came for the stuffed clams and roasted peppers with pignoli nuts.
Michael T. Fuchs came for the spirited atmosphere.
And Bo Dietl simply came, every Thursday, to sing along with Frank on the jukebox and smoke a Monte Cristo cigar.
They are among the intensely loyal, famous devotees of Rao's Restaurant on 114th Street and Pleasant Avenue who are mourning its destruction.
Rao's (pronounced RAY-ohz), which dates back to 1896, was gutted by fire last week.
City fire marshals said the blaze was deliberately set with flammable liquid, but said they have yet to come up with a motive or any suspects.
A similar fire was set at the restaurant last January.


Open Is a Day Late and Short on Thrills
Of the past 10 United States Open golf championships, five have required playoffs.
This reflects the depth of talent playing at the game's highest level and suggests there is a 50-50 chance that this year's championship at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club in Southampton, L.I., might end in a tie.
The odds on the subsequent playoff being a competitive -- or artistic -- dud are even better.
The reason is that the United States Golf Association insists that the Open playoff be a full 18 holes.
In the case of a tie, the tournament will not conclude on the last scheduled day with a sudden-death playoff.
And that's a pity.


COOKING
THERE are always those days when even someone who cooks reasonably well and regularly isn't up to it: no time, worn out, indecisive.
At times like those, all the old standbys come to mind with about as much life as a leftover souffle.
When I found myself hyperventilating through that syndrome not long ago, I turned to a batch of this season's new books, darting from the titles to the ingredient lists to the number and complexity of steps, silently imploring: Make it simple, please, and make it interesting, too.


Judith H. Itkin, Tony Benten
Judith Helene Itkin, a partner in the New York office of the Richmond law firm of Hunton &amp; Williams, was married yesterday to Robert Anthony Benten, a manager of finance and pension investments at The New York Times Company in New York.
The Rev.
Steven Yagerman, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse, a catering establishment in New York.
The bride, 34, graduated from the University of Virginia and received her law degree from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Rhona D. Itkin of Baltimore and Dr.
Allen Itkin of Sarasota, Fla., and Orange, N.J.
Her father is an oral and maxillo-facial surgeon in Orange.


More Sex Please, We're Russian
THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA  From the Age of the Czars to Today.
By Igor S. Kon.
Translated by James Riordan. 337 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $25.


Democrats Find Out Things Can Get Worse
FLANKED by his newly picked Democratic Party leaders, President Clinton stepped to the dais at the Washington Hilton Hotel in January and, taking some license with Mark Twain, proclaimed that the party was rising again after its disastrous beating of November.
"The reports of our demise are premature," he said.
Mr.
Clinton's comments, however soothing, were also premature.
Only the most discouraged Democrats believe their party has collapsed.
But as Democrats look to the 1996 campaign, many say that -- to their astonishment -- their prospects seem even worse than they did in the post-Election Day haze seven months ago.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
In the introduction to "Untold War Stories," (May 7), there is an intriguing reference to a 7-year-old boy in Oregon hearing unimaginable news on the radio of forest fires being set on American soil by incendiary balloons carried all the way from Japan.
Not only did such balloons ignite forest fires, they also randomly killed people.
My father owned a sawmill near Bly, Ore., and one of these devices killed a party of Sunday picnickers in the forest where we cut timber.
How these people -- three or four -- exactly died was never told; it is presumed they came across the bomb on the ground or hanging from a tree and it exploded.
My father gave me a piece of the balloon, which I still have, made of a sturdy, gray-colored paper.


A Correction: '95 BMW 740i


Miss Roberson And Mr. Gibson
Elizabeth de Villiers Roberson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Roberson of Newport News, Va., was married yesterday to Langhorne Gibson 3d, the son of Casa Huger Bacot of Lake Lure, N.C., and Mr.
Gibson Jr. of Richmond.
The Rev.
Alan E. Tilson performed the Anglican ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Hamilton Parish, Bermuda.
Mrs.
Gibson, 26, is an assistant fiduciary associate in the private banking group at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, as did the bridegroom, and received a law degree from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is a private investor in Newport News.
Mr.
Gibson, 27, is to become an associate in New York in the global capital markets unit of HSBC, the international banking corporation based in London.
He received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
His mother is an artist.
His father retired as the president of Craigie Inc., an investment bank in Richmond.


A Cozy Jewel in the Old World Tradition
THE smug diners at table X peeked out from their private alcove at Il Toscano to see whether they were being noticed.
What they saw was a restaurant filled with people who had equally self-satisfied looks.
And why not?
Il Toscano, a nine-year veteran nestled near the Douglaston railroad station, is a jewel.
And its customers know it.
Those who are interested in an especially cozy atmosphere can request table X, but everyone is fawned over in this snug, antique-filled restaurant.
It is like a trip to Tuscany without the flight delays.
There are beamed ceilings, old-fashioned lanterns, a flagstone wall, lace curtains, pictures of Florence and the Tuscan hills, rustic tools and copper pots on white stucco walls.


No Headline
"I decided to be cynical. What I've learned is, if I keep the door open just this much, they'll all show up. And I could teach. And they'll  actually cover it. They'll go: 'Ah-hah! This is a very sneaky way to run for  President."' SPEAKER NEWT GINGRICH, on his media strategy in New Hampshire.  [ 1:1. ]


Italian Referendum May Break Up Berlusconi's TV Interests
When Italians vote on Sunday in a referendum aimed at overhauling the shape of television in their country, former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and the media entrepreneur Rupert Murdoch will be watching intently.
The referendum has 12 questions, ranging from labor union laws to local governmental rules to the war against the Mafia.
But for Mr.
Berlusconi, whose Fininvest business empire owns all three of Italy's private television channels, the referendum is crucial because if voters approve three key questions, Fininvest will have to sell two of his channels.


Tamra A. Siegel, Scott P. Lichtman
Tamra Alison Siegel, the daughter of Claudine and Allen Siegel of Westport, Conn., is to be married today to Scott Philip Lichtman, the son of Sydelle and Jules Lichtman of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Paul Golomb is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 30, is an associate marketing manager at the Clorox Corporation in Oakland, Calif.
She graduated magna cum laude from Haverford College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Her father is the senior adviser to Concurrency Management, a real estate holding company in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother is the managing lawyer of the family unit at Connecticut Legal Services in Bridgeport.


Leave Isles Alone
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson makes a few interesting points in his recent column about the New Jersey Devils' threat to relocate to Nashville ("McMullen's High Stick a Low Blow," The Times, May 28).
However, his comment that the N.H.L. should promote the relocation of the Long Island franchise to Tennessee because their current attendance is below that of the Devils is ridiculous.


Mantle Out of Intensive Care
Mickey Mantle, recovering as well as doctors could hope from his emergency liver transplant, was shifted out of an intensive care unit at Baylor University Medical Center at about 11 A.M. today.
Describing the former Yankee slugger's condition as "serious but stable," Dr.
Goran Klintmalm, medical director of the Baylor Transplant Institute, said Mantle remained exhausted from his Thursday morning operation.
But, Klintmalm added, "The most acute danger seems to have passed."


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
Simon Small Moves In  Part of a Swedish film series for children at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan, Saturday, June 17.
Oskar Iorkvist Directed by Staffan Gotestam No rating 90 minutes In Swedish with English subtitles, with English narration available via headsets.


Words of Warning
To the Editor: There are some places where you simply shouldn't go.
The south of Italy is one of them.
The stories I had collected about Bari, Brindisi, etc., made me avoid these busy cities and go to Taranto instead, also in the south.
On the day I arrived, I was attacked by robbers and left for dead in the middle of the street.
An ambulance took me to a hospital, where I stayed for several days, without any money, documents, traveler's checks and,worst of all, without knowing who I was.
While I was in the hospital my rental car was vandalized, though it had been left in an enclosed parking lot.
Thank God for the kindness of strangers.
Delta, which brought me back home much earlier than my return date and without my original ticket, and Maiellano Tours in Staten Island, through which I had rented the car, behaved in the most decent manner.


Hamlets Draw Up Plans, Going to the Grassroots
WHEN residents of Mastic, Mastic Beach and Shirley were asked to become involved in a combined master plan for their communities in the fall they came out in record numbers, eager to spend hours discussing life in their hamlets and planning for the future.
They are putting the finishing touches on the plan and, like others before them, are hoping that their advice will be followed when the Town Board considers issues like zoning changes.


Before You Spray for Bugs . . .
THIS is about respect for insects.
They are starting to appear, and insects deserve at least a moment from gardeners to learn who they are before they are given a quick stomp with the shoe.
Granted, masses of some insects can do irreparable harm, yet there are many beneficial insects worth having around.
The onus is upon us to know the difference.
It should be noted that insects have their places in the scheme of things.
Insects are by far the most successful animals on earth and man would be nowhere without them.
This balance is finely tuned and troubles occur when things get out of kilter.


As Children Survive Cancer, They Confront New Problems
WHEN Jenna Leitman was 5 she was given a diagnosis of leukemia.
Now 8 and in remission, Jenna, a second grader in Roslyn Heights and an aspiring actress, said having cancer was frightening.
"It was hard because my hair fell out," she said.
"When I went back to school wearing a bandanna on my head one kid made fun of me and made me cry."


Q. &amp; A.
Difficulty Getting Insurance Q I own a two-story mixed-use building (one unoccupied apartment and one leased, occupied commercial store) in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, and I can't get insurance for it.
Are there any insurance companies willing to cover such a property? . . .
Victor Brown, Manhattan.
A "Absolutely," said Robert E. Mackoul, president of Mackoul &amp; Associates, an insurance agency in Lynbrook, L.I.
"But you've got to be ready to pay the premium that's going to be involved."
Generally, Mr.
Mackoul said, insurance premiums are determined by the amount of insurance sought and the degree of risk involved.
Difficulties in obtaining insurance arise when the risk is considered unacceptable.
And while it is not uncommon for some insurance companies to decline to insure properties they consider an unacceptable risk, there are usually other companies prepared to accept even significant risks -- for the right premium.
"There are probably insurance agents in the neighborhood who are familiar with the area and the buildings and who can find at least basic coverage," Mr.
Mackoul said.
In the event no agent can be found who will provide coverage, there is an "insurer of last resort."
The New York Property Insurance Underwriting Association, a not-for-profit organization, was created by the New York State Legislature in 1968 to provide a residual market for personal and commercial property insurance.
The association provides basic property insurance for fire, vandalism, malicious mischief, sprinkler leakage, loss of rent and business interruption.
The association does not provide liability coverage for personal injury.
Rates are usually higher than standard market rates.
Applications for insurance through the association can be obtained at most insurance agents' offices or at the association's office at 100 William Street in Manhattan.
Applicants should attempt to place coverage with three different companies before submitting an application.
Information: (212) 208-9700.
New Jersey and Connecticut have similar organizations that provide coverage when it is not available elsewhere.
Both are called FAIR Plans.
For information in Connecticut: (203) 528-9546; in New Jersey, (201) 622-3838.
Different Methods Of Appraisal Q In appraising real estate, what is the difference between appraising by capitalization, comparison and summation?
Which is best for residential property? . . .
Chieko Katagiri, Congers, N.Y.
A Neil Cherkosly, president of Upstate Appraisal Services, an appraisal company in Albany, said that there are three standard approaches for appraising real estate: cost, sales comparison, and income capitalization.
Summation is not an appraisal method.
An appraiser using the cost approach to determine the value of a property would calculate the construction cost of the building -- at current construction rates -- and then add to that figure the current value of the land and other improvements.
"In today's market," Mr.
Cherkosly said, "an appraisal made using the cost approach often exceeds the resale value of a particular property."
In the sales comparison approach, he said, the appraiser calculates the value of a property by comparing it to substantially similar properties that were either recently sold or are currently listed for sale.
Adjustments are then made to account for any dissimilarities that may exist between the properties being compared.
The income capitalization approach, Mr.
Cherkosly said, is typically used to appraise commercial property being purchased for investment purposes.
With that approach, he said, the value of a property is essentially determined by the property's ability to generate income.
The term "summation," he said, is not used to describe a single method of valuation, but describes a reconciliation of the differences between two or more valuation approaches to arrive at a final estimate of value.
For owner-occupied residential property, Mr.
Cherkosly said, the sales comparison approach is the most reliable indicator of value.


Noah E. Gotbaum, Carol A. Stiger
Carol Anne Stiger, a daughter of Comdr. and Mrs.
Henry B. Stiger of Cape Town, was married last evening in Manhattan to Noah Eliot Gotbaum, the son of Victor Gotbaum of Brooklyn and Dr.
Sarah C. Gotbaum of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Stiger, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a senior buyer in London for the House of Frasier, a department store company.
She received an M.B.A. from the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg.
Her father retired as the commander of the South African Navy Diving School in Simonstown.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Closely Watched Trains
Bridal gridlock occurred on a recent Saturday at the Conservatory Garden (above), at Fifth Avenue and 104th Street, when 16 bridal parties converged on the idyllic site with their entourages to be photographed.
Traditional styling was the order of the day, as 30 wedding parties were observed at city churches and parks.
Most popular were the richly embroidered romantic, full-skirted, off-the-shoulder necklines.
Many brides were accompanied by up to 16 attendants in matching dresses.
The second most popular was the slim-skirted style with back panel trains, and for less formal weddings, the simplicity of mini-dresses or bias-cut or ankle-length dresses.
The one unchanging element in this traditional styling was the chalk-white color.
Reaching for a more individual expression was a wedding party that mixed African-style motifs and fabrics like kente cloth with the traditional wedding dress (top right).
Another bride (lower right), at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, wore an 1870's bustle-style dress in the ivory hue popular in the Victorian period.


Just Call SID
THIS is a story about what it takes to fix the sidewalk, paint out graffiti, clean up a few public parks and pick trash off Atlantic City's streets.
In 1977, people thought the story would consist of three words: legalized casino gambling.


Commercial Property/Sublet Space; Conventional Ideas About Subleasing Are Changing
WHEN it comes to subleasing, three things have seemed almost axiomatic: Short-term sublets are unmarketable; landlords always see sublessors as competitors, not collaborators and sublet tenants only go for bargains.
Well, try to convince the Bank of Boston of the first.
It found two tenants to split 20,000 square feet that the bank had under lease for three more years at 2 Penn Plaza, at 33d Street.
One sublessee was opening its first New York office; the other was expanding.


Janis H. Moley And Jed McCarthy
Janis Helen Moley, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Moley of New York, was married yesterday to Richard Jed McCarthy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard McCarthy of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Birmingham performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
McCarthy is a nurse at Empire Mental Health Choice, a managed health care company in New York.
She graduated from the Columbia University School of Nursing.
Her father is a surgeon at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
The bride is the granddaughter of the late Raymond Moley, an adviser to and speechwriter for President Franklin D. Roosevelt who later became a columnist for Newsweek magazine.


Dabbling Dads
I WAS INTERVIEWING A HOLLYWOOD director over the phone when the subject of fatherhood came up.
The man has three kids himself, the youngest a baby.
He'd made his reputation making movies about kids and parents.
He knew I had children and knew I had spent the better part of the week playing phone tag with him, trying to arrange our interview around my toddler's nap time or nanny visits.
And while the director was ostensibly sympathetic, he had managed to mess me up twice, calling once at my daughter's bedtime.
I finally reached him at the end of a rather long and frantic day of chasing Franny.
"She's great," I told him, "but about as exhausting as anything I can think of."
"Yeah, but it's fun," he said somewhat insistently.
"The rewards far outweigh the insanity."
Right, pal, I wanted to say.
Maybe I'd be more enthusiastic if I'd spent the day overseeing the editing of my next multimillion-dollar motion picture.
Instead I had been running around a Brooklyn park trying to convince my 20-month-old not to lick rainwater off a picnic table.
This was more than mere envy.
Unlike our friend the auteur, I'm an all-day dad.
My wife works full time and I freelance from home.
My parenting is not confined to weekends and quality time and "baby-sitting," as some men put it.
Mine is the full-throttle, sunrise-to-sunset experience most dads never know, though some pretend to.
These pretenders are what I call Gentlemen Fathers.
A gentleman farmer is someone who doesn't have to farm the land he owns and generally pays someone else to do it for him.
He likes to get his hands dirty occasionally though, and he really likes to act the part.
A gentleman farmer is to farmers what Martha Stewart is to homemakers.
A gentleman father, similarly, doesn't have to take care of his kids.
He has a wife or a nanny to take care of the children while he works.
But like the gentleman farmer, the gentleman father savors the role, and plays to the balcony when in character.
He can usually be seen on weekends carrying his wee one around in a state-of-the-art baby backpack and declaiming his intentions in a loud stage voice: "Do you want to go see the squirrel? Daddy will take you to see the squirrel because he loves you very, very much."
Unlike many of our fathers, today's gentleman father is not afraid to change a poopy diaper and talk to you about it at length using all his descriptive powers.
The gentleman father defers to no one in the area of his child's health -- or any child's health, for that matter.
Like the Russian babushkas, who are famous for hectoring strangers on the street, the gentleman father won't hesitate to tell you that your child should really be wearing a hat or that the muffin you're feeding her is filled with sugar.
As a species, the gentleman father is usually in his late 30's to early 40's.
He is a man who put off having children until he found the right mate, or became a senior partner, or finally wearied of trying to nail every girl he met.
He is determined to be identified as a father -- carrying his child's toys at arm's length, so you won't think that Elmo doll belongs to him.
In his spare moments -- when his child falls asleep in his stroller, say -- he can be seen scribbling notes on his experience for the fatherhood book he is writing.
A glance in a bookstore's remainder bin reveals a cottage industry of books about being a father.
As long as writers can impregnate women (something most used to strive not to do) they will write books about it.
Bob Greene, Dan Greenburg, Steve Chapple, each has found his experiences as parent worthy of publication.
Not that there's anything new about writers writing up every aspect of their personal lives.
Everything is fair game: adoption, adultery, alcoholism.
But what has appalled many mothers (and this father) is the presumption of novelty.
"So you've changed a diaper," they complain.
"Talk to me when you've changed a thousand." HE BACKLASH TOO, IS NOT NEW; in 1979 Dustin Hoffman won an Oscar for his role as a martyr dad in "Kramer vs. Kramer." Millions wept as Dusty transformed himself from a workaholic absentee parent to a caring, voice-cracking, French-toast-making earth father.
And while some women objected, it seems that moviegoers -- including many women -- wanted to believe that within each obtuse father is a caring, sharing, nurturing mensch dying to play patty-cake.
The stance has even become politically correct; "I want to spend more time with my family" has become the excuse du jour when someone is squeezed out of a studio or board room and wants to save face.
But what burns me about the gentleman father is the self-righteousness with which he greets any expressions of frustration about the child-caring experience.
To hear another man say that his kids are driving him crazy seems to the gentleman father an act of treason; it's not supposed to be work, he seems to be saying, it's supposed to be fun, fulfilling, rewarding.
But who said fulfilling experiences shouldn't be difficult, that fun would not be leavened with frustration?
In a culture where Forrest Gump seems like a role model and Barney the dinosaur has to tell kids to use their imaginations (as redundant, to my mind as Joycelyn Elders's proposed masturbation instruction) I think it is important to remember that rewarding does not mean painless and that expressions of insanity are better than going insane.
At the end of a long day with Franny, when I'm exhibiting what war survivors call the 1,000-yard stare, I am in a state of solidarity with any full-time parent, and in empathy (I now realize) with my own mother, who raised three kids by herself.
And I know as she did that as discombobulating as kids can be, all is forgiven when they wrap their arms around you or give you a smile.
As hard won as that bit of wisdom sometimes seems, it is not unique or brilliant; I don't even know what I can do with it.
Write a book, maybe.


3 Countries Join to Lure Visitors to the Sinai
ISRAEL, Jordan and Egypt have begun plans to tap the tourism potential of the Sinai and the Red Sea, with its pristine reefs, vast stretches of desert and gleaming white beaches.
The plans, still in the preliminary stage, call for improved transportation links, tour packages that include stops in all three countries, jointly managed wildlife areas and streamlined customs procedures.
Israel and Jordan signed a transport agreement on May 10 to allow vehicles to cross their common border.
The agreement also calls for cooperation between the two national carriers, Royal Jordanian and El Al Israel Airlines.


A Postman, a Poet, an Actor's Farewell
IN "IL POSTINO" ("THE POST-man"), Massimo Troisi, one of Italy's most beloved comic actors, plays a simple postman who steers his bicycle along the sandy terrain of the Italian Mediterranean coast to deliver mail to his sole client, the Nobel Prize-winning poet Pablo Neruda.
The film, directed by Michael Radford, is the first work of Troisi's to be distributed in America.
And this bittersweet fictional tale has a real-life tragic ending: Troisi, 41, born with congenital heart problems, fell gravely ill during the filming of the movie, enabling him to work for only an hour a day.
He died of a heart attack last June, the day after "Il Postino" was finished shooting.


SUNDAY, June 11, 1995; CUISINE: French Toast, the Sequel
In New York, cooking trends know no bounds.
Even French toast is not safe: witness the following sampling of nouvelle toasts, with prices and perps (chefs):
Hawaiian sweet bread French toast stuffed with guava jam and served with Portuguese sausage; Geoffrey Murray, Boom; $10.
Organic cinnamon hallah bread French toast with a maple-berry sauce (dairy and egg free); Jeanette Maier, Herban Kitchen; $7.25.


Rest Stops, Memorials and Plates: Trenton Considers Them All
A handful of recent proposals that have been introduced in the Senate and Assembly that would affect how New Jerseyans get from one place to another.
For these measures to beome law, the Legislature would have to approve them before the session ends in January.
NO CHARGE -- Senator Joseph L. Bubba, a Republican, is the sponsor of a bill that would guarantee that drivers won't have to pay a quarter to put air in their tires at the service station; presumably the same would apply to children on bikes.
NAMING REST STOPS -- A bill would require rest stops on state highways to be named for state troopers killed in the line of duty.
Had it been enacted this year, Governor Whitman might have avoided the fuss that erupted after she named a rest stop after Howard Stern.
ROADSIDE MEMORIALS -- Some members of the Legislature want to put signs along state highways as memorials to people killed in accidents caused by drunken drivers.
The signs would be placed close to the site of the accident and would warn against drinking and driving.
SPECIAL PLATES -- Think you've seen every special license plate imaginable?
There are 38 bills pending that would allow new plate designations for everything from the Great Falls in Passaic to shade trees and forests.
LIGHTS ON -- Under a bill sponsored by Assemblywoman Clare M. Farragher, a Republican, and known as the Dead Battery Bill, drivers would be required to keep their headlights on at all times.
The current requirement is for drivers to use their headlights from 30 minutes before sunset until 30 minutes after sunrise.
BIKE TO THE TRAIN -- An Assembly bill would require New Jersey Transit to provide space on trains to store the bicycle, except during rush hours.
The catch is, they could charge a fee for the storage.
HELMETS -- Those whose wheels are limited to skateboards and Rollerblades would not be free from the watchful eye of the Legislature.
A bill sponsored by Assemblyman John V. Kelly, a Republican, would require anyone under 18 to wear a helmet, knee pads, elbow pads, and wrist and palm guards.
The bill also would require bicyclists under the age of 18 to wear helmets; currently, anyone under 14 must wear a helmet.
KAREN DEMASTERS


The World; Bad News They Can Manage
EVER since the traumatic televised spectacle of a dead American helicopter crewman being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu, the "Somalia syndrome" has been a prime worry of governments mired or trying to stay unmired in Bosnia.
Lately the United States, France and Britain have taken different approaches to managing the risks posed by troubling media coverage of soldiers doing what soldiers are paid to do -- stand in harm's way.
Consider how the United States dealt with the shooting down of Air Force Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady before his dramatic rescue last week, and how Britain and France have coped with the embarrassment of the Bosnian Serbs taking many of their soldiers hostage this month (more than half of the nearly 400 have since been freed).


The Urban Gollfer
With its verdant fairways and stately trees, Van Cortlandt Golf Course in the northwest Bronx shimmers like a slice of summertime heaven.
But here, as on the city's dozen other municipal courses, heaven comes with a decidedly New York inflection.
Korean grocers arrive before sunrise to get in a round before work, Spanish (including appropriate curse words) is common, and one of the many clubs within the club is made up of black golfers.
Homeless people live in a tunnel they have furnished that connects the second and third fairways, and neighborhood children sometimes dart onto the 16th fairway to steal balls.
Tournaments are both frequent and maniacal: outings sponsored by nearby Irish bars are outdone only by the police and firefighters' get-togethers, which sometimes degenerate into games of bumper carts.


She Knows How to Combine Innocence With Sensuality
WHEN DARCEY BUSSELL, the long-limbed star of Britain's Royal Ballet, made her first guest appearance with the New York City Ballet in June 1993, Anna Kisselgoff, chief dance critic for The New York Times, wrote: "The program will always be remembered for the astonishingly sensuous performance that Darcey Bussell . . . drew out of the familiar pas de deux from 'Agon.' . . . There is nothing like sex appeal to set an audience roaring."
When reminded recently of this reaction, Ms.
Bussell said in her laid-back English drawl that she had been unaware of the mounting excitement until the end of her performance.
"Then I thought, 'Gosh, all that applause just for a pas de deux.' "


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about executives' popularity as commencement speakers misstated the relationship of Richard D. Parsons, the president of Time Warner Inc., to Howard University.
Mr.
Parsons is a trustee of Howard, not an alumnus.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center's decision to move its administrative offices from 410 East 62d Street misidentified a gas found in the building.
It was carbon monoxide, not carbon dioxide.


Zoilo Versalles, 55, Shortstop Who Was Mr. Baseball in 1965
Zoilo Versalles, the slick-fielding, Cuban-born shortstop who led the Minnesota Twins to their first American League pennant in 1965 and became the first Latin American player to be named most valuable player, was found dead at his home in suburban Bloomington, Minn., on Friday.
He was 55.
After an inconclusive autopsy yesterday, a spokesman for the county medical examiners office in Minneapolis said lab tests had been ordered to determine the cause of death.


How to Act Like a Bat
It paid off for Bela Lugosi and Michael Keaton.
And starting next Saturday, visitors to the Field Museum in Chicago can try acting like a bat.
Among other things, "Masters of the Night: The True Story of Bats" is an exhibition that allows humans to hear like bats, fly like bats and even hang upside down.
It also dispels myths about the creatures and explains their ecological benefits.
The entrance is a neo-Gothic portal leading to a room of bat folklore, all displayed upside down.
Live fruit bats have been brought in from the Dominican Republic, too.
Admission to the exhibition, which runs to Sept. 4, is $3, plus the museum admission of $5 (free on Wednesdays).
The museum, on Lake Shore Drive at Roosevelt Road, is open 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily; (312) 922-9410.
JOSEPH SIANO


INSIDE
Progress in Korea Talks
The United States and North Korea have reached tentative understandings aimed at carrying out an accord to halt the North's suspected nuclear weapons program.
Page 4.
Depending on City Hospitals
Like the factories that once brought middle-class stability to today's poor neighborhoods, New York City's public hospital system has evolved into an economic engine.
Page 37.
A Trainer's Triple Crown
Kentucky Derby winner Thunder Gulch took the Belmont, giving trainer D. Wayne Lukas the triple crown.
Section 8.
The race ended too late for some copies of SportsSunday.


U.S. May Send More Radar-Jamming Jets to Hinder the Serbs
Seeking to increase protection for NATO war planes patrolling the skies over Bosnia, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said yesterday that the United States might soon send more radar-jamming aircraft to the region.
Adm.
Leighton Smith, the commander of North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in Southern Europe, is expected to submit his recommendations in the next day or two, Mr.
Perry told reporters traveling with him from a two-day NATO meeting in Brussels.


Rating Funds for Fun, But Not for Profit
A SEEMINGLY surefire way for a financial magazine to jump off the newsstands is to put a mutual fund headline on its cover and a comprehensive rating of funds inside.
The ratings, which usually appear once or twice a year, are often used by investors to whittle their choices from the more than 5,000 funds on the market.
But are these rankings reliable guides for fund investors?


Ireland Urges Britain to Free I.R.A. Prisoners
Prime Minister John Bruton has urged Prime Minister John Major of Britain to allow the early release of some of the 600 Irish Republican Army prisoners held in British jails.
Mr.
Bruton, in a brief meeting with Mr.
Major in Paris, where both were attending a dinner given by President Jacques Chirac, said Friday night on Irish national television that he had told Mr.
Major that "the time is now for the release of paramilitary prisoners." He did not report Mr.
Major's reaction.


June 4-10: A Hollywood Tale; The Guy Who Passed Up $250 Million a Year
Maybe you wouldn't reject a money package of at least $250 million.
But Michael Ovitz, the most powerful agent in the entertainment business, did last week.
The offer was to run the entertainment giant MCA Inc. for its new owner, Edgar Bronfman Jr.
Mr.
Ovitz's rejection was a surprise, with friends saying money was not the major issue. (One issue was how much control and independence he would retain; another was his apparent ambivalence about leaving Creative Artists Agency, which he built into a powerhouse).


Hecht's 2 Sides: Pariah and Humorist
BEN HECHT's beat as a newspaper reporter was defined by the slums and saloons of Chicago before Prohibition.
He also covered hangings in America and revolutions in Berlin.
Once he turned to short stories, Mencken discovered him.
And it was no surprise that the language of ax murderers, harlots and bookies shot through the writings that followed, fiction and non, plays and polemics.
When Hecht was brought up on obscenity charges -- the exhibit was fiction -- Darrow defended him.
In his career as a "brilliant bad boy," Ben Hecht (1894 to 1964), who leapt into the big time as a playwright and screenwriter, knew everybody.
But fame won was purposefully lost to infamy.


You're Out! Clean Out Your Office! Now for Some Nice Parting Gifts
WANT to make big money?
Land a top corporate job.
Want to make really big money?
Be dismissed from one.
The evidence is irrefutable.
J.
P.
Bolduc is ousted as chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company -- and gets a $20 million going-away present, $5 million more than his contract required.
Joseph E. Antonini, forced out as Kmart's chief executive, walks with a $3 million severance package, even though the company performed poorly during his tenure.
Robert J. Morgado, the former head of the Warner Music Group, will get between $50 million and $75 million for agreeing to a forced sayonara last month, according to a company executive.
And Connie Chung, removed as co-anchor on the CBS Evening News amid lackluster ratings, is likely to get a $2 million payout.


When Some of Your Best Friends Are Insects
THIS is about respect for insects.
They are starting to appear, and insects deserve at least a moment from gardeners to learn who they are before they are given a quick stomp with the shoe.
Granted, masses of some insects can do irreparable harm, yet there are many beneficial insects worth having around.
The onus is upon us to know the difference.
It should be noted that insects have their places in the scheme of things.
Insects are by far the most successful animals on earth and man would be nowhere without them.
This balance is finely tuned and troubles occur when things get out of kilter.


20 Years of Art in a City Without Walls
DURING its 20-year career, City Without Walls, here, has moved from a Benedictine monastery on Shipman Street to a funky setup on Halsey Street and finally into the smoothly run storefront operation at 1 Gateway Center.
Yet, for all the changes, which include the vast exhibition space recently made available to the gallery by Seton Hall University, at 1 Newark Center, City Without Walls still lives up to its subtitle -- to wit, An Urban Gallery of New Art And Artists.
The proof is in the current anniversary celebration devised by the director, Stephen Sennott, and divided between the two centers.
In the brochure accompanying this double header, Mr.
Sennott explains that instead of attempting a "best-of" selection, he combed the gallery's slide registry, billed as the largest of its kind in the state.
The result is a small work by 30 artists at Gateway, larger efforts by 10 artists at Seton Hall.


Where Dining And Dancing Fill a Need
Spring benefits for children, the elderly and a museum, June 5.


This Time, Krone Gets Plaudits From Zito
Five Saturdays ago in Kentucky, Nick Zito was furious enough with Julie Krone's ride on Suave Prospect to consider ruling her out for any future triple crown races.
Yesterday at Belmont, Krone went a long way toward erasing that unhappy memory.
Just another day in the life of horse racing's most combustible couple.


...and Then There Were 2
SURELY, when Americans talk about the need to shrink government, this can't be what they have in mind.
For the first time in its 61-year history, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Government agency responsible for safeguarding trillions of dollars of investors' money, may operate with only two commissioners, both Democrats.


Composers Come Calling, Leaving Scores and Trinkets
ON THE WALL OF AN EXHIBITION ROOM at the Pierpont Morgan Library is a framed assortment of composers' visiting cards, simple rectangular slips of stiff paper with names imprinted.
One is a relic of a visit by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov; another, in impossibly florid script, announces Franz Liszt.
A short note by Igor Stravinsky is scribbled around the stern lettering of his name.
My favorite card is Franz Joseph Haydn's, used when he had achieved the status of elder statesman; alongside his name is a melody from one of his songs: "Gone is all my strength,/ old and weak am I." What an endearingly bold proclamation of humility and mortality!
These cards are part of a new exhibition, "Auld Acquaintances," which draws from an imposing collection of musical scores and objects assembled over the last 65 years by James J. Fuld, a lawyer, and acquired recently by the library.
The Morgan is already home to important collections of autograph manuscripts, but this acquisition is different.
Its 10,000 items include the largest private collection of first editions of musical scores in the world, along with posters, recordings, programs, piano rolls, medals, bookplates, librettos, tickets, stamps, batons, porcelain objects and, in Mr.
Fuld's words, "other ephemera of historical note."


Habitats/50 Hamilton Terrace; Moving From the Village to Harlem
AS a barefoot child, Peggy Scott Hammond sat on the delightful gingerbread-decorated porches of the little Victorian houses in Oak Bluffs, part of the historic African-American summer colony on Martha's Vineyard Island off the Massachusetts coast.
She remembers gazing with awe at the elegant pastel-colored linen dresses and finely tailored suits of the men and women who stayed in the gingerbread cottages.


Natalie Coe and Eduardo Llanos
Natalie Coe, a daughter of Dr.
Michael D. Coe of New Haven and the late Dr.
Sophie D. Coe, was married on Friday to Eduardo Llanos Ruiz, a son of Efraim Llanos and Maria Ruiz of Santiago de Cuba, Cuba.
Olga Lidia Perez Diaz, a notary and a lawyer at the International Legal Consultancy, a department of the Cuban Government, performed the ceremony at La Maison, a tourist complex in Havana.
Ms.
Coe, 26, is keeping her name.
She is the translations editor at Prensa Latina, the Cuban Government news agency, in Havana.
She received a bachelor's and master's degrees in philosophy, politics and economics from Oxford University.
Her father retired as the Charles J. MacCurdy Professor of Anthropology at Yale University in New Haven.
He is also an author, whose works include "Breaking the Maya Code." Her mother was a culinary anthropologist and author of "America's First Cuisines."


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with the Behind the Wheel column in the Automobiles section was outdated.
It depicted a 1994 BMW 740i, not a 1995 model.
A correct picture appears on the first page of the section today.


Convicting Cali's Drug Boss May Be as Hard as Arresting Him
It took months of effort and a massive manhunt to capture Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, the leader of the Cali cocaine cartel who was arrested Friday and immediately rushed to a maximum-security prison here.
But if experience is any guide, gaining a court conviction that will keep him in jail for the next 30 years may prove just as difficult.
Twice before, the Colombian authorities have held Mr.
Rodriguez, 56, a former pharmacist who is also wanted in the United States.
Each time he was able to use his wealth and a battery of lawyers to gain his freedom, helping earn him the nickname "El Ajedrecista" -- "The Chess Player."


With Tents and Tees, Shinnecock Is Ready for U.S. Open
SOUTHAMPTON and its neighboring East End communities have had five years to prepare for the United States Open Golf Championship, which arrives tomorrow at the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club.
When the tournament ends next Sunday, they have promised to undo in two weeks what it has taken years to put into place: equipment for 25,000 spectators a day, communications centers for hundreds of reporters, landscaping, signs and even a footbridge spanning County Road 39 to keep traffic flowing for what is expected to be the largest spectator event ever held in the area.


Thunder Gulch, Only No. 2, Brings Lukas a Triple
With his star, Timber Country, back in the barn recovering from a virus, the trainer D. Wayne Lukas marched into the racing record books yesterday when his other colt, Thunder Gulch, won the 127th Belmont Stakes by two lengths after a tingling duel down the homestretch with Nick Zito's Star Standard.
Lukas became the first trainer ever to win five straight triple crown races, which he did with three horses, and the first to sweep the triple crown with two horses: the absent Timber Country, who won the Preakness three weeks ago, and Thunder Gulch, who won the Kentucky Derby five weeks ago.


Amazon Indians' Battle for Land Grows Violent
In a palm-thatched classroom in this remote Amazon town in northern Brazil, the Indian students softly sang a new anthem whose words were composed to send chills down the spines of neighboring white ranchers.
"Let's fight to get demarcation -- we want our land," the Macuxi Indian students sang, slowly but firmly arcing their arms overhead to embrace an Amazon homeland of dusty savannah and rocky hills.
The area they claim stretches over an area larger than Connecticut.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Let's Think About What We're Doing in Bosnia
To the Editor:
Everyone agrees that the situation in Bosnia is a mess.
But although there is disagreement on how we got there, some argue that we recognized Bosnia before it was clear that the Government had control and was supported by the people.
This was contrary, for example, to British tradition, and contrasts with the United States delay of 17 years recognizing the Soviet Union (in 1935).


Japanese Know How to Insult the Police
To the Editor:
As a Japanese national I was amused and annoyed after reading "A Neighborly Style of Police State" (Week in Review, June 4), in which police are seen as respected civil servants performing their duties with cheerful alacrity.


Bookshelf
WHAT A WONDERFUL WORLD.
By George David Weiss and Bob Thiele.
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan.
Atheneum. $16. (Ages 4 to 8) The words to the still-popular song associated with Louis Armstrong are exuberantly illustrated in a large-format book featuring a small puppet of Armstrong and a chorus of cheerful children.
Sing along.


Houston Heeds Signal From Ground Control
Rudy Tomjanovich smelled trouble.
It's a sixth sense that good coaches have.
The Houston Rockets looked too confident, too relaxed at their morning workout before Game 2 of the National Basketball Association finals.
So Tomjanovich did something he often does.
He took a chance.
He gave the team a severe tongue-lashing in a situation where it could have backfired.
The mood changed.
The bus was quiet on the way back to the hotel.
And when the Rockets returned to Orlando Arena, they took care of business in a big way, whipping the Magic, 117-106, to take a 2-0 lead in the series.


Avoiding Animal House
To the Editor:
The Your Home column on April 28, "Avoiding Animal House," brought back frightening memories of thundering footsteps in our attic early one July 4 morning many years ago.
This mysterious pounding proved to be the movement of three or four dozen squirrels who had taken up housekeeping in the attic insulation.


Village Fight Leaves 1 Dead and 2 Injured
One nightclub employee was shot to death and another employee and a patron were seriously wounded early yesterday during a shooting inside a Greenwich Village nightclub, the police said.
Sgt.
Sean Crowley, a police spokesman, said that the shooting occurred at the Rock Ridge nightclub, at 179 Varick Street at Charlton Street, after several people began to fight.


Dr. Marion, Ms. Rutledge-Parisi
Allison Rutledge-Parisi, a daughter of Anne Rutledge of Gainesville, Fla., and Dr.
Peter Parisi of Bayville, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
James Francis Marion, a son of Irene Marion of Orange, Calif., and the late Robert Marion.
The Rev.
Tim Forbess, a Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Eagles Mere, Pa.
The bride, 32, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University.
She will be a third-year law student at Columbia University in the fall.
She has worked as an actress in television, theater and film, and she played Jane, one of the debutantes in the 1990 film "Metropolitan."


Meadows Need Wetlands, Not More Malls and Hotels
To the Editor:
In his Jersey column (May 21), David Corcoran says the Hackensack Meadowlands have been saved.
They have not.
There has been some progress, but huge and inappropriate projects are still planned.
Who needs them?
In Carlstadt, for instance, a mini-city would include yet another shopping mall, two hotels (in addition to the 15 hotels and motels that already exist in the meadowlands, not to mention the 600-room hotel proposed for Allied Junction in Secaucus) and three million square feet of office space (though office space is begging for tenants all over North Jersey).


THE DIGERATI!
Your article is so "Gutenberg" in that, with all that print, it doesn't give the U.R.L. (universal resource locator) of the Hotwired home page.
Had it done so, a cool million of us could have been looking at what Metcalfe, Rossetto and Company have up on the Net, while reading Keegan's befuddled view of Wired's world.


Correction
A picture caption on May 28 about "Gallery Beat," a public-access cable television program in New York, misidentified an artist whose work was shown being filmed by a video crew.
The artist is Rona Pondick, not Marcus Harvey.
The gallery showing the work, a sculpture titled "I Want," was also misidentified.
It is Jose Freire Fine Arts, in SoHo, not the Tanya Bonakdar Gallery.


East Is: (a)West (b)North (c)I Don't Know
AS we began a drive from Princeton, N.J., to Portland, Me., one morning last month, my wife, Judy, cheerfully asked, "On the way, why don't we stop off in Buffalo and see the Whites?"
"If we can arrange an airlift," I replied.
"Honey, Buffalo is nowhere near our route to Maine."


Ms. Greweldinger and Mr. Probst
Christina Barbara Greweldinger, the daughter of Dr.
Jutta E. Greweldinger of Demarest, N.J., and Eric L. P. Greweldinger of Antwerp, Belgium, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Tristan Ernest Propst, a son of Judge Floyd E. Propst 3d and Dr.
Laurie Probst of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Steffey Morrow, a Methodist minister who is associate dean of Princeton University Chapel and of religious life at the university, performed the ceremony at the chapel.
Mrs.
Probst, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from Princeton, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.
They are students at Tulane University, where she is studying for a medical degree and he is a candidate for a joint law degree and M.B.A.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  PIPELINE TO BOSNIAN SERBS  Even as the West courts Serbia's President in hopes of bringing peace to Bosnia, his military is secretly continuing to deliver assistance to the Bosnian Serbs.  1  CAPTAIN O'GRADY'S ORDEAL  At his first news conference since his rescue, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady described how he survived for six days in a Bosnian forest, hiding by day and never sleeping for more than half an hour at a time.  1


Spicy Business
THE INVENTION OF CURRIED SAUSAGE By Uwe Timm.
Translated by Leila Vennewitz. 217 pp.
New York: New Directions. $19.95.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Fullerton Wins College Series
The all-America sophomore Mark Kotsay hit two home runs and drove in five runs today to lead top-seeded Cal State Fullerton (57-9) to the College World Series championship with an 11-5 victory over sixth-seeded Southern Cal (49-21) at Omaha yesterday.
Fullerton starter Ted Silva (18-1) carried a 7-5 lead to the eighth, when Kotsay came on in relief for the final five outs.
Silva scattered six hits in adding to his nation-leading and school-record victory total. (AP) GOLF  Love Keeps Kemper Open Lead With a 71
A par round of 71 was good enough to keep Davis Love 3d atop the Kemper Open leader board yesterday in Potomac, Md.
Love had three birdies and three bogeys to finish the third round at 11-under 202, one shot ahead of Payne Stewart and two in front of Corey Pavin. (AP)


Unfashionable Guys
BIG AS LIFE  Stories About Men.
By Rand Richards Cooper. 323 pp.
New York: The Dial Press.


Anitra E. Ingalls, David A. Hyde
Anitra Eiding Ingalls, a daughter of Joan Stueve Ingalls of New York and John Taft Ingalls, of Juneau, Alaska, was married yesterday to David Alexander Hyde, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Don L. M. Hyde of Victoria, British Columbia.
The Rev.
Pam Kittredge, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Golden Hind Farm in Madaket, on Nantucket Island, Mass.
The couple graduated from Reed College.


Privatizing Can Be a Spur To Government Workers
To the Editor:
Regarding your May 28 On Politics column and the article "Privatization: Leaner Government, or Just Another Fad?": I become nervous when public officials speak of privatization.
The goal shouldn't be simply to move government programs into private hands but to find the most efficient and cost-effective way to provide a particular service.
In many places around the country, notably Indianapolis, competition in the form of privatization has forced government bureaucrats to work more efficiently to keep their jobs.
It should happen in New Jersey.


THE LONELINESS OF BEING WHITE
If Matt Geiger thinks that spending his time with black men who are all nearly seven feet tall, attended college on full scholarships and earn, on average, $1.6 million a year gives him "an understanding of what it means to be black" in America, it's very white of him to say so.
BRUCE NEWMAN Los Angeles


The Blockhead's Final Bow?
For 15 years, the Sideshows by the Seashore and the Coney Island Museum, on the Boardwalk at West 12th Street, have offered the boardwalk stroller a chance to see the very last "10-in-1" sideshow in the country.
There are an escape artist and a snake charmer and eight other acts, including Mike Wilson, "The World's Most Heavily Tattooed Man," and "The Human Blockhead," who promises to bang nails into his head and "live to laugh and joke about it."
But the sword swallower may well be on the unemployment line this summer, and the Human Blockhead may have to find work in the construction business.
Arts funds were withdrawn, the lease has expired and the museum owes $20,000 in rent and is being evicted.


THE DIGERATI!
Wired should be mandatory reading, particularly for stock analysts.
America's driving industrial force is no longer the heavy industries.
It is Silicon Valley, Redmond, Wash., and all the rest of the cyberspace world.


Debra Goodman, Jeffrey Feinstein
Debra Lynn Goodman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl L. Goodman of Potomac, Md., was married last evening to Jeffrey Lewis Feinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Feinstein of New York.
Rabbi Bruce Lustig performed the ceremony at The Ritz-Carlton Hotel in McLean, Va.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25, work for Bed, Bath and Beyond, the home furnishings chain.
She is a customer service representative in Rockville, Md.; he is an area manager in Columbia, Md.
The bridegroom's father is the president and chief executive of the company, which has its headquarters in Springfield, N.J.


Grand Potentate Of Jazz
THERE ARE FEW POOLS IN WHICH THE JAZZ impresario George Wein has not fished in the process of building an empire.
Mr.
Wein, 69, who both founded the JVC Jazz Festival and organized 25 similar events worldwide, has been the single most powerful figure jazz has ever seen.
And if he is not the force that he was a decade ago, it may well be a result of his own proselytizing.
Using his ideas, others have usurped some of the ground he once held.
Power often breeds selfishness, but Mr.
Wein has avoided its traps.
He has spent most of his career working for the good of the music.
One may agree or disagree with his notion of what constitutes jazz and his occasional wily attempts to co-opt critics.
But through his presence in New York and the world, he has consistently kept jazz in view as an important, culturally significant form of entertainment. (The centerpiece of his efforts, the 10-day JVC Jazz Festival, opens in New York on June 23.)


Florida on Horseback
Royal Palm Tours of Fort Myers, Fla., conducts nine-day horseback tours in Florida, with overnight stays in beachfront resorts, rural motels and a golf resort.
Riders of all levels can participate, and those who easily get saddle-sore can finish out the day's travel in a van.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FIDDLING CELEBRATION
Today marks the 20th year that the yearly Fiddling Celebration has been held at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River.
Lovers of country-western, bluegrass, Cajun, Appalachian folk and many other varieties of music obtained by applying bow to strings will gather from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. for a heavy dose of mostly fiddle music.
Headliners are among the best fiddle bands and solo fiddlers in the country, including Matt Glaser, who has developed an unusual jazz fiddling style since his appearance at the first Fiddling Celebration when he was 17.


Travels With Fido
A lot of dogs suffer separation anxiety (and so do their owners) when vacation time arrives.
No need for that, according to the May/June issue of Doggone, the newsletter of canine travel.
It lists camps across the country that dogs and their owners can go to together.
There's one in Putney, Vt., for example, offering agility and obedience lessons as well as costume parades for four-leggers.
A seven-day camp in the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains of Southern California is another.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the Lumiere Ballet Company misstated the location of the dancer at the left and misidentified the dancer in the middle.
The dancers were, from the left, George Wright, Ventzislav Petrov and Marissa Freeman.
The founder of the company, Svetlana Caton-Noble, was in the foreground.


The Eminent Bloomsberry
LYTTON STRACHEY  The New Biography.
By Michael Holroyd.
Illustrated. 780 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.


Feasting on Tapas Around Madrid
THE tapeo is to Madrid what the pub crawl is to Dublin.
A ramble from one tapas bar to another follows a late-afternoon stroll, or paseo, almost as surely as night follows day -- though it is in no way limited to evenings.
Madrilenos eat all day, as whim moves them, and tapas bars are often their watering holes of choice.
For foreigners having difficulty adjusting to Madrid's late hours, the tapeo offers a welcome way to fill the gap before a fashionable 10 P.M. dinner reservation or as an outright substitute for a meal.


Paying Flowers A Visit
The Botanical Garden's Spring Dance, June 8.


Before You Spray Those Insects...
THIS is about respect for insects.
They are starting to appear, and insects deserve at least a moment from gardeners to learn who they are before they are given a quick stomp with the shoe.
Granted, masses of some insects can do irreparable harm, yet there are many beneficial insects worth having around.
The onus is upon us to know the difference.
It should be noted that insects have their places in the scheme of things.
Insects are by far the most successful animals on earth and man would be nowhere without them.
This balance is finely tuned and troubles occur when things get out of kilter.


Racial Remarks at Rutgers Prompt Plan, and Criticism
Extended protests at Rutgers University earlier this year over remarks about black students by its president, Francis L. Lawrence, have resulted in a wide-ranging plan to decrease racial tension on campus.
But the plan was criticized yesterday for not addressing the core problem.
Months of student and faculty meetings on the issue resulted in an eight-page report approved unanimously on Friday by the Board of Governors.
The plan, called "Multicultural Student Life Recommendations," sets out five major goals for promoting change and touches on everything from the curriculum to student life.


Gentle Charm, Cozy Class
BIRICCHINO ++  (212) 695-6690; 260 West 29th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Superior sausages and other charcuterie are among the best offerings at this pleasant, casual place with marble floors and marble tables.
An appetizer of mixed grilled sausages with a salad and bread could well make a meal.
A daily roster of fresh sausages might include sweet combinations like chicken and apricot or duck with Grand Marnier and orange peel, spicy sausages like North African merguez and other savory combinations like chicken and lemon grass or rabbit and chanterelles.


How Do the Bulls Think? With a Smile
It's been a long time since it was a good idea to be bearish on the American stock market.
In fact, the market has never before gone this long -- since 1990 -- without a single decline of 10 percent or more.
The following was written by a professional investor who is, as you might suspect after reading it, quite bearish on the stock market.
He has been, in his words, "around for more than one market cycle."


Making Way For Wheelchairs
SOME recent developments will be of interest to wheelchair users who travel.
Greyhound Lines of Canada, owned by the Dial Company and separate from United States Greyhound, announced in March that buses with wheelchair lifts were available on some intercity routes in four provinces.
A small test began in 1992 in Alberta, and now 10 of Canadian Greyhound's 400 buses have the lifts, which can accommodate wheelchairs as wide as 32 inches.


News of a Lifetime
HEARD ANY GOOD OBITS LATELY?
Ginger Rogers's maybe, or Howard Cosell's?
Not much beyond that, I bet.
American television dotes on death, the violent kind.
It oozes sentimentality in memorializing the victims of tragedy.
But in death, as in life, television news recognizes mainly mayhem and celebrity.
Not even in death does it take the time and effort to dwell on noteworthy careers, selfless service, dedicated philanthropy, brilliant invention, artistic genius.


Maryland Crab House
IF outstanding seafood restaurants are rare on Long Island, crab houses are rarer.
Some spots call themselves crab houses, but few, if any, are in the traditional Maryland mode -- sawdust on the floor, butcher paper on the tables, mallets to attack the hard-shelled treats, big galvanized buckets for the empty shells and plenty of paper towels for cleaning up the mess that a crab bash generates.
That changed, less than a month ago, when Larry's Crab House opened in East Moriches.
The casual 60-seat waterside newcomer sells a dozen medium-size steamed Long Island blue crabs for $14.95.
They are unceremoniously dumped from a serving tray into the center of the table in the time-honored manner.


Sports of The Times; Take Me Out to the Beanball Game
THE last time Jim Leyritz, the Yankee catcher, remembered seeing Randy Johnson, the long-haired, long-limbed Mariners pitcher, was under highly perilous circumstances.
It was 11 days ago in New York's last game in Seattle, and Leyritz, at bat, happened to notice that Johnson was taking a lengthy stride toward him.
When Johnson, who stands 6 feet 10 inches, is ambulating from a mound 10 inches high and 60 feet 6 inches from home plate, one might legitimately feel he is about to step down on your head.
Turned out it wasn't Johnson's size 13 shoe that was the problem, but his fastball, clocked at 96 miles an hour on that pitch.
It landed smack in Leyritz's face.
Actually, the ball ricocheted off Leyritz's arm, flung up to protect himself.
His cheekbone swelled up and so did the ball field, with both teams emptying their benches.
Nothing much else happened.


Looking for an Attorney? Here's Counsel
STEPHEN NAIFEH, new to Aiken, S.C., asked around town for a real estate lawyer and hired the first one he talked to.
Susan Illston and her husband went to his old college roommate when they needed a will.
Nicholas Carroll, who has moved often and hired lawyers at nearly every stop, has consulted the Yellow Pages.
And these three probably know as much as anybody about lawyers, if that's any indication of how hard it is to find a good one.
Mr.
Naifeh is co-editor of "The Best Lawyers in America" (Woodward/White, 1995); he and his partner are both lawyers and have a staff of seven who evaluate lawyers' evaluations of other lawyers.
Ms.
Illston is a Federal judge in San Francisco who spent 20 years as a trial lawyer.
Mr.
Carroll wrote "Dancing With Lawyers" (Royce Baker, 1992), a guide for small-business owners.


Norplant Complaints: Legitimate or Concocted?
"Will the Lawyers Kill Off Norplant?" (May 28) reported that in the five years since the silicone-coated birth-control device was introduced, Norplant has been the target of an avalanche of lawsuits brought by many of the lawyers who took on the makers of silicone breast implants and won a $4 billion settlement.
Some critics of Norplant responded with another side to the story in the following letters.
To the Editor:


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL
Brant Beach, 3:30 P.M.


L.A. Law, One Year Later
Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald Goldman were murdered one year ago tomorrow.
Time may fly for the obsessed watchers of tabloid television, but it has crawled for more serious citizens.
Beyond question the trial of O. J. Simpson has already consumed enormous chunks of attention, and after 20 weeks, it may be only half over.
After all this travail, the trial is in danger of collapsing into a mistrial.
Already 10 jurors have been dismissed and only two alternates remain.
Judge Lance Ito continues to grind out dismissals of sitting jurors for what he describes as "good cause" without saying exactly what that means.
Prompted by the impatient surviving jurors, he tries but fails to pick up the pace, frittering over time-consuming motions and straining jury endurance.


At Home on the Ice
A COMMON, but cozy, misconception in professional sports is the notion that the local team is truly local.
Take the Devils, for instance, and the state of New Jersey.


For Student Who Killed Her Mother, Acceptance
A year and a half ago, an obviously distressed Gina Grant sat down with her boyfriend, Liam Case, and his parents, explaining that she wanted to tell them how her mother had died three years earlier.
What unfolded that day in the airy living room of the Case home in Cambridge, Mass., was the tale of how Ms.
Grant, while living in Lexington, S.C., had killed her mother by repeatedly striking her on the head with a heavy lead crystal candlestick.


June 4-10; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Welcome, Summer!
The season gets under way with celebrations charitable, educational, theatrical, even personal.


ON THE TOWNS
a opinionated giode to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week.
To submit items for consideration,write to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036, or send a fax to (212) 552-7219 MUSIC BEACH FEST '95 A nonstop weekend festival of free music on the Boardwalk in Atlantic City with the New Rascals, the Drifters, Shirley Alston Reeves, and Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.
Friday at 9 P.M., Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Atlantic City's Boardwalk. (609) 484-0920.
CALDWELL COLLEGE ALUMINI THEATER The Center for Italian and Italian-American Culture presents a special Father's Day program featuring Theresa Pezzano Siegert, soprano, in "Songs My Father Taught Me and Other Arias From Great Italian Operas." Friday at 7:30 P.M.
Ryerson Avenue, Caldwell. (201) 812-0433.
CONGRESS HALL, CAPE MAY The Cape May Festival Pops Orchestra presents a concert today at 2 P.M. and an evening performance at 8:30.
The New York Chamber Ensemble, Tuesday at 8:30 P.M.
The Cape May Festival Orchestra, Thursday at 8:30 P.M.
The American Boy Choir, next Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for the elderly and $6 for students.
Congress Hall, Beach Drive and Perry, Cape May. (800) 275-4278.
CONNECTICUT FARMS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL The Union Symphony Orchestra presents its summer concert featuring the works of Brahms, Bach and others.
Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $8 or $5 for students and the elderly. 711 Stuyvesant Avenue, Union. (908) 851-6476.
FIRST UNITED METHODIST CHURCH "Music for Violin, Clarinet, and Piano," a concert performed by Anakay Koshka, Howard Meltzer and Christine Todd.
Today at 4 P.M.
Free.
Burton and Division Avenues, Hasbrouck Heights. (201) 288-4636.
HARDING ELEMENTARY SCHOOL The Philharmonic Orchestra of New Jersey presents its second annual "Music Gardens" concert.
Today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Lee's Hill Road, New Vernon. (908) 356-6165.
KASSACHAU MEMORIAL SHELL Trattoria Fratelli, an Italian restaurant, sponsors "Opera in the Park," featuring highlights from "Rigoletto," "La Boheme" and "Carmen." Next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 447-9377.
MEADOWLANDS ARENA Melissa Etheridge.
Friday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
The Grateful Dead, next Sunday at 6 P.M. and next Monday at 7 P.M.
Tickets; $35 and $50. 50 Route 120, East Rutherford. (201) 935-3900.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM Sarah Partridge performs as part of the Montclair Art Museum's annual jazz concert.
Next Sunday at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $12. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL The Montclair High School Band Boosters will present a jazz concert with Oliver Lake, Reggie Workman, Steve Turre, Chris White and Steve Colson.
Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10 or $3 for children. 140 Park Street, Montclair. (201) 783-8344.
NEWARK MUSEUM The Newark Boys Chorus presents a concert of classics, pop and ethnic music.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free.
The Billy Johnson Auditorium. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6638.
OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERTS The Kingston Trio.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
The Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
RIDGEWOOD CONCERT BAND A concert with Myra Garcia-Fernandez, soprano, and Rick White, trumpeter.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for the elderly and $6 for students.
Benjamin Franklin Middle School, Glen and Van Dien Streets. (201) 265-6174.
RIDER UNIVERSITY The Westminster Community Orchestra, conducted by Barbara Barstow, presents a pops concert today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Richardson Auditorium, Alexander Hall on the campus of Princeton University, Princeton. (609) 921-7104, ext. 260.
SOCLAIR MUSIC FESTIVAL The 20th season begins with an anniversary celebration titled "Bach 'n' All." Today 4 P.M.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly.
Soclair Brooks Farm, 19 Haytown Road, Lebanon. (908) 236-6476.
SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Tim Gillis Band.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free.
Schooleys Mountain Park, West Springstown Road, Washington Township. (201) 326-7600.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER Jennie Avila and Amy Torchia will sing, play guitar and conga drums in a concert next Sunday at 7 P.M. in the last of the Center's Sunday night series this season.
Tickets: $8. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
Y.M.-Y.W.H.A.
OF CLIFTON THe Council Contemporary Club, a group of singers and dancers, presents its annual music show, "Smile, Darn You, Smile." Today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $2. 199 Scoles Avenue, Clifton. (201) 799-2980.
Theater BRUNDAGE PARK PLAYHOUSE "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," by Christopher Hampton.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Through June 17.
Tickets: $10.
Carrell Road, Randolph. (201) 989-7092.
CAPE MAY WELCOME CENTER Cape May Stage presents "Cape May on Fire," with Eric Hissom and John Alvarez.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 405 Lafayette Street, Cape May. (609) 884-1341.
JOHN HARMS THEATER John Amos stars in "Halley's Comet." Today at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $50. 30 North Van B runt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.
McCARTER THEATER "Random Acts '95," the second annual festival of new plays presents "A Park in Our House," by Nilo Cruz.
Today at 8 P.M., Monday through Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Staged readings of one-act plays by Wendy Wasserstein, Joyce Carol Oates, Mac Wellman and Jane Anderson will be presented today at 2 P.M., Saturday at 5 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $18. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
MODERN JEWISH REPERTORY THEATER "Two," by Ron Elisha.
Today at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Blooming Grove Theater, 544 Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 325-8154.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Harold Pinter's "The Homecoming." Starts Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.
Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tickets: $16 to $30.
Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
PARSIPPANY PLAYHOUSE "Run for Your Wife." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Through June 18.
Tickets: $10, or $7 for students and the elderly. 130 Knoll Road, Lake Hiawatha. (201) 263-7020.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY The Celtic Theater Company presents John B. Keane's "Sharon's Grave." Today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $9, or $7 for students and the elderly. 400 South Orange Avenue, South Orange. (201) 761-9790.
SMALL TOWN AND FANCY PLAYERS "The Fantasticks," presented by the Mahwah High School Drama Club.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $8 for students and the elderly.
Mahwah High School, Ridge Road. (201) 529-4909.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "Inherit the Wind." Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Through next Sunday.
Tickets: $10 on Friday and Sunday; $12 on Saturday.
Route 514, Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.
STRAND THEATER "Ravensbruck," a suspense drama set during World War II.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 and $18.
Fourth Street and Clifton Avenue, Lakewood. (908) 367-9595.
Museums and Galleries ARTWORKS Paintings of Dante's "Inferno," by Eric Fowler.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday through June 24.
Thursday and Friday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M. and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. 19 Everrett Alley, Trenton. (609) 394-9436.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze.
Through July 16.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet Engeman and Dwight Hiscano.
Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M.
Through Aug. 10. 300 Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.
BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibit of works by all members of the Center.
Starts Thursday with an opening reception on FRiday from 7:30 to 10 P.M.
Through August 20.
Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover. (201) 328-9628.
COOPER GALLERY "Tangible Insites," textural paintings and clay vessels by Susan Hogan.
Opening reception today from 2 to 8 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 7 P.M. 295 Grove Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-1074.
CORYELL GALLERY Oil paintings by Albert Bross, watercolors and acrylics by Vincent Ceglia and watercolors by Charles Ross.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through July 5. 8 Coryell Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0804.
CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings, Elaine Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Through July 14.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 340 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.
EVERHART GALLERY Abstract paintings by Jim Fuess.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Through July 12. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.
EXTENSION GALLERY "Hug the Noise," an exhibition of cast metal sculpture and drawings by Sean Poreda.
Through June 29.
Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.
GALLERY JUPITER "Recent Works," paintings by Evelyn Leavens.
Through July 1.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 25 Church Street, Little Silver. (908) 530-8035.
GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE "Displacement," a collage by Peter Jacobs, and "Home," a collage done in mixed media are on display.
Starts with an opening reception today, 3 to 5 P.M.
Through June 28.
Tuesday and Wednesday, 6 to 8 P.M., Thursday, 10 A.M. to noon and 6 to 8 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Baird Community Center, 5 Mead Street, off Ridgewood Road, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.
GUILD OF CREATIVE ART "Rhythms of Nature," a collection of landscapes, watercolors, pastels and collages by Fran McIlvain.
Through July 6.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER A faculty exhibition of painting, sculpture and mixed-media collages; "Sculpture and Collage," assemblage sculptures and photo collages by Carol Rosen.
Through June 25.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880.
J.
RICHARDS GALLERY Oil paintings of faraway beaches, old Paris streets and landscapes of the French countryside by J. P. Dubord are on display.
Through June 26.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 64 East Palisade Avenue, Englewood. (201) 871-1050.
LEBANON MUSEUM "Details," color photgraphs by H. Lisa Solon.
Through June 29.
Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M. 57 Muscanetcong River Road, Hampton. (908) 537-6464.
MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "From Darkness Into Light," paintings and drawings by Howard Lerner.
Through June 30.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Japanese Expression in Paper." The upper gallery will be devoted to five sculptors from the papermaking town of Imadate in the prefecture of Fukui in Japan.
Through Today.
Admission: $3, or $2 for the elderly.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College, 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Through June 25.
"Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
NABISCO GALLERY "Lost and Found," an exhibition of 80 works of three-dimensional art using recycled objects.
Through June 22.
Daily and weekends, noon to 4 P.M.
River Road and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to 19th centuries.
Through July 2.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through July 2.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEWARK PUBLIC LIBRARY "Lasting Impressions: The Jewish Legacy of Greater Newark" showcases the development of neighborhoods and culture in Newark by Jewish residents.
Through July 3.
Monday, Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8:30 P.M. 5 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 733-7798.
NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "The Artful Message: Contemporary Video," focusing on the evolving art of video.
Through today.
Monday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $1. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters.
Through Aug. 7.
"Baseball in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through next Sunday.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its Sixth Annual Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art.
Starts Wednesday.
Through July 30.
Opening reception on Monday, 6 to 9 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism.
Through July 9.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown.
Starts Tuesday; opening reception on Friday, 6 to 8 P.M.
Through July 20.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.
PINE SHORES ART ASSOCIATION Spring Art Show, featuring the works of members and local artists.
Through June 21.
Wednesday, 10 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 3:30 P.M. 94 Stafford Avenue, Manahawkin. (609) 597-3557.
RABBET GALLERY "Five Sculptors: Clay, Wood, Metal." Through July 7.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 120 Georges Road, New Brunswick. (908) 828-5150.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "New Insights -- Rising Talent," an exhibition of the work of John Bingham, glass craftsman; Andrew Braitman, painter, and Lisa Gralnick, metal- smith.
Through July 8.
Monday through Wednesday and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
SHOESTRING GALLERY "Hung Up," paintings and sculptures by Bill Barrell.
Saturday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. 111 First Street, Jersey City. (201) 420-5018.
STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia.
Starts Saturday with a reception from 1:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works" in oils by Brian Townsend.
Opening reception on Friday from 7 to 9 P.M.
Through July 20.
Tuesday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Planfield (908) 756-1707.
UNTITLED (#130), LTD "Intro Art -- Children's Art Exhibit." Through June 25.
Opening reception on Saturday, 2 to 6 P.M.
Gallery hours: Friday, 1 to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WILLIAMS GALLERY "The Changing Landscape: Contemporary Interpretations of Landscape Painting and Photography" by David Scott Leibowitz, Marlene Lenker and Rena Segal.
Through July 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 8 Chamebers Street, Princeton. (609) 921-1142.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM More than 100 prints document "Printmaking in America" from 1960 to 1990.
Drawn from private collections and museums around the country, the exhibition includes works by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Roger Brown and others.
Through next Sunday.
Free.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Spoken Word BELLEVILLE PUBLIC LIBRARY Linda Heimall, an opera singer, will give two lectures on opera: "The French Opera" on Wednesday at 1 P.M. and "Opera Becomes Real Verismo" on June 21.
Free. 221 Washington Avenue, Belleville. (201) 450-3434.
DELAWARE VALLEY POETS David Felder, Patricia Celley Groth and Judah Jacobowitz will read selected works.
Monday at 8 P.M.
Princeton Market Fair, Route 1 South, Princeton. (609) 874-3480.
ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Sherrie Cleary will present excerpts from "The Belle of Amherst," which focus on Emily Dickinson's school life, family relationships and her literary contributions.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE ASSOCIATION Bob Suanders will demonstrate special recipes with wild foods such as greens, mushrooms, wild teas and herbs.
Today at 1:30.
Fee: $6.
Advance registration is required. 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood. (201) 567-1265.
MORRIS COUNTY PARK SYSTEMS The "Nature Through Garden's Gate" program will describe ways to attract hummingbirds and butterflies into gardens and ways to discourage undesirable insects.
The focus will be on control by natural interaction.
Today, 1 to 4 P.M. at the Cooper Mill.
Free.
County Route 513, Chester Township. (201) 326-7645.
Nancy Goodwin, the owner of Montrose, will lecture on "the Gardens of Montrose," a private garden in Hillsborough, North Carolina.
Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $5. 53 East Hahover Avenue, Morris Township. (201) 326-7603.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY Michael Adonia Moscovici, the Cultural Attache at the German Embassy in Brussels, Belgium, will speak on "German-Jewish Dialogue Today." Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Duffy Hall Faculty Lounge. 400 South Orange Avenue, South Orange. (201) 378-9838.
SKYLANDS ASSOCIATION Margaret Dexter, a trained herbalist, present a lecture and workshop on 6 to 10 common plants which benefit our skin.
Today at 3 P.M.
A free plant clinic will offer advice on what to do if your hosta leaves have holes in them, if your your hemlock is showing signs of color loss and if there are tiny white insects crawling on your shrubs.
Saturday from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The Carriage House at the New Jersey State Botanical Garden.
Morris Road off Slatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-9534.
SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER A series of lectures on health and medicine by Dorothy L. Zufall includes "Remember This -- Improving Your Memory." Monday at 7 P.M. and Tuesday at 10 A.M.
"Laughing Matters," regarding arthritis support.
Wednesday at 7 P.M. and "Making Your Wishes Known." Thursday at 10 A.M.
Advance registration required. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2200.
For Children MARCELLA GELTMAN GALLERY The Art Center of Northern New Jersey sponsors the Annual Children's Art Show.
Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 250 Center Street, New Milford. (201) 599-2992.
MEADOW THEATER "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe." Saturday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $6.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M. and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian Grand Canyon in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn about the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through July 2.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Gingerbread Players present "Beauty and the Beast." Saturday and next Sunday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $6 and $7.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
ETC.
ANNUAL ROCKLAND COUNTY FAIR Rockland County Futures sponsors an 11-day and night celebration of Rockland County.
On Thursday a "$25 Per Carload" includes free admission, free parking and unlimited rides on the fair ground.
Friday is highlighted by a "Moonlight Madness" party at 10:30 P.M.
Fireworks will light up the sky on Saturday.
Through June 25.
Anthony Wayne State Park, off exit 17 of the Palisades Interstate Parkway. (914) 358-2272.
CAPE MAY WHALE WATCHER A sightseeing cruise around Cape May.
Saturdays through Saturday.
Tickets: $10 and $5.
Miss Chris Fishing Center, Third Avenue and Wilson. (609) 884-3351.
COMMUNITY THEATER Paula Poundstone, comedian.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25. 100 South Street, Morristown. (201) 539-8008.
COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS A Mini-foreign film festival with "Cafe Au Lait," on Friday, "The Revolt of Jon" on June 23 and "Sweetie" on June 30.
All show times 8 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Dragonetti Auditorium in the Student Center, 214 Center Grove Road, Randolph. (201) 328-5024.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER The 1995 Spring Heritage Festivals continues with the Jewish Festival of the Arts is next Sunday, starting at 10 A.M. with a stage show at 2 P.M. with Freddie Roman, comedian, and Michael Burstyn, singer.
Tickets: $5 to $21.


Girl, 7, Is Raped in School
A 7-year-old girl was raped by two boys in the bathroom of an elementary school in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
The incident occurred about 3 P.M. on Wednesday at Public School 106 at 1214 Putnam Avenue.
The police said that most of the students had already gone home when the suspects, two older students, forced the girl into the bathroom and had sex with her.


Washington Talk; If 'Old Hickory' Met New Politics
A major party's Presidential candidate was revealed last month to have sworn an oath of allegiance to a foreign country, pledging to report all conspiracies against its sovereign and to support him in battle if necessary.
The candidates' opponents have not yet made use of the charge, probably because they have been dead for more than a century.


Race for 7,500 Ends Up Duel of 2 Kenyan Villages
When about 7,500 women gathered in Central Park yesterday morning for the Advil Mini Marathon, they comprised several elite runners, rookie participants, an octogenarian and a basketball star.
Emerging from that eclectic throng was Delillah Asiago, the wispy Kenyan who completed the looping 6.2-mile (10-kilometer) course in 31 minutes 22 seconds.


Are Good Times Gone For the Funds Industry?
THIS cannot be a good sign for the mutual fund industry: Jeffrey N. Vinik, who calls the shots for the $44 billion Fidelity Magellan fund -- the biggest fund in the galaxy -- has been reduced to touting his favorite technology stocks at a shopping center shoe store.
Improbable as it may seem, that was the scene one evening last week as several hundred people were shoehorned into the Salvatore Ferragamo boutique at Trump Tower in Manhattan.
The multitude came not to buy fine Italian leather goods, but to hear Mr.
Vinik's outlook on the stock market and the economy.


Norplant Complaints: Legitimate or Concocted?
"Will the Lawyers Kill Off Norplant?" (May 28) reported that in the five years since the silicone-coated birth-control device was introduced, Norplant has been the target of an avalanche of lawsuits brought by many of the lawyers who took on the makers of silicone breast implants and won a $4 billion settlement.
Some critics of Norplant responded with another side to the story in the following letters.
To the Editor:


This Is Sex?
AT FIRST GLANCE, THERE'S A lot of sex on the Internet.
Or, not at first glance -- nobody can find anything on the Internet at first glance.
But if you have time on your hands, if you're comfortable with computing, and if you have an unflagging curiosity about sex -- in other words, if you're a teen-ager -- you may think you've suddenly landed in pornography heaven.
Nude pictures!
Foul language!
Weird bathroom humor!
No wonder the Christian Coalition thinks the Internet is turning into a red-light district.
There's even a "Red Light District" World Wide Web page.
So we explore.
Some sites make you promise to be a grown-up. (O.K.: you promise.) You try "Girls," a link leading to a computer at the University of Bordeaux, France.
The message flashes back: Document Contains No Data.
"Girls" at Funet, Finland, seems to offer lots of pictures (Dolly Parton! Ivana Trump!) -- Connect Timed Out.
"Girls," courtesy of Liberac University of Technology, Czech Republic, does finally, with painful slowness, deliver itself of a 112,696-byte image of Madchen Amick.
You could watch it spread across your screen, pixel by tantalizing pixel, but instead you go have lunch during the download, and when you return, there she is -- in black-and-white and wearing clothes.
These pictures, by the way, are obviously scanned from magazines.
And magazines are the ideal medium for them.
Clearly the battle cry of the on-line voyeur is "Host Contacted -- Waiting for Reply."
With old Internet technology, retrieving and viewing any graphic image on a PC at home could be laborious.
New Internet technology, like browsers for the Web, makes all this easier, though it still takes minutes for the typical picture to squeeze its way through your modem.
Meanwhile, though, ease of use has killed off the typical purveyor of dirty pictures, capable of serving hundreds of users a day but uninterested in handling hundreds of thousands.
The Conservatoire National des Arts et Metiers has turned off its "Femmes femmes femmes je vous aime" Web page.
The good news for erotica fans is that users are redirected to a new site where "You can find naked women, including topless and total nudity"; the bad news is that this new site is the Louvre.
The Internet does offer access to hundreds of sex "newsgroups," forums for discussion encompassing an amazing spectrum of interests.
They're easy to find -- in the newsgroup hierarchy "alt.sex" ("alt" for alternative) comes right after "alt.sewing." And yes, alt.sex is busier than alt.sewing.
But quite a few of them turn out to be sham and self-parody.
Look at alt.sex.fish -- practically nothing.
Alt.sex.bestial ity -- aha! just what Jesse Helms fears most -- gives way to alt.sex.bestiality.hamster.duct-tape, and fascinating as this sounds, when you call it up you find it's empty, presumably the vestige of a short-lived joke.
Alt.sex.bondage.particle-physics is followed by alt.sex.sheep.baaa.baaa.baaa.moo -- help!
Still, if you look hard enough, there is grotesque stuff available.
If pornography doesn't bother you, your stomach may be curdled by the vulgar commentary and clinical how-to's in the militia and gun newsgroups.
Your local newsstand is a far more user-friendly source of obscenity than the on-line world, but it's also true that, if you work at it, you can find plenty on line that will disgust you, and possibly even disgust your children.
This is the justification for an effort in Congress to give the Federal Government tools to control the content available on the Internet.
The Communications Decency Act, making its way through Congress, aims to transform the obscene-phone-call laws into a vehicle for prosecuting any Internet user, bulletin-board operator, or on-line service that knowingly makes obscene material available.
As originally written, the bill would not only have made it a crime to write lewd E-mail to your lover; it would also have made it a crime for your Internet provider to transmit it.
After a round of lobbying from the large on-line services, the bill's authors have added "defenses" that could exempt mere unwitting carriers of data, and they say it is children, not consenting adults, they aim to protect.
Nevertheless, the legislation is a historically far-reaching attempt at censorship on a national scale.
The Senate authors of this language do not use E-mail themselves, or browse the Web, or chat in newsgroups, and their legislation reflects a mental picture of how the on-line world works that does not match the reality.
The existing models for Federal regulation of otherwise protected speech -- for example, censorship of broadcast television and prohibition of harassing telephone calls -- come from a world that is already vanishing over the horizon.
There aren't three big television networks now, serving a unified mass market; there are thousands of television broadcasters serving ever-narrower special interests.
And on the Internet, the number of broadcasters is rapidly approaching the number of users: uncountable.
With Internet use spreading globally, most live sources of erotic images already seem to be overseas.
The sad reality for Federal authorities is that they cannot cut those off without forcing the middlemen -- on-line services in the United States -- to do the work of censorship, and that work is a practical impossibility.
Any teen-ager with an account on Prodigy can use its new Web browser to search for the word "pornography" and click his way to "Femmes femmes femmes" (oh, well, better luck next time).
Policing discussion groups presents the would-be censor with an even more hopeless set of choices.
A typical Internet provider carries more than 10,000 groups.
As many as 100 million new words flow through them every day.
The actual technology of these discussion groups is hard to fathom at first.
They are utterly decentralized.
Every new message begins on one person's computer and propagates outward in waves, like a chain letter that could eventually reach every mailbox in the world.
Legislators would like to cut off a group like alt.sex.bondage.particle-physics at the source, or at its home -- but it has no source and no home, or rather, it has as many homes as there are computers carrying newsgroups.
This is the town-square speech the First Amendment was for: often rancorous, sometimes harsh and occasionally obscene.
Voices do carry farther now.
The world has never been this global and this intimate at once.
Even seasoned Internet users sometimes forget that, lurking just behind the dozen visible participants in an out-of-the-way newsgroup, tens of millions of potential readers can examine every word they post.
If a handful of people wish to share their private experiences with like-minded people in alt.sex. fetish.hair, they can do so, efficiently -- the most fervent wishes of Congress notwithstanding -- and for better or worse, they'll have to learn that children can listen in.
Meanwhile, if gun-wielding extremists wish to discuss the vulnerable points in the anatomy of F.B.I. agents, they too can do so.
At least the rest of us can listen in on them, too.
Perhaps there is a grain of consolation there -- instead of censorship, exposure to the light.
Anyway, the only real alternative now would be to unwire the Information Superhighway altogether.


June 4-10; Primitive? Not the One Who Drew the Lion
FOR countless students who sit in the dark staring at slides, art history is meant to reinforce the theme that human history is a continuum of advancement; that by bending the stiff joints of Egyptian figures and making refinements, the Greeks could create the Venus de Milo.
But the theme of continuous advancement was always undermined by a glance at student notebooks.
Despite centuries of artistic struggles, some students doodled better than others.
It now appears that talent was also unevenly distributed as the last ice age drew to a close.
Paintings discovered last December in a cave in the Ardeche region of southeastern France have been verified to be at least 30,340 years old, the French Culture Ministry announced last week, making them the world's oldest known paintings.
The Chauvet cave, named after Jean-Marie Chauvet, who uncovered the drawings, contains more than 300 animal images and a series of red hand prints of the artists, who drew with charcoal, ochre and red hematite.
But even without the signatures, it would be easy to see that many different people drew the animals, because their abilities vary so widely.


New Anti-Gang Weapon Bars Everyday Conduct
Evenings on Walnut Street are quiet these days -- no gunfire or drug deals -- and Christopher Lawson, a 20-year-old member of the Orange Street Locos street gang, which once ruled the neighborhood, knows the reason all too well.
"It's the injunction," he said the other day as he stood with his legs spread and his hands splayed on the hood of a police cruiser.
"It keeps everyone on their toes. A lot of my homeys are working now. They'd rather be working than getting into trouble on the streets."


Very Public Figure Turns Private Eye
A wedding guest was found stabbed to death in an alcove outside the basement chapel at City Hall, the police report said -- at least in the churning imagination of Edward I. Koch.
Detectives were stumped in their efforts to determine how the killer managed to smuggle the knife past the building's network of weapons detectors -- but Edward (Private Eye) Koch wasn't.


St. Augustine: A Cautionary Tale
Long before the issue of private support for the arts came to the national forefront, an independent arts program run out of St.
Augustine School of the Arts was a paragon.
For 11 years, the program's board managed to attract the support of scores of celebrities -- and hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations.
But the board's former chairwoman, Mary Elizabeth Taylor, said that once the idea of private financing for the arts caught on all over, donors became choosier or spread their contributions across a wider spectrum.
The program, which had been formed to teach discipline through music and art, folded at the end of December.
And Ms.
Taylor says there are no plans to resurrect it at St.
Augustine or elsewhere.


Janann E. Baker, Troy A. Telitz
Janann Elliman Baker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Crowell Baker of Lawrence, L.I., was married yesterday to Troy Allan Telitz, a son of Patricia Rowlett of Severna Park, Md., and Gary Telitz of Denver.
The bride's mother, the Rev.
Edyth Baker, performed the ceremony at Trinity St.
John's Episcopal Church in Hewlett, L.I.
Mrs.
Telitz, 30, is an education manager at Junior Achievement Rocky Mountain Inc., a nonprofit educational organization in Denver.
She graduated from Colby-Sawyer College.
Her father is a trustee of the Village of Lawrence and a former advertising director of Evyan Perfumes in New York.
Her mother is a priest at Grace Episcopal Church and Day School in Massapequa, L.I.


Intimate Festival at the McCarter
WHEN the McCarter Theater commissioned a series of original plays (12 short, 1 long) for a mid-season festival last January, it was called "Winter's Tales '94."
But the timing was off.


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
The Titfield Thunderbolt  A 1953 British comedy, Wednesday and Thursday at Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street, Manhattan Stanley Holloway Directed by Charles Crichton No rating 84 minutes


Shunning Earned
To the Sports Editor:
Baseball owners and players are finally receiving their just desserts: nearly empty stadiums, low ticket sales and continuing public hostility.
Even when many players acted like spoiled brats, became involved in sex and drug-abuse scandals, or charged kids for autographs, many fans remained loyal.


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
Johnny Mnemonic  Keanu Reeves Directed by Robert Longo R 98 minutes


June 4-10; Politics Magnifies an Immigration Proposal
Reports of blue-ribbon commissions often fade into obscurity as soon as they are issued.
But the recommendations of a Federal panel advising Congress on immigration policy are already getting serious attention on Capitol Hill, and that only promises to increase as next year's Presidential campaign heats up.
The panel, headed by former Representative Barbara Jordan of Texas, suggested last week that Congress gradually reduce legal immigration by one-third, to an annual level of 550,000.
It also suggested speeding up the admission of spouses and young children of legal aliens.


PATRICK REYNOLDS
I applaud Patrick Reynolds's crusade to create a Smokefree America (Sunday, May 21).
However, he swings and misses when he says that Big League Chew shredded bubble gum is "abominable." Alternative would be a better word.


On Sunday; For Panther, Revolution Never Ends
A QUARTER of a century later, the Black Panther is president of the Bradford Street Block Association in East New York.
"Revolution," said Charles Barron, "is a process."


Hunting for the Perfect Weapon? Try Mad Ave.
Laura Ashley has a new neighbor.
So do Le Relais, and the Lloyd Jensen jewelry store, and the Waterford shop, all on Madison Avenue between 63d and 64th.
The new neighbor, Beretta, sells guns -- expensive trap and skeet shotguns, hunting rifles and semiautomatic pistols.
Prices range from $1,200 to $47,000.


The Messenger Business Is Not Like a Sweatshop
To the Editor:
The May 14 Coping column "Voices From the 'Sweatshop of the Streets' " has it wrong.
Bicycle companies are not sweatshops.
Sure, there's more that can be done to improve working conditions, but salaries far outdistance those in sweatshops, and bikers, unlike sweatshop workers, are not directly controlled by their companies.


Silent Partner
To the Editor:
As an American composer who spent three years working at a Government-financed arts center in Banff, Alberta, I read with interest David Shannon's article about the new Denys Arcand film "Love and Human Remains"  [ "Looking for Love in All Sorts of Places," May 28 ] .
Even taking our threatened National Endowment for the Arts into account, it can't be overestimated just how much more of a role government plays in financing the arts in Canada than in the United States.


Penick's Tips For Women
FOR ALL WHO LOVE THE GAME  Lessons and Teachings for Women.
By Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. 188 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Medieval Mystic and a New Jersey Nun Ascend Billboard Charts Together
Community life and daily prayer are the rule for Benedictine nuns.
They were the rule in the 12th century, when Hildegarde von Bingen, founder of a monastery in the Rhine Valley, wrote liturgical music for her sisters.
It is the rule for the 75 Benedictine Sisters of Elizabeth and their prioress, Sister Germaine Fritz.
"It's hard to compare yourself to Hildegarde," Sister Germaine, 59, said on a recent afternoon following the noon prayers at the St.
Walburga Monastery here.
"Hildegarde certainly didn't see herself as an auspicious person."


Movies to See and Miss; The Relatively Fabulous
UPTOWN -- There are few things other than malfunctioning movie projectors that unnerve Mary Lea Bandy, the chief curator of the department of film at the Museum of Modern Art.
On May 30, the evening before the museum's black-tie benefit celebrating the 60th anniversary of its film library, Ms.
Bandy was on her way out of the office.
She was going to a Community Board 5 hearing about another thing that is unnerving her at the moment -- the City Planning Commission's proposed zoning amendment that would limit adult video stores to certain neighborhoods, including hers.


Cable TV News Expands To 24 Hours in Connecticut
The rehearsal began precisely at 6:30 A.M.
Mary Anne Loughlin, a former anchor for CNN, sat alone at a news desk, facing Teleprompters and a camera.
A recorded introduction announced: "Twenty-four hours every day. Connecticut's own news network. This is News 12 Connecticut, morning edition."
Ms.
Loughlin began reading a summary of the news to come: state legislators had approved money to move a University of Connecticut campus to downtown Stamford; a bakery in Bridgeport had been robbed; exit ramps for the Merritt Parkway in Greenwich were being redesigned.


Substituting Tuna for T-Bone
ON grills throughout this region, fresh tuna steaks now often replace the T-bone and porterhouse variety.
But unlike beef, which can be cooked to taste, tuna is best when left at least a bit rare in the middle.
Otherwise, it will be rather dry and tasteless.
The reason?
It has a much lower fat content than even the leanest beef.
And much to the dismay of diet experts, fat is what often carries flavor.


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
Fluke  Matthew Modine, Eric Stoltz, Nancy Travis Directed by Carlo Carlei PG 93 minutes


Caramoor And Tony Bennett
IN 1946, a young singer, fresh from a three-year stint in the Army, was spending what he now calls his "scuffling years" trying to establish a career foothold.
And 50 years ago a philanthropic couple decided to convert what had hitherto been private recitals at their Katonah estate to public concerts.
The singer was Tony Bennett, the recitals at the home of Walter and Lucie Bigelow Rosen expanded into the Caramoor Festival, and on Thursday evening the twain shall meet for the first time, as Bennett performs at the 50th Anniversary Gala Benefit at Caramoor in Katonah in a program also featuring the popular singer-songwriter Mariah Carey and the television personality Regis Philbin as host.
"It's Caramoor unplugged!" said Howard Herring, Caramoor's executive director.
"There's history in the making here, and no question that the gala will be absolutely electrifying." Concertgoers should not be too shocked at the $500 and $1,000 ticket prices: it is a golden anniversary benefit, and guests will be treated to preconcert cocktails and an elegant dinner in the Venetian Theater.


On the Hotel Front: New and Rejuvenated
Travelers on both coasts of the United States and points in between will have new hotels and renovated classics to choose from this summer.
The Delano, a renovated 1947 hotel on the beach in Miami Beach, is scheduled to open June 30 with 238 suites, rooms, lofts, apartments and bungalows.
The hotel is owned by Ian Schrager, whose other properties include the Royalton and the Paramount in New York.
The design, by Philippe Starck, will include interiors that combine antiques and contemporary furniture.
Amenities will include a swimming pool with a waterfall, a landscaped garden, a 24-hour gymnasium and a $1 movie theater.


The Bards of Brooklyn Bring You Blood, Guts and Wargret
AFter a class of sixth-grade drama students from Junior High School 285 saw a production of Shakespeare's "Henry VI," they asked the question that might seem natural to young minds in this age of multiple movie sequels and television spinoffs: what happens now?
Their curiosity was so fierce that the class decided to just go and write a sequel, unaware that Shakespeare had already written one, "Richard III," some 400 years earlier.


History as Buckskin-Clad Fairy Tale
Fathers across America will soon be volunteering in record numbers to take the children to the movies, and here's why: Pocahontas is a babe.
She's the first Disney animated heroine since Tinker Bell with great legs -- maybe with any legs.
She wears form-fitting, off-the-shoulder buckskin that would be as much at home in Beverly Hills as in 17th-century Jamestown.
She's got sloe eyes, a rosebud mouth, billowing black hair and terrific muscle tone.
And she is the centerpiece of a film that's as great-looking as its heroine.
Blood will soon boil because of the Harlequin-style history dished out by this prettily romantic "Pocahontas," which despite its origins is as much a fiction as any fairy tale.
But for all the blatant liberties it takes with Pocahontas's story (and notwithstanding a slight taste for numbing pieties), it's still a success.
Gloriously colorful, cleverly conceived and set in motion with the usual Disney vigor, "Pocahontas" is one more landmark feat of animation.
It does everything a children's film should do except send little viewers home humming its theme song.


Luxembourg
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has known its moments of glory.
In the Middle Ages, four Holy Roman Emperors sprang from its ducal family, and its fortress was so mighty that after 900 years, in the late 1800's, it had to be dismantled stone by stone, having become a menace to peace in the region.
In today's reduced circumstances, the duchy has a population of over 400,000 and covers 999 square miles -- an area smaller than Rhode Island.
This year, though, Luxembourg and its capital have assumed a larger profile.
The duchy's longtime Prime Minister, Jacques Santer, has been elected president of the European Commission, the executive body of the 15-nation European Union; the city of Luxembourg has been named European Capital of Culture for 1995 (a different city is given this designation every year by the European Union).
And Unesco has put the city and its fortress -- partly rebuilt with the original stones after its dismantling -- on the list of World Heritage Monuments in order to protect them.


March of Pathmark Leaves Trail of Anger
The Pathmark supermarket chain, recently the target of fierce opposition by small merchants over its plans to build a large store in East Harlem, is facing a similar battle in Springfield Gardens.
Although opposition to the 65,000-square-foot supermarket planned for the intersection of Springfield and Merrick Boulevards is not as vehement or as organized as it has been in Harlem, local merchants share many of the same concerns.
They argue that the supermarket will drive them out of business, increase traffic and ruin economic development plans.
And they have won the support of a local politician, Councilwoman Juanita Watkins.


THE DIGERATI!
Great job by Paul Keegan on "The Digerati!" (May 21).
However, I think the elitist white-male club running the Net is going to dissolve soon, no matter what Wired's publisher, Louis Rossetto, says.
Increasing numbers of women and minorities, not to mention teens, are using the Net.
I myself am a 14-year-old girl who regularly uses the Web and Prodigy.
AMY OLIVE Louisville, Ky.


Queens Dreams
IF you want to know about backyards, you have to ask a 10-year-old.
The nature of 10-year-olds is to explore.
They're really curious and totally unafraid.
They're also not threatening; they can explore with impunity.
When I was 10, my backyard had bushes that turned into ghosts at night and archeological treasures -- old bottles, animal bones, dirty round rocks I was sure had gems inside.
I never thought I wouldn't have a backyard.


This Time, A Bloop, Not a Blast, Tips Yanks
Maybe it's more than just bad baseball.
Maybe it's a curse.
How else do you explain the unending ways the Yankees are finding to lose baseball games?
Usually it has been the long ball that has doomed the Yankees; 54 home runs and counting.
But yesterday it was a two-out bloop single in the ninth inning that sent Manager Buck Showalter's battered team to its 19th defeat in 24 games.
The floater off the bat of Seattle pinch-hitter Chad Kreuter couldn't have broken a window, but it was deep enough over the infield to score pinch-runner Joey Cora from second base with the winning run in the Mariners' 3-2 come-from-behind victory before 25,279 fans at Yankee Stadium.


Two Ships for Rent
Plenty of modern cruise ships stop at Curacao, but once travelers arrive, they can board something more historic: a wooden sailing ship.
The Insulinde, a 129-foot two-masted schooner, was built in the early 1930's.
After a recent restoration, it has nine two-person cabins and is available for day sails, weekend trips to Bonaire or five-day trips. (Rates start at $55 a day per person.) The Vira Cocha, a 36-foot twin-masted full-gaff yawl, takes passengers on day sails along the island's south coast to Caracas Bay for snorkeling and sunbathing. (Prices start at $20 for two and a half hours.)


THE DIGERATI!
Keegan's penchant for coining labels and casting people in "us and them" categories may make titillating reading but it also does a disservice by hyping the rift between the digital knows and know-nots.
Working with computers is like working in any other complex field that requires specialization.


Revelations: 32 Painters and Sculptors Picture Themselves
MARC STRAUS, the curator of "Inside Out" at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, is a doctor of medicine; Douglas Maxwell, his collaborator and author of a catalogue essay, is a psychoanalyst.
With the assistance of Richard Klein, the museum's acting director, and Harry Philbrick, its director of education, the two men of science have produced a show of "psychological self-portraits" by 32 painters and sculptors.
In his introduction, Dr.
Straus explains that the inspiration came from a recent Manhattan exhibition of photographs that Hannah Wilke took of herself while undergoing treatment for cancer.
That the doctor, though an oncologist, found the pictures even more disturbing than the sight of patients with the cancer was, he says, because he knew the others had died.
Whereas a live patient enables the doctor to busy himself with treatment, the one who dies leaves him with nothing to do.


Ellen M. Hyman, Jeffrey O. Jones
Ellen Martha Hyman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Hyman of Dumont, N.J., is to be married there today to Jeffrey Owen Jones, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Haydon Jones.
Judge Malcolm Blum of the Municipal Court in Oakland, N.J., is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride is a literary agent in New York, representing playwrights and screenwriters.
She graduated from Northwestern University.


Love and Glasnost
BREAKING FREE  A Memoir of Love and Revolution.
By Susan Eisenhower.
Illustrated. 295 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Tanya M. Bird And Jed Hartman
Tanya M. Bird, the daughter of Sandra and John Bird of Carrollton, Tex., was married yesterday to Jerard K. Hartman Jr., the son of Dorothy and Jerard Hartman of Larchmont, N.Y.
Msgr.
Joseph J. Boyd performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Saints John and Paul Church in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Hartman and her husband, both 26, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
The bride is an assistant buyer at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her father is the general manager of sales and production for Printing Research, equipment manufacturers in Dallas.


Sandy Hook's Reputation Lags Behind Its Reality
To the Editor:
I wonder why your article "Greetings From the Shore" (May 28) made no mention of Sandy Hook National Park.
The Hook has come a long way in the past 10 years, but its reputation has not.
It has to be seen to be believed.


THE LONELINESS OF BEING WHITE
Bruce Schoenfeld's article "The Loneliness of Being White" (May 14) draws needed attention to the National Basketball Association's anomalous racial composition.
The league's racial makeup is not reflective of the population at large, a situation that elicits howls of protest when it comes to businesses or universities.


Geek Love
MICROSERFS  By Douglas Coupland. 371 pp.
New York: Regan Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $21.


Tamara Lefcourt, Shawn M. Ruby
Tamara Rachel Lefcourt, a daughter of Miriam Lefcourt of Scotch Plains, N.J., and the late Arthur M. Lefcourt, is to be married today to Shawn Michael Ruby, a son of Ilana and Stephen Ruby of Montreal.
Rabbi George Nudell is to officiate at Young Israel of East Brunswick, N.J.


The Nation; Why a Jury Can Be 12, Even 6, but Not 5
TWO more down.
Only two alternates left.


Christopher and Assad Reaffirm Syrian-Israeli Military Talks
After holding what he called a "very productive meeting" today with President Hafez al-Assad, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced that long-stalled talks between the military chiefs of Israel and Syria would resume in Washington on June 27.
"The agreement that we have reached on this rather detailed and ambitious work plan confirms the determination of parties to seek an early peace," Mr.
Christopher announced after three hours of talks with the Syrian leader.


Here Comes the Bride. Here Comes Another.
IT is the first Sunday night in June.
Joseph Salamone, dressed in his work clothes -- a black tuxedo and Rockport shoes -- stands in the back of the Carillon Room at the Oriental Manor, catering hall extraordinaire in Bensonhurst.
He looks past the beveled mirrors, 15-foot chandeliers and pots of green silk plants, at the 200 guests assembled for the Fontanone-Cini wedding reception.
Three disk jockeys have set up speakers.
Twenty white-gloved waiters are poised to uncork champagne.
The floor pounds.
The theme from "Rocky" starts, at ear-splitting decibels.


The Season Picks Up In Summer Venues
Performing next Sunday afternoon is Andrea Griminelli, the young Italian flutist who gained international attention as the only instrumentalist to be featured on the "Three Tenors" concert; waiting in the July wings are the St.
Lawrence String Quartet and the Eroica Trio, Dan-Wen Wei, the young Chinese-American pianist, concludes the series in August.
For reservations or driving directions, call 966-9700.


Ready to Be Pampered: A Movie-Goer's Sad Tale
To the Editor:
After reading the June 4 article "Manners Matter: Sony Ushers Get Disney World Outlook" I went to the colossal new theater at Broadway and 68th Street, ready to be pampered, from the entrance to the concession line.
It did not live up to your billing.


For a Growing Indian Community, a New Temple Keeps With Tradition
Etching sacred symbols in the earth, a circle of Hindu priests prepared last week for a long-awaited project: building a temple for Indian immigrants in Somerset County.
Since 1992, members of the Hindu Temple and Cultural Society have worshiped in a small brick church in here.
But as more Indian immigrants have moved to Middlesex and Somerset counties, membership has grown to more than 500 people, and the society needs a larger space.


Calling All Jugglers, Mimes, Unicyclists . . .
MORE than 300 street performers -- based everywhere from Brooklyn to the Netherlands to Mexico -- have been invited to perform in various spots around the Financial District this week as part of Buskers Fare '95.
"Buskers" is the term for street performers used in England, where shop-owners invite them to perform in front of their stores, to attract customers.
That's the point of Buskers Fare '95, which runs through next Sunday, at sites including City Hall, Battery Park City and the South Street Seaport.


Let's Think About What We're Doing in Bosnia; Rescue the Children
To the Editor:
The children of Bosnia should not be allowed to become the slaughtered innocent victims of the intensified fighting in Bosnia.


A Special Counsel Feels the Pressure to Indict
To the Editor:
Re "Special Counsels, Petty Cases" (Op-Ed, June 5): Elliot L. Richardson provides cogent reasons why we need fewer special prosecutors.
Let me provide one more.


Activities for Children
School's out, or will be soon.
What activities do the children at your house have planned for the summer?
Sight and Sound
At Imagine Tomorrow, children in groups of eight work on projects that integrate all of the elements of multimedia.
They can construct videos with special effects, design computer games with themselves as characters, and watch their ideas come to life as they produce interactive stories.
The projects require planning, logic and critical thinking skills.
Children schedule their time, outline their ideas, write their script, and plot their games.
In addition, they learn how to find information on on-line services and multimedia encyclopedias.
The kids are learning and having fun.
There are centers inPark Ridge, Madison and Bernardsville, and two more will open this summer, in Denville and Middletown.
KATHERINE PATTERSON Morristown The author is vice president of Imagine Tomorrow.
Musicals All Summer
Gloucester Township center for the arts presents these children's musicals at 10:30 A.M.: July 11-14, Jungle Book.
July 18-21, The Wizard of Oz.
July 25-28, Pinocchio.
July 26, Gary Rosen (Tot Rock) of Rosenshontz.
Aug. 1-4, Kids on Broadway.
Call 609-227-3091 for information or tickets.
ED FISCELLA Blackwood Last month, Chatter asked for opinions about the way the news media covers New Jersey.
Look to the Shore
We have wonderful restaurants and entertainment down here.
There is an abundance of well-received live theater (especially the Henderson Theater in Lincroft, which is currently featuring a new original play by the writing team of Milmore and VanZandt, who have many situation comedy credits to their name, as well as some off-Broadway New York productions) and an active alternative and jazz music scene.
The northern shore communities are anything but summer tourist attractions, and it would be nice to see more reporting on us down here.
Also, there is hard news going on in urban areas like Long Branch and Asbury Park, where attempting to rebuild is a daily struggle.
LEE-ANN NIBBLING Long Branch Covering the Arts
You solicited opinions about the way the news media cover the state.
In my view, superbly well except perhaps for the performing arts.
There is an explosion of dance events and plans by indigenous regional and touring companies which deserve to be chronicled.
Last year I discovered the formation of a performance center and school in upstate New York, at which four New Jersey companies are committed, among others, to presenting seminars, classes and performances.
The story has been under-reported everywhere.
JOSEPH GALE Millburn How to Talk Back
Each week, this column summarizes responses to one question and poses another.
Readers can post in the @times area of America Online; comments will also be accepted by E-mail to jersey@nytimes.com, by fax to (212) 556-7219, and by mail to Chatter, New Jersey, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Published messages become the property of The Times; they may be edited and may be republished in any medium.
Next: Supporters of Governor Whitman's plan to cut the state income tax by another 15 percent say it will distribute the tax burden more fairly and stimulate the economy.
Opponents say her timing is unwise, given the possibility of large cuts in Federal aid or a recession, and they claim it will lead to higher property taxes.
What do you think?


Montreal for Food and Civility
ON the way to our first great meal in Montreal, my best friend, Bob, stopped an elderly stranger for directions to the metro and got us not only an escort virtually to the door but also two free tickets.
That was wonder enough for two weekend refugees from Manhattan's meanness, but it got even better.
Inside the station, the turnstile rejected our windfall and the token clerk called us over.
I braced for abuse and heard instead: "I'm sorry, those tickets are for senior citizens. But you can still use them. Give me one dollar more and go right in."


Punk Summer Camp's Over
It happens every summer.
Dozens of people -- most white, in their teens and 20's -- with spiked and rainbow-colored hair and lip and eyebrow rings descend on the Lower East Side from Florida, California, Georgia, Louisiana, Colorado and Oregon.
They call themselves nomads and anarchists; others call them "crusties" or "gutter punks" because their clothes are tattered and filthy.
For the past couple of years, neighbors say, they have camped in growing numbers in La Plaza Cultural, turning the former community park at Ninth Street and Avenue C into an open-air drug den, bedroom and toilet.
This year, estimates of the itinerant anarchists ranged up to 300, with many arriving last Saturday.
Some were responding to a message that was posted on the Internet identifying the lot as the site of a "Nomadic Festival."


THE SOUTH LAWN
THERE IS A SOUTHERN LANDSCAPE OF THE MIND lush with majestic and mossy oaks, glimmering with the light of still waters, redolent of sweet flowers and untold histories.
It's a cliche so resonant it refuses to die or to be updated.
And in small, private gardens, like Sherry Durlach's outside Charleston, S.C., it actually exists.
When Durlach first discovered the remnants of a pre-Civil War plantation about to be parceled into lots, she knew instantly that not only the house but also the land stretching languorously along the banks of a deep creek had to be preserved.
In addition, she wanted a cutting garden that wouldn't demand backbreaking care.
Her gardener, Beverly Rivers, adept in the science of matching plot to person, obliged with a welcoming outdoor room neatly fenced off from water's edge.


SCHOOL COLORS
THE HIGH SCHOOLS in eastern Bergen County are all good ones.
They send most of their seniors off to college and, presumably, to good and prosperous lives.
In many cases, people in these 20 towns choose to live where they do precisely so their children can attend the schools.
None of the 15 high schools that serve the 20 towns are large.
The strong penchant of New Jersey residents for home rule, for control of what goes on within the borders of their towns, is very much in evidence here.
Also strongly in evidence, in a state with the fourth most segregated school system in the country, are race and prejudice -- real or perceived -- and the law.


For the Elderly, a Day-Care Option
PAST experience deceived Jeffrey Kessel last year.
It led him to think that a computer maker or electronics firm would rent the 8,500-square-foot free-standing building that the family real-estate firm, George Kessel Associates of Bergenfield, N.J., was putting up at its Commercecenter corporate park in Totowa, N.J.
There are 50 tenants in the nine buildings of the park, which is near Route 46 and Route 80 in southeastern Passaic County.
Many are in the computer or electronics business.


Sex Zone Rules: A Roundup
Last March, Mayor Giuliani and the City Council agreed on strict new zoning regulations for sex-related businesses that would force many to close and leave few areas open for relocation: the city expects the number of such outlets in Manhattan to initially drop to as few as 15 from 177.
To put the new rules into effect, it remains only for the community boards to take an advisory vote (due Thursday), for the borough presidents to weigh in (30 days later) and for the City Planning Commission and the City Council to take an official vote, which is expected by November, when the Mayor's temporary moratorium on new sex businesses is to expire.


On the Highways: 11 Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 at Route 17, in Paramus.
Left eastbound and westbound lane closed Monday through Friday, 10 P.M. to 6 A.M, for bridge work.
Through July 1.


Reclusive Tribe Fears Effects of Plane Crash
The crash last month of one of the nation's most advanced warplanes on this peaceful Indian reservation just west of the Continental Divide has forged an unlikely alliance of secrecy between a reclusive ancient people and the Air Force.
Military officials refuse to talk about the crash, as do tribal officials.
When the silence around Zuni is broken, it is most likely to be by members of the tribe who talk of their concerns about the exposure of Zuni Indians to highly toxic chemicals at the crash site and in the smoke from the plane's explosion.


SUNDAY, June 11, 1995; STRANGE BUT TRUE: Wildcats vs. Lady Kong
Some American products have been well received in Japan despite trade barriers.
"Besuboru" is, of course, a national obsession (not plagued by strikes).
And American football is also making some inroads, although probably not in the way that Vince Lombardi might have expected.
Two amateur teams, one in Tokyo and one in Osaka, play two games of full-contact football a year, in helmets and pads, once in the spring and once in the fall.
But here's the catch, Vince: all the players are young women.
Two companies field the teams, the Kansai Gogin Bank Wildcats of Osaka and the Daichi Life Insurance Lady Kong of Tokyo, some of whom are shown at right.


Luxury Home for Elderly Opens Its Doors
NO wonder the Swiss Benevolent Society bought 54 acres on top of Kisco Mountain for use as a Swiss cultural center 70-odd years ago.
The panoramic views vividly remind one of Switzerland.
The society bought the property and a country inn with it in 1923 and for many years the inn, known as the Swiss Home, was a retirement home for elderly Swiss nationals.
Eventually, it was turned into a nursing home until 1993 when escalating operating costs forced it to close.
Now the Swiss Home is once again home to older adults.
In March, after extensive renovation and modernization, it opened its doors as Town and Country, a luxury residence for the elderly.


When Some of Your Best Friends Are Insects
THIS is about respect for insects.
They are starting to appear, and insects deserve at least a moment from gardeners to learn who they are before they are given a quick stomp with the shoe.
Granted, masses of some insects can do irreparable harm, yet there are many beneficial insects worth having around.
The onus is upon us to know the difference.
It should be noted that insects have their places in the scheme of things.
Insects are by far the most successful animals on earth and man would be nowhere without them.
This balance is finely tuned and troubles occur when things get out of kilter.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
View of Dogdom's Pinnacle
AS the president of the Poodle Club of Long Island talked, Bonaparte listened.
Bonaparte sat in the front row, on a chair.
That made him tower over those seated next to him.
Bonaparte is a poodle, a big black standard poodle.
With his windblown pompadour, he looked like a canine Lyle Lovett.


Robyn Trugman, Jeremy F. Simon
Robyn Beth Trugman, the daughter of Riva and Leonard Trugman of Upper Saddle River, N.J., is to be married today to Jeremy Franklin Simon, the son of Drs.
Julie and Barry Simon of Loudonville, N.Y.
Rabbi David A. Nelson is to perform the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 26, is a regulatory analyst at the New York office of Union Bank of Switzerland.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the president of Del Electronics, a manufacturing company in Valhalla, N.Y.
Her mother is the director of the Educational Therapy Center in Ridgewood, N.J.


Stevens Makes Impact But Not on Scoresheet
Certainly Scott Stevens of the Devils had some impressive moments yesterday afternoon at Byrne Arena.
He made the highlight reel late in the third period when he flipped Craig MacTavish of the Flyers over the U.S.
Health Care sign and into the Devils' bench.
Adding injury to insult, Stevens used his stick to tap the helmet-less noggin of MacTavish, who rubbed it afterward on the bench.
Stevens, the Devils' captain and highest-paid player, got plenty of ice time and always seemed to be in the middle of the action.


North Korea May Agree To Atom Deal
The United States and North Korea have reached tentative understandings aimed at carrying out an accord to halt the North's suspected nuclear weapons program, United States officials said today.
"We understand that today in Kuala Lumpur some tentative understandings were reached between the two sides," Robert C. Gallucci, the State Department official in charge of the nuclear issue, said during a news conference here today.
But he cautioned that "the Devil is in the details" and that "we are not finished yet."


June 4-10: Conspiracy Charges; 6 Defense Lawyers Face Drug Indictments
The indictment of six lawyers in Miami last week on drug conspiracy charges made for a bracing commentary from officials on how cocaine has corrupted the legal profession.
The point was made all the more starkly by the fact that one lawyer used to be a high-level Justice Department official who had tried to put drug barons in jail.
The event also highlighted a decade-long tug-of-war in South Florida between Federal prosecutors and lawyers who defend drug clients.


Debate Goes On Over Protecting Residents And Workers
IT is a familiar scene in communities with burgeoning Hispanic populations: early each weekday morning, hundreds of men congregate on downtown streets and corners, hoping to be hired as day laborers by passing landscape and construction trucks.
This town's Community Relations Committee, appointed by the Mayor last year, has been grappling with ways to cope with what is seen not only as a hazard and nuisance by residents but also a breeding ground for exploitation of the workers themselves.


Substituting Tuna Steaks For T-Bone on Outdoor Grills
ON grills throughout this region, fresh tuna steaks now often replace the T-bone and porterhouse variety.
But unlike beef, which can be cooked to taste, tuna is best when left at least a bit rare in the middle.
Otherwise, it will be rather dry and tasteless.
The reason?
It has a much lower fat content than even the leanest beef.
And much to the dismay of diet experts, fat is what often carries flavor.


Schools Face Renovations of Aging Buildings
RISING student enrollments are creating problems for school districts that are also plagued by shortages of space and aging buildings that need repairs, renovations and expansion.
Many districts are asking voters to approve bond issues of several million dollars to finance such improvements.


Budget Cut Leads Military to Shift Focus of AIDS Fight
Facing a drastic budget cut, military medical officers say they are planning to curtail clinical work in treatment of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, to concentrate instead on developing a preventive vaccine.
With the new emphasis, the officers said, they would be fulfilling the primary mission of military medicine: keeping troops in a state of readiness.


TRAVEL
ONE truism about travel of any kind is that you often remember your companions at least as well as the places you go.
In literary travel, a first-person genre, choice of companion is especially important: you can't ditch your tour guide and still finish the trip.
This season's books tend toward the outdoorsy, the rough and rugged; the following selection will let you explore two rivers in the United States or wander off to Baja California, Moscow, East Africa or northern Alaska.
You can travel by canoe, bicycle or 18-wheeler truck, and with guides who are just as diverse.
Some will educate, entertain and edify; others you may wish to throttle.
The best writing can be found in Robin Cody's VOYAGE OF A SUMMER SUN: Canoeing the Columbia River (Knopf, $23).
Mr.
Cody, a novelist and freelance writer, paddled a canoe from the Canadian headwaters of the Columbia down to his home in Portland, Ore., and on to the Pacific Ocean.
"The story," he says right up front, "is the Columbia River, not the canoe and me, but I've learned that friends can't hear me tell about the river until they know why I was out there." He takes care to point out that "this is not an adventure story, although some adventure was unavoidable, and I didn't set out to find myself if I could help it." Thank God!
The travel-narrative-cum-voyage-of-self-discovery is by now such a cliche that it should be outlawed.
Trips need to carry their own weight, and this one does.


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
Congratulations on a fine essay.
Now we need Rosenblatt to survey the way in which schools shape and misshape experiences that affect character more deeply than words: the way sports are conducted, grades are dished out, conflicts resolved.
It takes a total environment to reach a child.
AMITAI ETZIONI Washington


For Now, the Job Outlook Is Brighter
THREE years into the recovery, there is finally a window of opportunity for graduates entering the job market.
Analysts and career counselors say the employment outlook this spring is better than it has been in five years for high school and college job applicants, with recruiting activity up and salaries on the increase.
But the advice from the experts to would-be workers is: hustle or else.


Asleep on the Job
Gone are the days when actresses were obliged to be goddesses.
Movie stars have asserted their rights, and now Hollywood is a better, more humane place for it: freed at last of all responsibility to their public, no longer required to maintain the illusion of perfection, actresses are recognized for who they really are -- people just like the rest of us, people with problems.
They turn up at opening-night parties, wearing no makeup or rumpled pants suits or silly ankle boots, as touching proof of their fallibility.
All of which, you would think, would move us to compassion for these innocent victims of their own good looks and the media's relentless attention.
Why is it then that when my friends and I are watching the Academy Awards or leafing through the latest issue of Movieline, we feel as if we're being cheated?
The old studios, with their flawless publicity stills and extensive wardrobe departments, begin to seem like not such a bad idea after all.
Many stars today evidently operate under the misapprehension that it's the producers who are paying their salaries, when in fact it's us, the people who buy the tickets.
Do they imagine that we're paying them millions of dollars a year for their performances?


No Headline


Word for Word / High School Speeches; Farewell, Dear Fellow Graduates. Hello, Whoever I Am.
VALEDICTORY speeches, now being heard at high school graduation ceremonies across America, bid farewell to a million bittersweet memories of youth and look forward with fear and longing to the future.
Today, the basic message, whether given by valedictorians or students chosen to speak by tryout or plebiscite, is unchanged: the world is waiting, take heart, take heed.
Tanya Holthusen was the valedictorian in a class of 29 at Red Lake High School on the Red Lake Indian Reservation in northern Minnesota.
She lives in Ponemah (pronounced Po-NEE-mah), or Where the Wind Blows.
Miss Holthusen, an Ojibwa, spoke on the importance of friendship and family.
She plans to attend Fort Lewis College in Colorado.


Wages of Deceit: Untrue Confessions
WITH THE HELP OF A makeup artist, Rob and Emily are returning to themselves after an appearance on "The Charles Perez Show." Emily has snatched off an unnaturally bright red wig and is combing out her naturally brown hair, while Rob carefully plucks off the remains of a fake beard.
Along with three other couples, Rob and Emily (their assumed names on the show) have just finished taping an episode titled "I Can't Forgive Her for Aborting Our Baby." Rob seems unfazed by the experience, but Emily is clearly upset.
She agreed to do the show, she says, to warn other women that the decision to have an abortion is one that will haunt them, yet the show focused almost exclusively on the conflict the abortion had caused between her and Rob.


Two New Programs For Frequent Fliers
America West Airlines has formed a frequent-flier partnership with Continental Airlines, and T.W.A. has added two car rental companies to its program.
Members of the America West program will earn a minimum of 500 miles whenever they fly on either Continental Airlines or Continental Express. (Continental's frequent fliers will earn 500 miles for trips on America West.)


Odd Desk Decor? Let Us Know!
Harry Truman's desk had a sign that said, "The buck stops here." How about your desk?
Tell us about the Tibetan dart gun you use to keep nasty, work-bearing colleagues at bay, or the ossified fortune cookie from that Very Memorable Meal in 1989.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


WESTERN OFFICIALS SAY SERBIA HELPS BOSNIAN COMRADES
Even as the West courts Serbia's President in hopes of bringing peace to Bosnia and winning the release of the 52 remaining United Nations hostages, his military is secretly assisting the Bosnian Serbs, American and European officials say.
The Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, vowed last year to seal the border between Serbia and Bosnia, and he won an easing of United Nations sanctions as a result.
Mr.
Milosevic insists that since then only non-lethal aid has been sent to the Bosnian Serbs, an assertion generally accepted by United Nations monitors.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WASHINGTON HEIGHTS  Open-Air Serenades: Music in Bennett Park
"People in Washington Heights enjoy the arts but can't always get down to Lincoln Center," said Roxanne Ansolabehere, a board member of Northern Manhattan Community Artists, a nonprofit sponsored by the city Department of Cultural Affairs.


Post-Modern Love
THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT  Sex, Shopping and the Novel.
By Alain de Botton.
Illustrated. 326 pp.
New York: Picador USA. $23.


Movie Violence Has Become Routine
To the Editor:
In your June 4 news article on the general moviegoer's response to Senator Bob Dole's comments on the entertainment industry, I might submit that the 17-year-old high school junior who admits to seeing "Natural Born Killers" seven times graphically illustrates the magnitude of the cultural problem that Senator Dole and others decry.


Yael Goldsmith, Raphael Treitel
Yael Elana Goldsmith, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Sheldon D. Goldsmith of New York, was married on Thursday to Raphael Treitel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Treitel of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Rafael Blum officiated at the Sands, a catering establishment in Atlantic Beach, L.I.


Cooling Off On a Pastel Island
IT had been New York's coldest spring in years, and I was ready for a weekend escape -- some place sunny and balmy, with teal-blue water and soothing sands.
A long weekend in Bermuda, less than two hours from New York by air, seemed just right.
So on a blustery Friday morning in early May, I eagerly boarded a plane.
Unfortunately, Bermuda did not feel much warmer than Manhattan.
The sky was overcast, and a powerful wind (the island is well out in the Atlantic) made it seem much cooler than the 70 degrees the pilot promised us.


Imbalance Persists, Defying Courts
EVEN before Brown v.
Board of Education in 1954, New Jersey had a law prohibiting racial segregation in public schools.
In rulings in 1965 and 1971, the State Supreme Court upheld the education commissioner's power to desegregate schools across districts, regardless of the reasons for the segregation.
The law went further than the Federal counterpart, which applied only to de jure segregation.
But the living conditions of the densely populated Northeast, where heavily black and Hispanic urban areas are surrounded by affluent, predominantly white suburbs, have left New Jersey's schools the nation's fourth most segregated, according to a study of the 1991-92 school year by the Harvard Project on School Desegregation.


SUNDAY, June 11, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: Maira Kalman
Q: What do children want?
A: Do you mean "What do children want to snack on after 12 consecutive hours of TV-watching?" or "What do children want to drink ink for?" I'm no kid, so I found some to ask.


'To' vs. 'With'
"TO' IS FROM MARS; "with" is from Venus.
"I have noticed a telephone locution lately that is beginning to drive me nuts," interoffices Philip Gefter, my colleague who works in Business Day. (You don't like interoffice as a verb? You've got a better verb for such communication?) "It's 'I'll get back with you.' I've always said, 'I'll get back to you.' Style police -- help!"


Valerie M. Alley, Mark A. Limardo
Dr.
Valerie Maliha Alley, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ali A. Alley of Berwick, Pa., was married there yesterday to Mark A. Limardo, a son of Angelo Limardo of New York and the late Rose Limardo.
The Rev.
William L. Price performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church.
Dr.
Alley, 34, is keeping her name.
She is an emergency medical physician at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
A graduate of Dickinson College, she received a master's degree in genetics from George Washington University and her medical degree from Hahnemann Medical College.


June 4-10; Remorse Story
(Chinese characters), it appears, means never having to say you're sorry.
After months of debate, Japan's lower house of Parliament passed a resolution last week intended to show remorse for Japan's conduct during World War II.
But in the end it seemed to show as much ambivalence as anything.


The Nation; Congress Fiddles While Flags Don't Burn
INSTEAD of swearing "to support and defend" the Constitution, as members of Congress have done on taking office for more than 200 years, the 104th Congress must have pledged "to support and amend."
Last week committees in both houses moved forward on the third attempted amendment of the year, an effort to prohibit the "physical desecration" of the American flag.
And a House subcommittee began hearings on a fourth topic, prayer in schools. (Earlier, the Senate rejected an amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget and the House killed off proposals to impose term limits on members of Congress.)


If You're Thinking of Living In/Shippan Point; Stamford Harbor's Treasured Address
THROUGHOUT the almost three decades that Stamford has been rebuilding its downtown into Connecticut's premier business and financial center, the residential districts have remained essentially untouched.
Large homes still nestle along streams and lakes in back-country woods, comfortable subdivisions cover the mid-portion, low-income housing dominates the southwest end and the shoreline is rimmed with expensive houses, private docks, boat clubs and marinas.


Muster and Chang Ready for Final
Thomas Muster, the man with the martial arts manner and the fancy Ferrari, is the first Austrian ever to reach a Grand Slam final.
Michael Chang, the man with the shortest legs in tennis, was perhaps the American least expected to survive six rounds in a field that originally contained top-ranked Andre Agassi, second-ranked Pete Sampras, and the two-time champion Jim Courier.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Patrice Kunesh; Defining How a Tribe Governs Its Land
PATRICE KUNESH of North Stonington is a counselor for the Mashantucket Pequot tribe in eastern Connecticut whose tasks include drafting amendments to the tribe's constitution.
Ms.
Kunesh, a member of the Hunkpapa band of the Lakota -- the most famous member of that tribe was Sitting Bull -- is a native of Minnesota, and a 1989 graduate of the University of Colorado Law School.
She worked for the Native American Rights Fund from 1988 until 1994, where she was part of a team that examined the constitutions of five tribes, including the Mashantuckets.


Zappology
FRANK ZAPPA: THE NEGATIVE DIALECTICS OF POODLE PLAY  By Ben Watson. 597 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $27.50.


F.Y.I.
Live.
Don't Eat Cars.
Q.
At 251 West 13th Street, near Greenwich Avenue, there is an ornate building with two large plaques inside its vaulted entranceway.
One identifies the building as the location of some church, and the other has an essay on it describing the building as, among other things, "a metaphor concerning molecular physics" and a collision between a 19th-century building and a 20th-century building.
What in the world is this place?
A.
Welcome to the wonderful world of Robert Delford Brown, artist and founder of the First National Church of the Exquisite Panic, a self-made religion devoted to laughter, art and the road to Nevada (Nirvana, says Mr. Brown, is too hard to find).
Mr.
Brown, 64, started the religion in 1964 as a stunt to attract attention to his first New York City art exhibit, a display of 3,600 pounds of meat in a local cooler. (Ah, the 60's.)
He billed the show as "the grand opening services" of his new religion and promised "startling spiritual, sexual and esthetic revelations." He has been spreading his doctrine of Orthodox Paganism (its two commandments: live, and do not eat cars) ever since.
Mr.
Brown, a smiling prophet who sometimes preaches in a clown's wig and rubber nose, bought the building in 1967, and asked an architect, Paul Rudolph, to renovate in 1971.
The "collision" refers to the juxtaposition of the new design to the original 1888 design by Richard Morris Hunt.
Mr.
Brown lives on the second floor, or in Temple of Hilarity, as it is known to the converted.
Take the 'El' to Japan?
Q.
Me and my peers (all native New Yorkers in our mid-50's) disagree about where each of the Manhattan elevated trains was and when they came down. (One squabble involves a tale about the Japanese buying scrap and using it during World War II.) You could settle a lot of fights by giving us a definitive answer.
A.
Elevated trains once ran, as part of the IRT system, up Second, Third, Sixth and Ninth Avenues, as well as over the streets over lower Manhattan, said Paul Fritz, a subway motorman and historian who has created a comprehensive map of subway lines throughout the system's history.
The els' disappearance, hastened by improving technology and the unification of the city's system, began in earnest with the abandonment of the Sixth Avenue Line in 1938 and its demolition a year later.
It was that demolition and its timing in relation to the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor that sparked "the myth" of subway steel being used by the Japanese war machine, said Clifton Hood, author of "722 Miles," a subway history.
"It's not true, but its amazing how that story persists," chuckled Mr.
Hood, who said the rumor was so pervasive during the war that Manhattan Borough President Stanley M. Issacs commissioned an investigation.
It found that the scrap had not made it into enemy hands, though, according to Mr.
Hood, other scrap metal from around the country was bought by the Japanese before the war.
As for the Sixth Avenue scrap, a large portion was bought by two men (one from San Francisco, one from the Bronx) who paid $80,000 for some 20,000 tons of steel, according to the December 1938 issue of the Bronx Home News.
The Board of Estimate approved the sale over the objections of the Bronx Borough President, who was concerned about the scrap being used by (you guessed it) enemy forces.
The piecemeal demolition of the elevated lines continued.
By 1942, the Second and Ninth Avenue lines were gone.
The Third Avenue El lasted until 1955.
Quoth the Raven . . .
Q.
How did the community of Ravenswood, Queens, get its name?
Was that sinister bird responsible?
A.
The little neighborhood to the north of the Queensboro Bridge owes its name to the Rev.
Francis Hawks, who around 1840 changed the name of the settlement from Matona to Ravenscroft in honor of his buddy, the Right Rev.
John Stark Ravenscroft, according to documents from the Queens Historical Society.
As the story goes, when John Ravenscroft became Bishop of North Carolina, Mr.
Hawks apparently felt his chum might be offended at having such a small place as his namesake and changed the name to Ravenswood.
JESSE McKINLEY
Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Kirov Orchestra To Play in 3 Festivals
The orchestra and soloists of the Kirov Theater in St.
Petersburg conducted by Valery Gergiev will participate in three festivals within a 500-mile radius this summer.
First is the White Nights Festival in St.
Petersburg, this year from June 15 to 30.
Highlights include a gala concert with Placido Domingo on June 19, performances on June 25 and 26 of a co-production, directed by Franco Zeffirelli, with La Scala of Verdi's "Aida," and the premiere on June 30 of a new Kirov production of Richard Strauss's "Salome."


Rebecca Feldman, John J. Sheinbaum
Rebecca Danielle Feldman, the daughter of Gail and Roger Feldman of Chevy Chase, Md., is to be married today to John Jacob Sheinbaum, the son of Lois and Morris Sheinbaum of Jamesburg, N.J.
Rabbi Jonathan Z. Maltzman is to perform the ceremony at the Park Hyatt Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 22, teaches English at the Cascadilla School in Ithaca, N.Y.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York office of McDermott, Will &amp; Emery, a Washington law firm.
He is also the president of the National Council for Public-Private Partnerships.
Her mother, a former financial analyst in Washington for Crestar Bank, is a writer.


Far From Farce
To the Editor:
In his account of David Wojnarowicz's life, "All the Rage Posthumously"  [ May 7 ] , Richard B. Woodward characterizes Wojnarowicz's lawsuit against Donald Wildmon and the American Family Association as a "somewhat farcical" dispute arising over Mr.
Wildmon's reprinting "without permission part of a sexually explicit collage by Wojnarowicz for one of his pamphlets."


Mantle and America: Allies in Vulnerability
Mickey Mantle was 19 years old when he burst into our lives, as strong as the heart of the great golden West, a fielder of dreams in a time of infinite promise.
It was 1951, the boom-time after a world war won, early summer afternoon in the American Century.
Yesterday, Mantle was transferred out of intensive care after the most invasive of heroic medical procedures.
He got his new liver at about the same time the country took heart from the brave rescue of a downed flier in a murky military adventure.
Rooting for Mantle's recovery, America may also be rooting for itself in a troubled time of re-evaluation, insecurity and discord.


In Pursuit of Ben Hogan
Forty years after he dominated the game and more than a quarter-century since he last played competitively, Ben Hogan remains the iconic embodiment of golf as a sport and as a measure of character.
His career -- shortened by war and by devastating injuries from which he recovered apparently stronger than ever -- was drawing to a close just as television began to inflate the sport from a relatively quiet pastime into today's gaudy endorsement-laden spectacle.
Yet he continues to exert a unique fascination, both for his accomplishments and for the manner in which he undertook them.
At his peak, he was unarguably the best in the game.
He won nine major championships -- four United States Opens, two P.G.A.
Championships, two Masters and a British Open -- over the eight seasons from 1946 to 1953, a remarkable achievement considering his near-fatal auto accident in 1949.
In 1959 (when the 19-year-old Jack Nicklaus won the United States Amateur), Hogan, then 46, entered the Open at the Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
During one of the practice rounds, he caught the attention of Jules Alexander, a photographer and weekend golfer, who fell under the Hawk's spell and stalked him during the tournament, shooting more than 100 photographs.
His black-and-white pictures, vivid and rich in detail, are the basis for THE HOGAN MYSTIQUE: Classic Photographs of the Great Ben Hogan (The American Golfer/Triumph, $50).
Included are a running commentary by Ken Venturi, the golf analyst and a longtime friend of Hogan's, and essays by Dave Anderson, a sports columnist at The New York Times; Ben Crenshaw, a two-time Masters champion and a historian of the game; and Dan Jenkins, the sportswriter.
Although not meant as an instructional text, the book reflects Hogan's technique and shot-making skill throughout.
One striking example is a pair of photos of his follow-through on two different shots, both taken at the same angle from behind and at first glance almost identical.
Mr.
Venturi notes that in one, Hogan's extended, slightly higher finish indicates that he is hitting a fade with a fuller shot; in the other, Hogan's right hand has crossed over, the club face is down and the finish is flatter, indicating that he is playing a draw.
The essays are a solid counterpoint to the photographs.
"I have this notion," Mr.
Jenkins writes, "that if Ben Hogan . . . had ever worn a green shirt and yellow slacks on a golf course, he couldn't have broken 85."  GORDON T.THOMPSON


Dina R. Kimel, David E. Fisher
Dina Rochelle Kimel, a daughter of Mary and Jack Kimel of Denver, is to be married this evening to David Eric Fisher, a son of Susan and Mark Fisher of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Seiger is to perform the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Denver.
The bride, 23, and bridegroom, 24, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
They are graduate students at Columbia University.
In the fall she will be a second-year student at the School of Social Work.
He will be a third-year law student.


Amy M. Daniels, D. H. Thompson
Dr.
Amy Melissa Daniels, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Daniels of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to David Henry Thompson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Lee Thompson of New York.
The Rev.
James W. Adelmann, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Garden City Community Church.
Dr.
Thompson, 26, is to become a resident in internal medicine at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington next month.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her medical degree from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
Her father is the president of Daniels Actuarial Enterprises in Garden City.
Her mother, Marjorie Daniels, is an administrator at the Jacob D. Fuschberg Law Center of Touro College in Huntington, L.I.


A Plan for Eighth Street Hits Landmark Violations
To the Editor:
As the executive director of the Village Alliance, a business improvement district, I would like to comment on the May 21 article "Beyond Awnings: Fight for the Soul of Eighth Street."


Of Good and Evil, Yin and Yang, in Union Sq.
"WHO is this man, why does Disney and Harvard have such faith in him?" asked Isaac Tigrett.
"I am an entrepreneur lucky enough to have a creative mind that gives people pleasure. We say, help ever, hurt never.
"But in every community there are professional agitators. There is always that one old lady who comes to every meeting and wants no changes."


Should 2 Lanes Become 5? There's a Difference of Opinion
Edgewater appears to be split over a proposed five-lane highway linking the town to North Bergen.
What exists now is a winding two-lane road that needs some improvement.
What is being proposed is a two-mile, five-lane road from the Hudson-Bergen County border in North Bergen to Route 5 in Edgewater.


Subway Brakes Work Well in Post-Crash Test, but at Slow Speeds
An automatic braking system that was suspected of having failed in a subway crash Monday on the Williamsburg Bridge worked according to design yesterday, as investigators ran an identical train over the same stretch of track.
But the tests left investigators little closer to determining what caused the accident.
Although the brakes worked, the tests showed that if the train had been going at top speed, they would not have stopped it fast enough to prevent the crash.


June 4-10: The Quagmire; A Daring Rescue Brings Scant Relief To Clinton on Bosnia
For all the euphoria generated at the White House, the deliverance of Captain Scott F. O'Grady as a durable hero last week amid the nation's muddled Bosnian debate struck the capital as something of a non sequitur.
True, the 29-year-old pilot, rescued in a sensational helicopter raid after six days of hiding in the hilly forests of the Bosnian war zone, stood prime-time tall, praising God, country and NATO with inspiring patriotism.
But at the same time, the Bosnian Prime Minister, Haris Siladzic, was railing bitterly outside the White House at the Clinton Administration's maintenance of the arms embargo on Bosnia.


Facts Are Not Always The Sum of Identity
AMERICAN IDENTITY IS A strange landscape: we're always looking for terra firma and always stumbling onto terra incognita.
We know the markers, but we're still trying to figure out how to read them.
What is your race or ethnicity; what is your place (inherited or acquired) on the social scale?
State your gender and your sexual preferences; name your political affiliations and try to describe (please try) their relationship to the above categories.
Would you prefer to move from the city to the suburbs or vice versa?
Are you married or otherwise indelibly coupled?
If you are single, is that your choice or was it thrust upon you without your consent?


Debra L. Katz, David L. Horowitz
Debra Lynn Katz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Katz of River Vale, N.J., was married last evening to David Louis Horowitz, the son of Sylvia Horowitz of Livingston, N.J., and Irwin Horowitz of Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad performed the ceremony at the Woodcliff Lake Hilton in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
Horowitz, 26, is an associate director at Cromwell Partners, an executive search firm in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Witco Corporation, a manufacturer of chemicals and petroleum products in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother, Annbeth Katz, is an independent human resource consultant in River Vale.


Norplant Complaints: Legitimate or Concocted?
"Will the Lawyers Kill Off Norplant?" (May 28) reported that in the five years since the silicone-coated birth-control device was introduced, Norplant has been the target of an avalanche of lawsuits brought by many of the lawyers who took on the makers of silicone breast implants and won a $4 billion settlement.
Some critics of Norplant responded with another side to the story in the following letters.
To the Editor:


In Budget Battle Between Mayor and the Council, the Devil Is in the Details
There is a small nursery at New York Foundling Hospital in Manhattan, supported by the taxpayers of the City of New York, where troubled parents can drop off their children for a day or so when for whatever reason -- drugs, illness, domestic violence -- they feel they can no longer cope.
It is only one of scores of programs that have given New York City its national reputation for expansive social services.
And it is one of the programs that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani says the city can no longer afford.


When the Party Says The Party's Over
Next Thursday 42 more or less conflicted men and women will gather at the Princeton Marriott to perform an unpleasant task, which is to dump an old and proven friend on orders from a relative newcomer who nevertheless has a hot streak going.
The state Republican Committee, a man and a woman from each of the counties, will be asked by the relative newcomer, Governor Whitman, to replace Virginia Littell as party chairman at the expiration of her term on June 30, and put in Chuck Haytaian, the Assembly Speaker who has conquered all the narrow worlds of the Assembly and is looking for something new to do.
Something that pays.


Heather Arak, Nathan Kanofsky
HEATHER ARAK, 24, and Nathan Kanofsky, 25, met as fellow art majors at Syracuse University, where they were best friends until one night in their senior year when he kissed her in the printmaking studio.
She said she had two different reactions: first, she wanted to run out of the studio, forget they had ever kissed and go back to being friends; second, she wanted to keep kissing.


BEST SELLERS: June 11, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
2
2
5
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
3
4
2
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
4
9
148
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
3
67
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
6
142
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
7
5
7
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
8
7
4
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
9
8
51
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
10
10
3
MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.
11
1
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
12
11
10
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
13
13
16
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
14
14
5
BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.
15
1
OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) The romance of a girl and a priest who is assigned to oversee her exorcism.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
35
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
3
2
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
3
2
7
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
4
5
66
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
4
24
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
6
7
17
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) Governmental regulations.
7
6
8
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) Rituals and spiritual journeys.
8
12
77
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories.
9
8
4
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
10
11
2
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist's essays.
11
9
4
LISTEN TO MY HEART, by Kathie Lee Gifford and Cody Gifford. (Hyperion, $12.95.) The television personality talks to her 4 1/2-year-old son.
12
10
6
MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The actress reminisces about Hollywood.
13
10
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How computers will alter our lives in the future.
14
14
40
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage.
15
5
MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling into a huge industry.
16*
1
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
17*
15
13
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
107
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
53
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
12
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
4
7
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University, $27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the mercy of organized crime.
DEEP RIVER, by Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr.
Endo's novel follows soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.
THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg. (Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct under the old regimes.
THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr.
Amis's cool and brilliant novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.
IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur -- The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World, by David Fromkin. (Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made the 20th century what it is.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES, by Robert Musil.
Translated by Sophie Wilkins and Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged readership.
RETHINKING AMERICA, by Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of America's economy and prescriptions for repairing it to accord with a changed world order, by a journalist who does not fear big subjects.
THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr.
Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.
WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU: The Butterfly and the Bat, by Edgar Munhall. (Frick Collection/Flammarion/Abbeville, $45.) A profusely illustrated biographical account of the encounter between the eccentric American painter and the foppish French nobleman that resulted in one of Whistler's masterpieces.


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
As employers, we obviously need employees who understand science, mathematics, history and communications, to name but a few disciplines.
But without a high set of personal standards, like those emphasized in character education programs, all the traditional subjects are of little value.
NORMAN R. AUGUSTINE President, Lockheed Martin Corporation Bethesda, Md.


Crash Focuses Attention On Equipment Conditions
The Transit Authority has spent 13 years modernizing the New York City subways, including the antiquated signal system, which is suspected of having contributed to a fatal train crash last week.
The job is about half done, and will not be completed until 2020.
A project to replace subway switching towers, which has been under way for 35 years, should finish sooner, about 2010.
By then it will be time to start over.


Twice-Told Tale
To the Sports Editor:
The New Jersey Devils, in so many ways, remind one of the Brooklyn Dodgers of 1952-53, immortalized by Roger Kahn in "The Boys of Summer."


Low Bridge Lifts Trucks' Lids
Frank Narcisco has heard the same sounds again and again for years on Southern Boulevard: the growling crunch of metal wedging against metal, or the bone-rattling screech of roofs being ripped from trucks.
The truckers who work for Mr.
Narcisco, the owner of Santini Moving Company on 173d Street, have heard the sounds often enough to avoid the low clearance beneath the elevated subway line above Southern Boulevard.
But four or five times a month, according to police officers at the 42d Precinct, rigs driven by truckers unfamiliar with Bronx streets get stuck beneath the tracks, or worse, lose their roofs.


Trouble With Your Conga? No Time for the Lottery? These Inventors Have a Better Way
AH, New Jersey, birthplace of Bubble Wrap, Valium and Spaghetti-O's.
Not to mention the light bulb, the phonograph and the electron microscope.
Since the day in 1819 when Seth Boyden of Newark was awarded a patent for a shiny new kind of shoe leather, New Jerseyans have provided an endless stream of ideas and devices to make life more pleasant and productive, from the concrete highway divider to the color television to the artificial larynx.
From the motion picture to salt-water taffy, no engineering challenge has proved too great or too small to inspire native inventors.


Visual Flair, A Hip Sensibility And a Past
BATMAN, WHO IS HAUNTED BY a traumatic childhood and attracted to danger, has always appealed to Joel Schumacher.
"He's not a superhero but a real man with real vulnerabilities," said Mr.
Schumacher, the director of "Batman Forever."
"He's also sexier and cooler than Superman," the director added.
"I mean, let's face it. Any guy who chooses to go out at night dressed like a bat as a vigilante is an interesting and isolating character."


In the Region/Connecticut; Why Buy a Tiny, Unbuildable Lot Near a Lake?
IN the 30's through the 50's, many of Connecticut's lakesides were developed with little summer cottages on small lots.
Later, many of the cottages became year-round homes.
But subsequent zoning, most recently for environmental reasons, has prohibited building on these minuscule lots and many of them have been put up for sale in the past few years.


Amy F. Loeb and Jeffrey A. Warsh
Amy Frances Loeb, a producer of television and radio commercials in New York, is to be married today to Assemblyman Jeffrey A. Warsh, Republican of Middlesex County, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Marcu is to perform the ceremony at the Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange, N.J.
The bride, 28, works at Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, an advertising agency.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Milton and Barbara Loeb of Somerset, N.J.
The bride's father owns Beam Promotions, advertising and marketing consultants in Somerset.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the Rutgers University Libraries in New Brunswick, N.J.


Age Catches Up Quickly For Winner of Pageant
On the night that Staci Baldwin was named Miss Washington U.S.A., she walked down a runway wearing a sparkling tiara, clutching red roses and shedding tears of joy before an enthusiastic audience.
She went home with the expectation of financial gains from personal endorsements and appearances.
But two weeks after the April 23 pageant, a stage in the Miss Universe competition, Miss Baldwin got a pink slip from the pageant's promoters.
Their reason: she is too old.
When Miss Baldwin turns 27 on Sunday, she will become ineligible to represent Washington in the next level of the Miss Universe competition, the Miss U.S.A. pageant in February.


June 4-10; Top Bananas


The Blighted House Next Door
Moline Street in Bellerose is a well-kept block of neat, single-family homes, a picture of residential pride.
Then there is the house at number 89-29.
Over the years, the ceiling in the back of the city-owned house had been chewed through by rodents and blown away by wind.
The gutters were breeding grounds for pigeons and rodents, whose carcasses were strewn throughout the house.


No 'Rambo,' And 6 Days On the Run
As he lay in the bushes near where his parachute landed, his face in the dirt and his ears covered with camouflage gloves, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady thought that a few feet away there were people looking to kill him.
"It wasn't that they were just walking around me," the 29-year-old pilot said today.
"It was that they were shooting their rifles, and they weren't just shooting at bunny rabbits, because I never saw any bunny rabbits, I never saw a squirrel. I think they thought they saw something that was me -- and were trying to kill me."


GARDENING
MANY American publishers feel that the time is right for gardening books.
The demographics are encouraging -- the baby boomers who enriched the authors and publishers of volumes on jogging a decade ago have moved farther into maturity.
With leisure, comfortable incomes and settled ways, the theory goes, they should be ripe to take up gardening.
Thus, hardly a day goes by that some new book on the subject doesn't appear in my mailbox.
Sadly, many -- perhaps the majority -- of them are early candidates for a garage sale, especially those dominated by the alphabet, following a formula that says start with abelia, end with zinnia and along the way throw in some information about the height and spread of plants, the colors of their flowers and how tolerant they are of nasty weather.


Tibet
To the Editor: In his article on his travel in Tibet ("Pilgrimage to Tibetan Temples," April 19), John Lundquist states, "I never felt I was being watched or monitored by the many Government officials and soldiers stationed in Tibet."
He should have come with me.
I'd come to Tibet in 1993 with permits to hike remote passes, not for a political crusade.
Nonetheless, in the parking lot of the Lhasa Holiday Inn, a police official stopped me to warn me that I had been observed at the Dalai Lama's offices, the week before, in Delhi, India.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue from 44th to 86th Street will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. today for the Puerto Rican Day parade.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mike Mussina, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Joseph Bauldree, pitcher.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Traded Chris Donnels, infielder, to the Boston Red Sox for a player to be named later.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Activated Robby Thompson, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Enrique Burgos, pitcher, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Ryan Grigson, offensive tackle.


Saturday in the Park With an 80-Foot-Tall Pocahontas


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5  There are ghosts galore in it.
But the only thing frightening about the new Casper movie is what it is doing to investors.
By Kurt Eichenwald.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 6  For mutual fund companies, the easy money has been made.
And rising interest rates aren't helping.
By Edward Wyatt.
EARNING IT /Page 10  Employee-leasing lightens the boss's load and improves employee benefits.
If only it really worked that way.
By Mukul Pandya.
VOICES /Page 14  A Chicago father spends five years on the mommy track and hasn't looked back.
Well, only a little.
From the Desk Of, by Michael S. Perricone.


Ranking the Domestic Equity Funds
CHOOSING a fund group is no easy task.
Investors often look for the group with the best record in domestic equities, and for good reason.
Diversified funds that buy domestic stocks are the cornerstone of long-term portfolios, and their returns are much more variable than those of bond and money market funds.
To find out which fund group does best, analysts at Morningstar Inc., the Chicago funds research company, reviewed the domestic stock lineups of all the fund companies large enough to qualify as fund supermarkets.
They started with the 20 largest in assets and then removed five -- Federated, Janus, Kemper, Prudential and Scudder -- because of limited product offerings.


The World; In Algeria, Real Power Hides in the Shadows
THE most powerful man in Algeria has no official position, gives no interviews and is hardly seen in town.
In theory Khalid Nizar, a former army commander and a former Defense Minister, is retired and lives quietly on his pension.
But even the least informed Algerian will tell you that no significant policy move or key military or government appointment can go through without his nod.


Sports of The Times; McMullen's 'Suiteheart' Plan: Run the Arena
INCHING their way south, the Devils were on a bus last night to Philadelphia for today's fifth game of their Stanley Cup playoff that is now 2-2 after yesterday's 4-2 loss.
But the bus wasn't going on to Nashville.
At least not yet.
"We're not going to do anything," John McMullen was saying, "until our playoffs are over."
In a two-and-a-half-hour conversation with three New York Times reporters at his Norton Lilly International shipping headquarters in nearby Secaucus, the Devils' owner insisted that "it's not too late" for the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to keep the team in Byrne Meadowlands Arena but it can't keep dawdling.
"You know what Nashville is offering," McMullen said, as if talking to the state agency.
"Give us a proposal."


Jill A. Bickford, Steve Roberts
Jill Ann Bickford, the daughter of Lawrence and Ann Bickford of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Steven Roberts, a son of John and Diane Roberts of La Plata, Md.
The Rev.
Ronald Lemmert performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of the Good Shepherd.
Mrs.
Roberts, 26, graduated from George Washington University.
Until recently she was a senior labor information specialist at the Bureau of National Affairs Inc., a legal publishing company in Washington.
In September she is to begin graduate studies at the University of Michigan School of Information and Library Science in Ann Arbor.
Her father is a managing director of Frederic W. Cook &amp; Company, executive compensation consultants in New York.
Her mother is an associate at the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom in New York.


Teen-Agers Look Down Road, Eyes on Safety
I THINK the statute of limitations has run out, so I can now admit that I owned my first car -- and was tearing up the roads -- long before I was old enough to get a license.
Happily, I didn't get caught and nothing terrible happened, but that was 40-odd years ago.
It was a different time, a different world.
We couldn't wait for the freedom of wheels, and as far as we were concerned, safety hadn't been invented.
None of the guys I traveled with could have qualified for the scholarships that were awarded last week to 33 new drivers from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


Pesto Packin'
Tucked into the crevice of a narrow, ancient road that winds from the Gulf of Tigullio to the city of Chiavari, Leivi is too small to be considered a town.
Rather, this little nook in Italy's Ligurian hills is a place that time forgot.
Its 200 citizens, like the land itself, are isolated and stubborn.
Their sense of grandeur comes from a view of craggy, volcanic hills that give way to an endless blue sea.
Theirs is a hardscrabble land and they live close to it; their vista, a constant reminder of the puniness of human scale.


Taking the Trolley To Brooklyn's Sights
Brooklyn's leading attractions are now linked by a free shuttle that runs Saturdays, Sundays and holidays from noon to 5 P.M.
Called "A Day in Brooklyn" Trolley, the service operates on alternative fuel and is handicapped accessible.
The trolley leaves the Wollman Rink parking lot at Parkside and Ocean Avenue in Prospect Park every hour on the hour and makes 10 stops, including Grand Army Plaza (by the public library), the Brooklyn Museum, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden and the Prospect Park Carousel (near the Wildlife Center and Lefferts Homestead Children's Museum).
Other stops are made within the park.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Book Review/Section 7 The annual summer reading issue, with a vacation book list; surveys of travel, cooking and gardening; a section on golf (led off by George Plimpton), and many other getaway devices.


PRESENT SHOCK
WHEN NEWT GINGRICH WAS elected Speaker of the House last December, one of his first moves was to give his fellow Representatives a required reading list that included the Federalist Papers, the Declaration of Independence and "Creating a New Civilization" by Alvin and Heidi Toffler.
Not long afterward, Turner Publishing announced the mass-market release of that book -- the Tofflers' 11th -- with a foreword by Gingrich.
For the Tofflers, futurist authors who for three decades have been forecasting the ways computer technology would change society, Gingrich's endorsement was a career-reviver.
Though they had published best sellers in 1970 ("Future Shock") and 1980 ("The Third Wave") and though their ideas were regularly solicited by Prime Ministers and industrialists from Singapore to Stuttgart, Alvin, 66, and Heidi, 65, had become marginal figures in American intellectual circles.


Magic Has A 2-Game Mountain To Climb
One by one, they trudged out of the Orlando Arena in baggy shorts today.
Dennis Scott was glib, Shaquille O'Neal was silent and Anfernee Hardaway was in a hurry.
The one constant was the shades they wore to protect their eyes from the sun.
It was awfully hot in central Florida today, and if the rising temperature and humidity were not enough, there was always the glare the Houston Rockets left behind after another twin killing on the road.


POSTINGS: Hard By South Street Seaport; Century-Old Warehouse Recycled Into Rental Lofts
A new luxury rental project has opened in a century-old warehouse in the South Street Seaport neighborhood in Lower Manhattan, using loft-like spaces as its lure.
The project, Seaport Mews at 264 Water Street, consists of 27 apartments, including four penthouses with terraces that looking out at the Brooklyn Bridge, South Street Seaport and the Financial District.
The ground floor also has a 1,850-square-foot maisonette apartment with a private entrance on Water Street.
All of the units have exposed brick walls, oak floors, high ceilings and at least two bathrooms.
Rents will range from $1,800 to $5,000 a month.
The smallest apartment is 945 square feet and the largest 1,450 square feet.
The rental office opened four weeks ago; 11 units have been rented since then.
"We think we have a unique product," said Andrew J. Singer, president of Watermark Company of Manhattan, which bought the building in foreclosure two years ago.
The building was partially renovated when it was acquired; the previous owners intended to turn it into a condominium.
"It was actually part of a larger plan before the historic district was established to acquire the other buildings on the street, demolish them and build high-rise housing," Mr.
Singer said.
"And this was to be the only gut rehab."
The renovation work was completed in October; the architect is Architect Design Group of Manhattan.
Mr.
Singer, who is also a mortgage broker, said that Seaport Mews offered apartments that were in sharp contrast to other Lower Manhattan luxury rentals, such as those in Battery Park City.
"It's a lifestyle decision," he said.
"People that are maybe younger and maybe don't want a doorman building and do want things like an exposed brick wall and restored columns and high ceilings would like this."


Journal; G.O.P. Gansta Rap
Some skeptics have speculated that Bob Dole, savior of America's children, had never heard of gangsta rap until someone told him it might come in handy in his Presidential campaign.
But they would be wrong.
Senator Dole's involvement with this music actually dates back four years.
In 1991, both he and his current rival for the hearts of Christian Coalition voters, Phil Gramm, rolled out the Washington welcome mat for Eazy-E, of the then-pre-eminent gangsta rap group N.W.A. (Niggaz Wit' Attitude), already notorious for lyrics preaching violence.
A 1988 hit song targeting cops, whose title cannot be printed here, had led to their eviction from the Joe Louis Arena by Detroit police and prompted MTV, in a display of corporate conscience that Senator Dole would now applaud, to ban N.W.A. outright.


DIARY
Technology  It Felt so Good to Be No. 1 That loud noise you heard last week came from an unlikely source: I.B.M.
The computer giant made a very out-of-character hostile bid to acquire the Lotus Development Company for $3.3 billion.
Lotus had received previous buyout overtures, but I.B.M. cleared the table with its offer, pretty much announcing that despite its staid image, it too can play hard ball in a competitive world.
I.B.M., you may recall, used to be the top seller of personal computers, but no more.
Lotus was tops in the spreadsheet market, but no more.
But Lotus is No. 1 with Lotus Notes, its networking software, and that's what has brought I.B.M. to the door.
First place, I.B.M. figures, is the only place to be.
Wall Street  Happy Days Are Here Again Hostile takeovers.
Kind of gives you the warm and fuzzies about the grand old '80's.
It turns out that some investors aren't just settling for that warm glow, but are trying to grab all they can get, or at least get away with.
The S.E.C. says it is investigating as many insider trading cases now as it did since the 1980's.
As one offical put it, "It's a growth industry." It got bigger last week.
Lotus stock jumped 89 percent on Monday after I.B.M. announced its bid.
The thing is, some of the people who owned the stock, or its options, had just bought on the Friday before.
Very insightful.
Or very illegal, depending on the quality of your lawyer.
Wasn't there something else that made the 1980's so grand?
Oh, yes.
Many of the insider traders were caught.
Brewing More Than a Deal Over Beer The Belgian brewer Interbrew agreed last week to buy the Canadian brewing company, John Labatt, for $2.9 billion.
Labatt had been fighting a hostile offer from the Onex Corporation since last month and had talked to several brewing companies about making a friendly offer.
Interbrew got the nod.
But the deal is for more than just beer.
Although Labatt is Canada's second-largest brewer after the Molson Companies, it has interests in the Sports Network and the Discovery Channel and has stakes in the Toronto Blue Jays, Toronto Argonauts and the Skydome stadium in Toronto.
Canadian law will force Interbrew to sell the cable channels, but no word yet on what happens to the sports assets.
The Brussels Blue Jays does have a nice ring.
New York Racing Through the Economy We've heard of economic development zones to spur the economy.
We've heard of tax breaks to lure big employers.
But can driving faster drive the economy?
That's what Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York said on Tuesday when he voted to raise the speed limit to 65-miles-per-hour on 1,100 miles of the state's highways.
He said the new speed limit, which goes into effect Aug. 1, will help improve the economy and tourism by moving people and goods along more quickly.
He presumably meant around the state, not out of it.
So, step on it.
As a way to generate revenue, it sure beats raising taxes.
Unless, of course, it has absolutely no effect.
The Workplace It Keeps Going, and Going ...
Los Angeles County estimates that the O.J.
Simpson trial has cost the county $4,986,167 so far, and it's still going like the Energizer Bunny.
That's nothing.
An outfit in Chicago reported last week that the trial has cost the United States economy $27.6 billion in lost productivity.
The Cambridge Human Resource Group figured that we all spend about five minutes of each work day talking about the trial.
The outplacement and career management company arrived at its figure by plugging that five minutes into the gross domestic product.
The company did not do the corresponding math of how much we cost our employers by talking about our kids, the NBA playoffs, or even about our cranky bosses, who just love to attach dollar signs to all the time we spend goofing off.
The Economy  Recession?
Big Deal O.K., who let that cold breeze in here?
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, put a bit of a chill on the markets when he told bankers in Seattle on Wednesday that the economy may indeed slip into a recession, but if so, it would be brief.
The markets took that to mean that the Fed has no intention of lowering interest rates anytime soon, and pushed both stocks and bonds lower.
The Dow industrials spent the rest of the week shedding about 60 points and the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped from about 6.50 percent to 6.72 percent.
Traders continue to be worried that the slowing economy will squeeze corporte earnings, which will just get worse without a rate cut.
Anytime Mr.
Greenspan wants to close that window, it would be fine with Wall Street.
Entertainment A Divorce Before the Marriage Michael Ovitz is not going to run MCA for its new owner, the Seagram Company, in what must be the biggest surprise to come out of Hollywood since "The Crying Game." Surprise plot twists are a mainstay of Holloywood, but few people predicted this one.
Hollywood insiders had said that the talks to lure Mr.
Ovitz, chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, had gone on for weeks, but fell apart over the issue of money and independence.
Usually, if you have a lot of one, you have the other, but Seagram balked at giving away too much of both.
No word yet of who will eventually run MCA.
The chairman of Seagram, Edgar Bronfman Jr., says he's going to spend time to learn MCA's business before making his next move.
Why does that sound so groundbreaking?
Employment Get a Job, Pretty Please Low unemployment has its good points, but many areas of the South have managed to find the negatives.
Unemployment is so low in many urban areas around the Southeast that some restaurants, hotels and grocery stores cannot find enough workers to fill low-wage jobs.
It's easy to figure out what happens then.
Employers get needy and those low wages suddenly get higher.
Some employers have had to raise wages from 20 to 25 percent and still can't find enough workers.
In a bizarre twist, the Opryland Hotel in Nashville has brought in about 300 workers from Puerto Rico and bought a former Quality Inn motel for them to live in.
Sometimes, supply and demand work together in very strange ways.
Air-Sea Rescue No, He Couldn't Call for Pizza When Capt.
Scott O'Grady came out of the Bosnian woods Thursday morning, the downed pilot was gripping his pistol.
Holding the gun probably made him feel better, but what saved him was a 28-ounce piece of equipment called the PRC-112, his air-survival radio.
He used it to send a signal that told everyone he was still around and used it to direct his rescue.
It did everything but cook him dinner.
So how do you get one?
You can't.
It is made by Motorola at its Scottsdale, Ariz., operation exclusively for the military.
These radios have been around since the early 1980's and pilots carried them during the Gulf War.
A bit bigger than a cellular phone, it operates on a lithium battery and fits nicely into the pocket of a flight suit.
In an understatement, a spokesman for Motorola said the folks in Scottsdale were very proud of their role.
Maybe the captain will give them a call.


Homey Tapas
EL CID ++  (212) 929-9332; 322 West 15th Street, $; American Express, Diners Club
At this friendly, unassuming little Spanish restaurant and tapas bar, which attracts a crowd of neighborhood regulars, the food is homey and gratifying, and prices are reasonable.
The menu is heavy with tapas: lean country sausage in red wine sauce; marinated octopus scented with paprika, roasted eggplant and peppers, and potato and onion omelet, served cool.
Entrees include paella, a combination of saffron rice, shrimp, tiny clams, chorizo and lobster, and roast veal with wild mushrooms and sherry sauce. ($25 and Under: 4/29/94)


Goethals Plan Would Give Commuters More Elbow Room
The overloaded Goethals Bridge may soon have a twin.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has proposed a $350 million structure parallel to and south of the Goethals between Elizabeth and Staten Island.
That would allow westbound traffic to traverse the existing bridge; eastbound traffic would use the new one.


'Higher Truths'?
To the Editor:
I found it comical, then sad, that a serious writer like Caryn James would extol the intentions of movie makers who fudge facts in the service of their "higher truths"  [ "They're Movies, Not Schoolbooks," May 21 ] .
Just what are these fact-defying higher truths?
Myths, dogmas, bigotry, propaganda?


When Some of Your Best Friends Are Insects
THIS is about respect for insects.
They are starting to appear, and insects deserve at least a moment from gardeners to learn who they are before they are given a quick stomp with the shoe.
Granted, masses of some insects can do irreparable harm, yet there are many beneficial insects worth having around.
The onus is upon us to know the difference.
It should be noted that insects have their places in the scheme of things.
Insects are by far the most successful animals on earth and man would be nowhere without them.
This balance is finely tuned and troubles occur when things get out of kilter.


Brodeur Fails Devils Again, And Suddenly It's a Series
As fast as one can say Stanley Cup, the momentum in the Eastern Conference finals has shifted from the top to the bottom of the New Jersey Turnpike.
The Devils suddenly have all sorts of questions to answer, starting with the goaltending of Martin Brodeur.
Everyone around the Devils thought Brodeur's poor performance in a Game 3 loss to the Flyers was a onetime thing, but he was worse in this afternoon's 4-2 loss that evened the four-of-seven-game series at two games apiece.
He gave up 4 goals on 17 shots and was pulled with 6 minutes 45 seconds left in the game.
A large number of the fans in the sellout crowd of 19,040 headed for the Byrne Meadowlands Arena exits at the same time, while the 10 percent or so who appeared to be Flyers fans cheered.


Unreformed Social Security System Presents a Scary Prospect; Checks and Funds
To the Editor:
Re "Social Security Checks" (letter, June 5), which asserts that funds received by Social Security are immediately spent on Social Security checks:


2 Rivals in A.F.L.-C.I.O. Are Seeking Its Presidency
Now that Lane Kirkland has decided not to seek re-election as president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., an unprecedented battle for the leadership of the union has broken into the open, with the two contenders promising to revitalize the federation.
It is a pledge that may be hard to fulfill in a time of weak public support for unions.
The contenders are Thomas R. Donahue, who has been Mr.
Kirkland's second-in-command for 16 years, and John J. Sweeney, president of the Service Employees International Union, whose more than 1 million members are mostly janitors, window washers and other building service employees.


At Fifth Ave. and 104th St., Latino Cultures Intersect
THE CRAMPED STAFF OFFICES of El Museo del Barrio are already hitting summer temperatures on a mild spring day.
Susana Torruella Leval leads the way to a large empty room on the third floor of the hulking 1921 building -- once an orphanage -- that the museum calls home.
The windows overlook the elegant Conservatory Gardens in Central Park at Fifth Avenue and 104th Street in Manhattan, but the walls need a paint job, life-size puppets are propped in the corners and children shout in the courtyard below.
This has been a banner year for the museum.
It celebrated its 25th anniversary and promoted Ms.
Leval, 51, from chief curator to director.
She oversaw the completion of a $400,000 refurbishing of the galleries and organized three ambitious thematic exhibitions of Latino art, which have proved to be the biggest draws in its history.
The third and best of them, "Reaffirming Spirituality," is on view through Aug. 16.


Family Fare? It Depends on the Beholder
IN HIS RECENT SPEECH ATTACKING the entertainment industry for contributing to moral decay in America, Senator Robert Dole identified what he regarded as films "friendly to families" (his list included "The Lion King," "True Lies" and "Forrest Gump") and those he considered "nightmares of depravity" ("Natural Born Killers" and "True Romance").
To see how widely shared his choices were, The New York Times asked eight people concerned with cultural issues what films they would place in these categories and why.
Here are their choices.
BARBARA GRIZZUTI HARRISON  Essayist  Friendly to Families  "Boyz N the Hood" Yes, it's violent; the world is violent.
But it says much more about a father's love for his son than most Hollywood mush.
"The Godfather" Come on, wouldn't you want to be snuggled in the embrace of a powerful family?
Nightmares of Depravity  "The Godfather, Part II" and "The Godfather, Part III" Uh, oh, they bump each other off.
They're not nice.
"It's a Wonderful Life" It's a terrible lie.
Only profound cynicism could have produced this soupy sentimentalism.
It will corrupt your children's morals.
EDWARD SOREL  Cartoonist  Friendly to Families  "The Maltese Falcon" Sam Spade, a good role model for today's youth, promises Brigid that he'll wait for her while she gains maturity in a maximum-security institution.
"Deep Throat" An inspiring story of a woman with a physical handicap who nevertheless becomes a useful member of society.
"Triumph of the Will" When men are not impeded from their God-given right to carry guns, cleanliness and happiness follow.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Mary Poppins" The heroine is a governess who uses trickery to get her job.
"Honey, I Shrunk the Kids" Just when there is a need for films about safety precautions in the home, Disney gives us this.
ANDREW SULLIVAN  Editor, The New Republic  Friendly to Families  "Crimson Tide" Superb moralistic drama in which the rule of law is contrasted with the rule of man.
Aristotle couldn't have taught this instructive lesson any better.
"Priest" Sincere Roman Catholic cleric fails to be celibate but abides by confessional confidentiality, and by divine intervention incest is uncovered.
Didactic but effective exploration of family values.
"Quiz Show" Middlebrow morality tale in which telling the truth is the ultimate indicator of character.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Home Alone" Delinquent parents lose a child, who proceeds to wreak revenge by graphically mutilating new companions.
The child takes sadistic pleasure in inflicting hideous pain and is deemed a hero.
"J. F. K." Propagandistic, nihilist, dishonest, paranoid and unpatriotic.
Hard to say which characteristic kiddies should be told to avoid most.
VICTOR NAVASKY  Publisher and editorial director, The Nation  Friendly to Families  "The Grapes of Wrath" A family beset with the woes brought upon by the Depression sets forth against every kind of adversity and gets closer by fighting the system.
"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" Jimmy Stewart takes on the system with the help of a woman he is going to marry, as well as his mother and those boys all over America who see him as a model.
"Natural Born Killers" Oliver Stone takes the television-sitcom view of the family to its logical conclusion and shows that it has no relation to real family values.
Nightmares of Depravity  "True Lies" I haven't seen "True Lies," but neither has Dole.
From what I understand, it's full of violence.
And especially if you're an Arab, it's very anti-family values, since Arabs get killed by the bushel.
"Hamlet" The guy kills his uncle and all that, but I think Hamlet can go in either category.
He loves his mother a lot, which suggests to me that the anti-family category is an unsatisfactory one.
BARBARA EHRENREICH  Essayist  Friendly to Families  "Dolores Claiborne" Edifying because it shows a woman cleverly disposing of her abusive husband, and it ends with the woman and her daughter drawing closer together.
"Braveheart" It portrays my Scottish ancestors more accurately than usual.
It shows them with uncombed hair and dirty fingernails, living in windowless huts.
A little humility is good in any family lineage.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Legends of the Fall" Sons disobey their father and fight in a senseless war, and one becomes a corrupt politician.
Furthermore, it tries to portray families without women.
"Mr. Mom" and "Mrs. Doubtfire" Movies in this tradition portray either a motherless family or an absent, career-driven mom.
KATHRYN HARRISON  Novelist  Friendly to Families  "A Woman Under the Influence" It portrays real heroism in the daily struggle to maintain a family.
The mother is troubled, possibly mentally ill or an alcoholic, and you see that family reflects a delicate balance.
"Ladybird, Ladybird" Completely unsentimental portrayal of a woman struggling against forces that are huge.
The effort to maintain a family is very affecting.
"Tender Mercies" An honest movie that suggests redemption is possible.
You can make bad mistakes and you can't undo them, but it's possible to keep a family together.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Down and Out in Beverly Hills" Mindless trivialization of social ills like homelessness and anorexia.
Even the dog has an eating disorder.
"Dumb and Dumber" American society is not only suspicious of intellectualism, but now we have movies that glorify imbecility.
MICHAEL LERNER  Editor of Tikkun magazine  Friendly to Families  "Schindler's List" It encourages a sense of trust in others and the possibility of goodness triumphing over self-interest.
"Panther" It encourages people to believe that narrow self-interest, in this case a drug-oriented and self-indulgent culture, can be transcended by commitment to a community.
"The Piano" A vision of the possibility of overcoming chauvinism, transcending a sexist relationship and a woman finding her own power.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Rambo" Perfectly depraved.
It takes the individual seeking to break all the rules to establish a higher truth, without regard to the consequences of others and with unrestricted use of violence.
"Pulp Fiction" A popular movie among people who think of themselves as hip because it's self-reflective about its own violence.
It makes it easier to live in the world of Bosnia and right-wing militias.
PAUL RUDNICK  Playwright  Friendly to Families  "Mommie Dearest" The title alone bespeaks a return to traditional values and happier homes.
At last, a film that showcases a celebrity as a concerned parent and a firm disciplinarian.
"The Terminator" and "Terminator 2" Senator Dole rightly cited the Republican stalwart Arnold Schwarzenegger as a family asset.
In the first "Terminator" film, Arnold was an evil robot from the future, but in the sequel he was a good robot from the future.
Bob Dole is, of course, a good robot from the past.
"Basic Instinct" Some viewers may find intimate conversations a bit embarrassing, so sometimes it's advisable just to pile the kids into the Bronco, head for a Sharon Stone movie and point.
Nightmares of Depravity  "Beethoven" As prophesied in Leviticus, Satan always appears in earthly guise as either a big, sloppy, huggable sheepdog, an endangered whale or Shirley MacLaine in character parts.
"The Lion King" As Senator Dole has indicated, American pop culture can be all too influential.
This led to tragedy when after watching a cassette of this Disney hit, my 6-year-old nephew was taken to the zoo, where he crawled into a cage and was mauled when he tried to force a lion cub to hula.


The World; Racism? Mexico's in Denial.
SHROUDED in mystery and myth, the heroes of Mexico's Aztec past are honored in glorious monuments all over the country.
But the living descendants of Moctezuma are not allowed to eat in some of Mexico City's best restaurants.


If You're Really Ancient, You May Be Better Off
In a culture where it is unseemly for anybody except Clint Eastwood to appear in public with a wrinkle, it may be hard to fathom that the fastest-growing segment of the population is not the middle-aged (those baby boomers again) or the merely old, but the oldest old -- people who are 85 and older.
The oldest old remain a tiny percentage of Americans over all, but their numbers are climbing at a swifter clip than those of any other age group.
And while centenarians seem such rare, unearthly creatures that Rose Kennedy's survival to age 104 was considered as remarkable as her political legacy, and the story of the 100-plus Delany Sisters was deemed worthy of a Broadway play, "Having Our Say," in fact this most tenacious group is growing even faster than the oldest old overall. .
In the last 35 years, the population of 85-plusers increased by 232 percent, compared with an expansion of 30 percent for the population as a whole.
Right now, the oldest old account for 1.2 percent of all Americans, but by some projections that figure could rise to nearly 10 percent by the middle of the next century.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ART TREASURE TOUR
The Connecticut Department of Economic Development has developed a fine arts project aimed at promoting tourism and increasing local interest in the state's considerable treasury of art.
The department has outlined a journey from Greenwich to New London, Storrs, Hartford, other cities and back to Greenwich, with stops at 11 museums along the way in which Impressionist paintings are an important part of the collection.
Details of the Connecticut Impressionist Art Trail are contained in a pamphlet that describes each museum, the artists represented there and something about the town, its restaurants, accommodations, and the scenes that inspired Impressionist paintings.
Group tour information may be obtained by calling 800-879-4222.
For other information or to obtain a pamphlet, call the nearest Convention and Visitors Bureau located in Fairfield County, New Haven, Mystic, Northeastern Connecticut, Hartford or Central Connecticut.
The museums listed are the Bruce Museum and Bush-Holley House in Greenwich, Weir Farm in Wilton, the Yale Art Gallery in New Haven, the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme, the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London, the William Benton Museum at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, the Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Co. and the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, the New Britain Museum of American Art, and the Hill-Stead Museum in Farmington.
Prominently featured are works of the American Impressionists including Childe Hassam, John Twachtman, Theodore Robinson, J. Alden Weir, Mary Cassatt, Leonard Ochtman, William Chadwick, Willard Metcalf and Henry Ward Ranger.
But the French Impressionists are also represented along with works by American artists who followed other styles, such as Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer and George Bellows.
CONCERTS FOR A ZOO
To raise money for the Professor Beardsley Research Station, the Beardsley Zoo in Bridgeport is offering a series of summer concerts on Saturday at 7 P.M., rain or shine, with Hugh Blumenfeld.
The singer-songwriter-guitarist has recorded several award-winning albums since receiving a doctorate in poetry from New York University.
Currently he is an assistant professor of English at Eastern Connecticut State University.
Admission is $7, free for children under 5.
On July 15, July 29 and August 12, the Five Chinese Brothers, Patty Larkin, and The Nields will perform, respectively, all starting at 7 P.M. with the same $7 admission charge.
The number for reservations is 331-1557.
The research station, for which a structure exists but needs extensive renovation, will serve as a special educational center for children.
It will replicate the various habitats that exotic zoo animals come from, with walls of canvas, thatch and bamboo, cargo boxes and other trappings of expeditions.
There will be a raised platform for the professor's desk, lab counters with microscopes, artifacts, pillows to sit on that are covered with ethnic fabrics, and the air will be scented with spices.
The project is expected to be completed over the next year at a cost of $50,000.
The 33-acre zoo is open daily from 9 to 4 at Noble Avenue, featuring North and South American animals.
It also contains a farmyard with goats, rabbits, poultry and a cow, and participates in the Species Survival Plan of the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums.
The Siberian tiger, red wolf and golden lion tamarin are its current survival plan animals.
DARIEN HORSE SHOW
One of New England's grandest horse shows gets under way for its 66th year on Monday at the Ox Ridge Hunt Club in Darien.
Competitions are scheduled through Sunday, beginning daily at 8 A.M. and continuing until the sun goes down.
Throughout the week more than 100 classes of hunter, jumper and equitation events will be held.
Highlighting the event is the $35,000 Ox Ridge Grand Prix, an official U.S.
Equestrian Team regional show jumping championshop beginning at 1 P.M. on Sunday.
Among the competitors will be Lise Quintero, the defending champion; and Chris Kappler, 1993 Ox Ridge grand champion, both of whom represented the United States at the Volvo Show Jumping World Cup in Sweden two months ago.
Also participating will be Joe Fargis, Olympic Gold Medalist, and a number of world-class competitors and international champions.
A large Boutique Garden will have outdoor accessories and indoor collectibles for sale, and on Friday from 5 to 8 P.M. a Country Fair will be held, offering Mediterranean and California-style foods, live music to dance by, the magician Amazing Andy, pony rides, a petting zoo, face painting, and games.
Admission will be $4.
Horse show admission will be free on Monday.
Tuesday through Friday the charge will be $5 per car, on Saturday it will be $5 for adults, $3 for children over 5 and people 65 and older.
Sunday's admission will be $7 for adults, $5 for children and the elderly.
For more information, the number is 655-2559.
AUTHOR, AUTHOR
Bel Kaufman, author of "Up the Down Staircase" and granddaughter of Sholem Aleichem, author of the stories on which "Fiddler on the Roof" is based, will give a talk today at 7 P.M. at Beth Israel Synagogue, 40 King Street in Norwalk.
Her book, now considered a classic novel about the New York City school system, has sold six million copies in 16 languages and is in its 47th printing, but it is only one of Ms.
Kaufman's accomplishments.
She is a teacher, translator, entertaining speaker and winner of numerous awards for her writings from Brandeis University, the Anti-Defamation League and Educational Press of America, among others.
Ms.
Kaufman was born in Berlin and lived in Odessa and Moscow before coming to the United States at the age of 12.
She has a Bachelor of Arts degree from Hunter College, a master's from Columbia University and a Doctor of Letters from Nasson College in Maine.
Tickets at the door are $12.
The number for more information is 866-0534.
ART ON A BUDGET
The 33d annual Professional Art for the Budget Collector, to be held from Friday through Sunday at the Cooperative Nursery School in the Rowayton section of Norwalk, offers an opportunity to pick up some of the 150 works by famous and not-so-famous artists for what is described as the proverbial song.
Among the celebrated artists represented are Christo, Calder, Zuniga, Picasso and Avery.
And those who are less well known include Gayle Asher, Heidi Palmer and Lynn Massey.
New works will be hung daily and for the first time a selection of jewelry, glass and textiles will be for sale.
The school is on Route 136 at Trolley Place and hours on Friday will be 5 to 10, Saturday 1 to 10 and Sunday 1 to 5.
Admission is $4 and includes wine, beer and hors d'oeuvres.
Call 866-2184 for more information.
STRAWBERRIES GALORE
Strawberries dipped in chocolate, strawberry shortcake and strawberry mousse are just a few of the locally-picked strawberry treats to be sampled at the Strawberry Festival and Craft Fair in Easton on Saturday.
Open from 10 to 4 on the firehouse green at the corner of Center Road and Route 59, the craft portion will include cross-stitched children's clothes, handpainted wooden folk art, handmade dolls, art depicting various public buildings in Fairfield County, quilted pillows and miniature houses.
The number for more information is 268-7890. ELEANOR CHARLES


Amtrak Resumes Seattle-Vancouver Run
After a hiatus of 14 years, Amtrak has resumed passenger service between Seattle and Vancouver, British Columbia.
The service last operated in the fall of 1981.
Spanish-built Talgo equipment will be used on the 144-mile run, with one round trip a day.
The train, the Mount Baker International, will leave Seattle at 7:15 A.M. and arrive in Vancouver at 11:50 A.M.; it will leave Vancouver at 6 P.M. and arrive in Seattle at 10:35 P.M.


Graf Survives The Elements To Capture French Open
The newest French Open champion coughed, cried, drank a glass of champagne and admitted she looked forward to trading in her adrenaline for a nap.
The older and sorer you get, said Steffi Graf, the harder it is to grind your way to Grand Slam titles like this one.
Still allergic to the dusty red clay of Roland Garros -- or perhaps to the marigolds and zinnias that border the center court where she captured her first Grand Slam title in 1987 -- and still employing the rapier forehand that launched her stellar career, Graf sneezed and sputtered to a 7-5, 4-6, 6-0 victory over Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain.


THE DIGERATI!
The real digital revolution will be in the escalating incomes of physical therapists who will be needed to undo the often crippling effects of long hours of sedentary noodling at keyboards.
I noticed a masseuse makes regular visits to minister to Wired's mostly 20-something staff.
BOB SUTER Huntington, L.I.


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
Roger Rosenblatt's "Teaching Johnny to Be Good" (April 30) addresses the growing national dialogue about character building for a democratic and civil society.
Schools are right to attempt to address this issue.
First, however, character building -- like all learning -- must begin in the home.


Miss Kaufman, Mr. Rosenberg
Michelle Suzanne Kaufman, the daughter of Diane and Harold Kaufman of Boca Raton, Fla., is to be married this evening to Dr.
Richard Michael Rosenberg, the son of Irene and Stanley Rosenberg of the Bronx.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman is to officiate at Sans Souci, a catering establishment in Seacliff, L.I.
The bride, 30, is a portfolio manager at Dean Witter Intercapital in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is a chartered financial analyst.


June 4-10: Preparing for '96; New England States Move Toward a Regional Primary
If in 1992 a four-month Presidential primary season felt endless, the 1996 primaries are shaping up as a contest that could be resolved a lot too quickly for some candidates.
With a number of states shifting their elections forward to get the most attention from candidates, the nominations could be effectively wrapped up 44 days after the Iowa caucus on Feb. 12.
Against that backdrop, Gov.
John G. Rowland of Connecticut signed a law last week that moves Connecticut's primary to March 5, from March 26, and coordinates it with those of Vermont and Maine.
Rhode Island and Massachusetts are expected to follow suit soon, creating in effect a New England regional primary just two weeks after the first voting, expected in New Hampshire Feb. 20.


Streetscapes/Fuller Building; Art Deco Delight Seeks to Recapture Its Past Glory
IT was built in 1929 as a jazz-age testament to the emerging commercial chic of 57th Street.
Upstaged in 1993 by the new 52-story Four Seasons Hotel New York next door, the Fuller Building, a 40-story Art Deco delight at the northeast corner of 57th Street and Madison Avenue, is at the end of a troubled financial period and at the beginning of a $6 million renovation that may help it recapture its original prominence.
Victorian New Yorkers prized wide streets like 57th as residential addresses almost as highly as they did Madison and Fifth Avenues.
Large town houses began going up on 57th off Fifth in 1869, and they continued to rise until just after the turn of the century, when an influx of art dealers like Durand-Ruel and Knoedler gave the street a different luster.


Pamela M. Geller, Eric R. Wapnick
Pamela Maude Geller, the daughter of Laurel and Morton Geller of Newton, Mass., is to be married this evening to Eric Richard Wapnick, the son of Phyllis and Allen Wapnick of Beachwood, Ohio.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel is to officiate at the Four Seasons Hotel in Newton Centre, Mass.
The bride, 29, is the manager of pension financing and analysis for General Motors in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the director of corporate taxes at the Bank of Boston in Boston.
Mr.
Wapnick, 34, is an associate at Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn, a New York law firm.
He graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and received his law degree from Ohio State University and a master's in taxation from New York University.
His mother is a child development specialist at Hanna Perkins School in Cleveland.
His father is a senior partner at Baumgarten, Kanner, Wapnick, Fialko &amp; Yunaska accountants in Cleveland.


Victoriana in the Fenwickian Tradition
THE Borough of Fenwick, perched on 200 acres of a peninsula at the mouth of the Connecticut River at Old Saybrook, is a quiet, unmarked summer resort that visitors to the Connecticut shore are likely to pass by -- and that suits the people who live there each summer just fine.
"We value our privacy," said Ellsworth S. Grant, one of those people.
"We call it our Victorian commune, but I guess that's better than Hartford-on-the-Rocks, which people once called it." By any name, Fenwick is a fascinating place, a throwback to the latter part of the last century and the first part of this century when affluent Americans flocked to newly created resorts at the seashore to enjoy the salt air in the fellowship of people of their own social class.
Now, more than a century after the first flockings took place, Fenwick has been honored by having most of its homes, some 60 of them, placed on the National Register of Historic Places as a unit.


Giuliani Creates Commission To Investigate Safety in Schools
In a sudden and sharp escalation of tension between City Hall and the school system, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday formed a commission to conduct a broad investigation of the Division of School Safety, arming the panel with the power to subpoena witnesses and documents from the Board of Education.
Mr.
Giuliani said the commission would hold hearings in the coming months to investigate the extent of criminal activity in the schools and the effectiveness of the board in maintaining safety.
The spectacle of highly visible hearings this summer, with witnesses from the board compelled to testify, is likely to produce weeks of unflattering attention for the board at a time when the school system will be reeling from the deepest budget cuts in years, imposed by the Mayor.


The Paradox of NPR
LISTENING TO AMERICA  Twenty-five Years in the Life of a Nation, as Heard on National Public Radio.
Edited by Linda Wertheimer.
Illustrated. 438 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.
THE SOUND AND THE STORY  NPR and the Art of Radio.
By Thomas Looker. 421 pp.
Boston: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company.


Flying to France
To the Editor: In September 1994, we embarked on a 10-day trip to France, making all our bookings through Jet Vacations and Air France.
Unfortunately, our connecting flight into Kennedy was late and we arrived at Air France about 25 minutes before our flight to Paris was scheduled to leave.
According to the airline, you must arrive not less than 30 minutes before departure or your seat is given away.
We and the connecting airline had notified Air France of our delay, but the seats were gone.
Through our own efforts, we arrived in Paris.
We contacted Jet Vacations and Air France in an attempt to receive some compensation, When Air France employees saw we were booked through its affiliate, Jet Vacations, they treated us as though we had the plague.
Upon returning, we wrote Air France.
In 30 days, when no response came, we called and were told they were four weeks behind.


Damian Woetzel
FOR SEVERAL YEARS NOW, HEATHER WATTS, Jock Soto and other members of the New York City Ballet have spent the down time between seasons making a Watts-produced tour of the provinces.
These expeditions feel almost like paid vacations: the dancers earn extra money, perform material that doesn't fit on the City Ballet schedule, and escape the critical pressure of the New York audience.
For Soto and Watts, there's an added benefit -- during the long bus rides, they can sit in the back seat and smoke and talk for hours.
Damian Woetzel was, in 1992, as thrilled as a teen-ager to be invited to join this tour.
Although Woetzel is only three years younger than Soto, he had long admired Soto's massively self-confident stage presence.
By the same token, he was in awe of Heather Watts, both as a dancer and for the strong persona she had established.
And so he would gather his nerve and drift to the back of the bus.
They would stop talking just long enough to spurn him.


McGwire Goes Deep, Twice, for Athletics
Athletics 8, Red Sox 5
Mark McGwire homered twice, including a tie-breaking two-run shot in the seventh inning, leading the Oakland Athletics to an 8-5 victory over the Boston Red Sox yesterday at Fenway Park.
After Mike Maddux (0-1) gave up a double to Ruben Sierra -- the only batter he faced -- to lead off the seventh, Stan Belinda came in.
McGwire hit his third pitch onto Lansdowne Street.
Orioles 6, Angels 2
Jeff Manto tied a major league record by homering in his fourth straight official at-bat over three games, and host Baltimore beat California.
Manto's solo home run in the second inning tied the record set by Johnny Blanchard of the Yankees in 1961, and made him the 24th player in major league history to homer in four straight at-bats.
Pirates 6, Marlins 2
The rookie Esteban Loaiza pitched six and a third strong innings and Pittsburgh prevented Florida from matching its franchise record of five consecutive victories with a triumph in Miami.
Florida suffered a bigger blow when Gary Sheffield was lost for the season with torn ligaments in his left thumb.
IN OTHER GAMES
Ray Lankford's fourth consecutive hit off Tom Glavine, a two-run single, capped a four-run seventh inning that lifted the visiting St.
Louis CARDINALS past the Atlanta BRAVES, 7-3. . . .
Butch Henry (1-4) won for the first time in nine starts this season as the Montreal EXPOS beat the GIANTS in San Francisco, 11-5. . . .
Shawon Dunston hit a three-run homer and Mike Morgan held the Colorado ROCKIES to five hits over seven-plus innings as the Chicago CUBS snapped a five-game losing streak with a 3-0 victory at Wrigley Field. . . .
Jose Valentin hit his first two homers of the year and the Milwaukee BREWERS halted the visiting Cleveland INDIANS' seven-game winning streak with a 6-1 victory. . . .
John Smiley improved his record to 5-0 as the visiting Cincinnati REDS defeated the Houston ASTROS, 3-2, winning for the 26th time in 32 games. . . .
Kevin Appier threw a four-hitter, pitching the Kansas City ROYALS past the visiting Toronto BLUE JAYS, 8-2.


Miriam Sapiro, Stephen Labaton
Miriam Sapiro, an attorney-adviser in the legal adviser's office of the State Department, and Stephen Labaton, a correspondent for The New York Times in Washington, are to be married today at the Jewish Center of the Hamptons in East Hampton, L.I.
Rabbi Myron Kinberg is to perform the ceremony with Rabbi Ezra Labaton, a cousin of the bridegroom.
The bride graduated from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Burton and Gloria Ordover Sapiro of Jupiter, Fla.
Her father, who retired as the senior vice president of Gimbels Department Stores in New York, is a retail consultantin Philadelphia.
Her mother retired as the coordinator in the gift shops at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.


Q and A
California Hostels
Q.
In midsummer my 22-year-old German nephew and his friend plan to travel in California for three weeks.
How can they get a card that will allow them to stay in California hostels?
Is there a listing of hostels in California? -- E. Fusco, Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Daniela Lupas, George P. Fletcher
Judge Daniela Lupas, the daughter of Ioana and Gheorghe Lupas of Bucharest, Romania, is to be married today to George P. Fletcher, the son of the late Fanny and Nicholas Fletcher.
Rabbi Edward Feld is to officiate on the Cabaret, a yacht, in New York.
The bride, 35, is a trial court judge in Bucharest.
She received her law degree from the University of Bucharest and was a Fulbright Scholar at the Lewis and Clark Law School.
She received a master's of law degree from Columbia University.
Her two previous marriages ended in divorce.


Rene F. Martell, 68, Is Dead; Doyen in the Land of Cognac
Rene Firino Martell, who engineered the $850 million sale of his family's cognac company to Seagram in 1988, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Nice, France.
He was 68 and a resident of Cognac, the small southwestern town that his family has dominnated for almost three centuries.
Spokesmen for the family said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Mr. Yankee
DIMAGGIO  The Last American Knight.
By Joseph Durso.
Illustrated. 272 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


Lisa Markowitz, Andrew Feldman
Lisa Beth Markowitz, a daughter of Sandra and Wallace Markowitz of North Bellmore, L.I., is to be married today to Andrew Jay Feldman, a son of Frayda and Ronald Feldman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Stern is to perform the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
The bride, a freelance graphic designer in Yonkers, was until recently a senior graphic designer at Meadows &amp; Wiser Graphic Design in Washington.
Her mother is a special education teacher at Elementary School 6 in Woodmere, L.I.
Her father is a vice president of the Princeton Consulting Group, financial consultants in Gillette, N.J.


U.S. Envoy to China Is Reported Preparing to Leave Post Early
Frustrated over the state of relations between the United States and China, the American Ambassador is planning to leave his post next week before his replacement has been named by the Clinton Administration.
Although the Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, has told close associates that the timing of his departure has nothing to do with the diplomatic crisis over the visit to the United States by the President of Taiwan, Lee Teng-hui, Mr.
Roy's return to Washington June 17 will only add to the image of worsening relations.


Only Half Right
To the Sports Editor:
In "Prefontaine Legacy Enjoys a Long Run" (The Times, June 4), Craig A. Masback recognizes Steve Prefontaine's contributions to American track and field and his inspirational role to American runners.


Recent Casper Popularity Doesn't Show Big Picture
WHO can forget the words from the old "Casper the Friendly Ghost" cartoons about the spook's generational appeal: "While grownups might look at him with fright, the children all love him so."
Well, that line goes to prove one thing: Most investors are grownups.


Let's Think Baout What We're Doing In Bosnia; Four Interests Involved
To the Editor:
William Safire contends that pouring weapons into Bosnia and dropping bombs on the Bosnian Serbs is the best way to "win the war" (column, June 1).
If successful, this pour and drop strategy would result in the death or expulsion of more than a million Serbs from their ancestral homeland.
A similar fate would be met by the tens of thousands of Muslims in Bihac loyal to Fikret Abdic, who do not support the insane policies of the Izetbegovic regime.


Thousands Jam Disney's Newest Park to See 'Pocahontas'
Sitting on 120,000 square feet of artificial turf in the middle of Central Park under a sky illuminated by 56,000 watts of light instead of stars, tens of thousands of people from across the nation braved intermittent rain and long lines last night to watch the biggest movie premiere in history.
The occasion was a showing of the animated film "Pocahontas" from Walt Disney Pictures, on four 80-foot-high screens.


Lynda R. Cohen, Robert S. Loigman
Lynda R. Cohen, the daughter of Janice and Harris Cohen of Longmeadow, Mass., was married last evening to Robert S. Loigman, a son of Carol and Dr.
Barry Loigman of North Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the Norwich Inn in Norwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Loigman, 26, graduated magna cum laude fom Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Columbia University and is an associate at Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, the law firm in New York.
Her father is a supervisor for the Massachusetts Department of Public Welfare in Springfield, Mass.


Doctors' Confidentiality
To the Editor:
"Can a Visit to the Company Doc Help a Cold but Hurt a Career?" (EARNING IT, May 21) does a good job in alerting employees to the pitfalls of using the corporate physician, but I believe the abuses are not as common as the article suggests.
As a corporate doctor, I often received phone calls from supervisors requesting information about an employee's illness.
My standard response was, "Why do you ask?" That usually ended the inquiry.
To the persistent I only conveyed the following information: can the individual perform the tasks necessary, can the employee perform them with any limitations and, finally, how long the employee may be out of work.
CLINTON G. WEIMAN, M.D.
Greenwich, Conn., May 25  The writer is a former corporate medical director at Citibank and Citicorp.


Ice Rink Proposal Leads to a Referendum in Lewisboro
TO build or not to build that is a question that is raising tempers in this town.
On Wednesday, Lewisboro property owners will go to the polls in a referendum to decide whether to construct a 56,000-square-foot community center in Lewisboro Town Park.


Foreign Affairs; A Consumer Guide
One of the hottest topics in finance these days is how to prevent another Mexico from destabilizing the global financial system.
Finance ministers will tell you that the subject has been dominating all their international meetings, and you are going to hear a lot of their proposed solutions at this week's G-7 summit in Halifax.
THIS IS A WARNING: There is more nonsense than common sense among these proposals.
Since some of them could cost you money, I offer this survival guide to the I-can-prevent-the-next-Mexico schemes.


Middle Eastern Movie Making With Curfew and a State of Siege
OF MORE THAN 20 MIDDLE Eastern films the Public Theater presented in a special series last month, "Bab El-Oued City" was singled out for its own commercial run, beginning on Wednesday.
The staff chose to highlight the film because its subject -- how religious militancy affects ordinary men and women -- is relevant not only throughout the Middle East but beyond.
"Of all the films we had in the series, it dealt most lucidly, accurately and explicitly with contemporary events," Gerard Dapena, the Public's film program administrator, said of "Bab El-Oued City," which depicts the clash between ascendant religious militants and their secular neighbors.


Substituting Tuna Steaks For T-Bone on Outdoor Grills
ON grills throughout this region, fresh tuna steaks now often replace the T-bone and porterhouse variety.
But unlike beef, which can be cooked to taste, tuna is best when left at least a bit rare in the middle.
Otherwise, it will be rather dry and tasteless.
The reason?
It has a much lower fat content than even the leanest beef.
And much to the dismay of diet experts, fat is what often carries flavor.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
HUNGER STRIKE: When it was just Wing Lam and the Chinese Staff and Workers Association protesting at the Jing Fong Restaurant on Elizabeth Street, it was bad enough.
But five Chinese-American students went on a week-long hunger strike and camped out in front of the restaurant to protest what they call Chinatown's "slave-labor system." . . .
THAT ELUSIVE COMFORT ZONE: About 50 residents debated rezoing SoHo -- from light manufacturing and residential (with provisions for artists) to commercial and residential -- to keep out terminal produce markets.
Two on Broome Street, Ban Produce and World Farm, rely on huge tractor-trailers that some residents find disturbing.
Councilwoman Katheryn E. Freed pointed out that the change could bring large retailers and late-night bars . . .
ARMORY BATTLE?: The 14th Street Armory may become the site of an employment program for home-relief recipients if the Mayor has his way.
But neighborhood groups are opposed to any H.R.A. involvement. . . .


Rapping and Politicking: Show Time on the Stump
DON'T BOTHER TO CHECK THE calendar -- the campaign season has begun in earnest.
The signal was Senator Robert Dole's speech denouncing the American entertainment business for promoting "casual violence and even more casual sex." Moral outrage is a time-honored gambit, echoing 1992: Dan Quayle's denunciation of Murphy Brown (for promoting unwed motherhood), Bill Clinton's condemnation of Sister Souljah (for racism) and bipartisan attacks on Ice-T's "Cop Killer."
It's always a publicity magnet for a campaign, since the products being denounced are so titillating.
Then, as if in reruns, artists and entertainers explain once more that they produce words and images, not deeds.
And they insist that art reflects reality far more than it shapes it.


An Artist Whose Ego Outreached His Art
HE SUED JOHN RUSKIN FOR libel, and the trial left him bankrupt and homeless.
He exacted revenge with his popular jeremiad "The Gentle Art of Making Enemies." But in the end he proved his own worst enemy, an artist whose ego, wit and celebrity overshadowed his art.
With three exhibitions devoted to him, and a fourth to open soon, James McNeill Whistler is being honored here in a manner he would have found entirely fitting.
A major retrospective at the National Gallery of Art (through Aug. 20) includes more than 200 of his works.
The National Portrait Gallery has gathered 100 portraits of him.
The Freer, which owns the largest number of Whistler's works in the country, including the brilliant Peacock Room he did for the shipping baron Frederick Leyland, is exploring (through Jan. 1) his connection with Japanese art.
And a show of prints by Whistler and his contemporaries starts on June 16 at the National Gallery.


Common Sense on Immigration
A bipartisan Federal commission proposed last week that the United States slash legal immigration by one-third and virtually close the nation's borders to "extended" family members of American citizens.
President Clinton swiftly embraced the report.
But after representatives of Asian and Hispanic immigrants complained bitterly, the President's press secretary volunteered that perhaps the White House had not carefully considered all the issues.
The press secretary spoke the truth.
The White House seems to have reacted before deliberating carefully on an issue that begs for deft handling.
Immigration, along with affirmative action, promises to become an incendiary issue in the 1996 elections.
It plays to racial fears.
It plays to economic fears of workers whose wages have stagnated for two decades.
The President can easily embrace the commission's basic policy thrust: admit more skilled, and fewer unskilled, workers.
But he should hesitate before endorsing its proposal to reduce immigration levels and impose a "fee" on employers who hire foreign professionals.


Treatment for Many Ills; An Area Centers on Lincoln Hospital
Tony Glenos, the owner of the Donut Shop on 149th Street in the South Bronx, paused in his morning routine of flipping bacon and stirring home fries to wipe his hands on his grease-stained apron and gesture across the street.
"Today they get paid over there," he said with a jagged-tooth grin.
"Everybody will spend more money here today."
Payday at Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, the huge, rust-colored brick building that dominates the view from Mr.
Glenos's window, does not go unnoticed by the 250 small-business owners in the neighborhood.
"The hospital gives a little bit to every business here," Mr.
Glenos said.
"If there was no hospital, I'd close, and everyone else would."


Victoria A. Hastings, David E. Garcia
Victoria Anne Hastings, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry M. Hastings of Smithtown, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
David Edward Garcia, the son of Sue Cooper Garcia of Richardson, Tex., and Dr.
Edward H. Garcia of Dallas.
The Rev.
William H. Edwards performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Smithtown.
Ms.
Hastings, 30, is keeping her name.
She and her husband, 29, graduated from Yale University.
The bride is a development assistant in corporate and foundation fund-raising at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.


The Nation; Transplants, Morality and Mickey
AMORALIST might be tempted to say that to a large extent Mickey Mantle brought his liver problems upon himself.
Granted, his liver cancer probably resulted from the hepatitis C infection he acquired from a blood transfusion years ago.
But Mr.
Mantle also had been an alcoholic for years and developed alcoholic cirrhosis, which greatly accelerates the course of the virus-initiated cancer.
If Mr.
Mantle had abstained, the cancer might never have occurred or not have materialized for decades.
So why are Mr.
Mantle's doctors so eager to give a precious organ to someone who actively contributed to his disease?
Why does any doctor give a liver to an alcoholic, when thousands of other, more temperate people languish on the waiting list or are never listed?
The case of Mickey Mantle raises a troubling question about medical desserts: Should alcoholics with liver failure, smokers with lung cancer and obese people with heart disease receive the same treatment as people who have lived lives of moderation?


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
Braveheart  Mel Gibson, Patrick McGoohan, Sophie Marceau, Catherine McCormack Directed by Mel Gibson R 179 minutes


Trivia Long Ago, Serious Treasures Now
"MOTHERS ARE THE NATUral enemies of all young collectors," says Gary Alexander, a 56-year-old former radio newscaster who now does voice-overs on commercials.
He was recalling the day in 1964 when he returned home from a tour of duty in the Marines and found that his mother had given a young cousin half of his collection of bubble-gum cards emblazoned with comic-book characters.
Fortunately, he says, she had not touched the rings, badges and pins that he had collected with the help of cereal box tops between the ages of 7 and 13.


Sauces With Flavor, Take Out or Eat In
TAKE-OUT food has been part of American life for so long now, it is hard to think that anyone could give it a new twist.
But two new Fairfield County Mexican taquerias, one in Stamford, the other in Westport, show that there is a new dimension to take-out and at the same time demonstrate what a little ingenuity can do to make eating-in agreeable and comfortable as well.


A Blueprint of Crucial Transit Projects for the Next 20 Years
In one of the most detailed assessements ever, a regional planning agency has outlined the transportation needs and problems for a 13-county region in North Jersey, with recommendations on how to spend an expected $27 billion in Federal funds over the next 20 years.
The state has little choice but to be aggressive, according to the study by the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority.


Where the Readers Are Inside the Books
SHUTTERS SHUT AND OPEN; SO do minds.
I went to Paris expecting to dislike the new Bibliotheque Nationale de France and came away enchanted by it.
Like all of the Grands Travaux -- the large-scale public works undertaken in the city by President Francois Mitterrand -- the library has sparked considerable animosity.
Smart people don't like it.
The design by the young French architect Dominique Perrault does indeed defy common sense.
What kind of nutty idea is it to put books in high-rise towers and bury readers underground?
Why bother to build four glass skyscrapers only to line them inside with rows of wooden shutters?
And what can you say about the library's symbolic concept: four L-shaped towers, grouped around an open square like four immense open books?
But people go to libraries more for introspection than for panoramic city views.
The library's damp, Seine-side site prohibited carving out sufficient space to store more than two-thirds of the library's 12 million volumes underground.
And when you're actually at the library, you may wind up asking yourself when was the last time you saw a work of architecture this logical, this clear?


Research Park Rising on Site of Audubon Ballroom
THE grainy black and white photographs in the architect's office show an empty room with folding chairs pushed haphazardly aside.
Tiny black dots ringed with white chalk -- bullet holes outlined by police technicians -- pepper the podium.
After a decade of major and minor confrontations among a kaleidoscopic array of city agencies, Washington Heights residents and officials of Columbia University, 40 percent of that room -- where Malcolm X was assassinated on Feb. 21, 1965 -- still stands, newly shrouded in white sheetrock and waiting for its promised museum and memorial.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; Shades of Meaning
THE ARTIST AND THE WRITER MEET FOR LUNCH.
Their mission is to find the perfect pair of sunglasses.
Some people have perfect pitch.
The artist (a man of many pursuits, including sculpture, photography, site installation and landscape design) has perfect esthetics.
He knows when something looks right.
When it is wrong, it can pain him to see it.
Or it can make him laugh.
The writer thinks in words.
She finds it difficult to see something until she can put it into phrases, sentences, paragraphs.
She bought her current glasses because the saleswoman said she didn't think the writer had enough attitude to wear them.
In the restaurant she puts them on for the artist.
People turn to see what's making the tall man laugh.


Legitimation Crisis


New Isolationists Weaken America
The United States will never -- unless Pat Buchanan, the Republican Presidential candidate, has his way -- return to the isolationism of no "entangling alliances."
It will continue to accept international political, economic and military commitments unprecedented in its history.
It will even enlarge some, as in the curious mania to expand NATO, which would commit United States forces to the defense of Eastern Europe from, presumably, the menace of a Russian Army that cannot even beat Chechnya.


Without Dignity of a Job, Masculinity is Meaningless
To the Editor:
In his Soapbox essay "No More 'Jewels in the Crown' " (June 4), Vernon McClean suggests that the solution to the problems of young black men is community-level action.
It will not work.
Generations of inner-city young men have been lost to drugs and crime because they had no real prospect for meaningful employment -- the kind of employment that would support the children they father, the kind of employment that would give them dignity.
Without that dignity, masculinity is an empty shell.


Oh, Brothers! Majors Seem Full of Them
Before a game in Toronto in the first week of the season, Marcel Lachemann approached Al Leiter.
"What do you Leiter boys have against us Lachemanns?" the California Angels' manager asked the Blue Jays pitcher.
The day before, Leiter had allowed the Angels no runs and two hits in six innings in the Blue Jays' 3-0 victory.
The night before that, Mark Leiter, Al's older brother, had permitted no runs and two hits in six innings in the San Francisco Giants' 4-0 victory over the Florida Marlins, who are managed by Rene Lachemann, Marcel's younger brother.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 11, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
ALL THAT GLITTERS, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) From plantation house to shanty: Ruby's marital ordeals continue.
2
11
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
3
5
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
4
33
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
5
3
UNTIL FOREVER, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) A 10th-century sword enables a woman to take a romantic journey through the past.
6
6
THE KEY TO MIDNIGHT, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A 1979 novel about a man who helps a troubled nightclub singer in Japan.
7
5
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
8
1
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
9
2
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $6.99.) V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
10
22
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in Ireland.
11
3
TWO ALONE, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A 1987 novel about a man and a woman who are stranded after a plane crash.
12
8
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
13
5
THE TEA PLANTER'S BRIDE, by Rosemary Rogers. (Avon, $6.50.) An American rogue and a young Ceylonese woman in Victorian London.
14
1
WALKING SHADOW, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) The private eye Spenser investigates the murder of a member of a theatrical troupe in a Massachusetts town.
15
3
DREAM MAN, by Linda Howard. (Pocket, $5.99.) A clairvoyant teams up with a detective stalking a serial killer and finds love.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
SELENA! by Clint Richmond. (Pocket, $5.99.) A bilingual account of the life and career, ending in murder, of the Mexican-American singer.
2
5
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
3*
38
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
74
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5*
11
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
6
605
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
3
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8
37
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
5
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, by Jim Carroll. (Penguin, $10.95.) The coming of age of a poet and rock performer in New York in the 1960's.
10
26
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
11
7
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected places.
12*
6
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society to meet the conditions of the 21st century.
13*
16
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
14
41
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
15*
15
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
37
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
6
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
3
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
215
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


The World; Sure, Ebola Is Bad. Africa Has Worse.
WITH the gruesome death of scores of people from the Ebola virus last month, this lost city of 500,000, and with it a largely forgotten continent, was suddenly, if momentarily, found.
For weeks now, the scenery of Kikwit has been utterly transformed as space-suited scientists scurry about the government hospital compound and white Red Cross vehicles comb neighborhoods whose dirt roads had lost all habit of bearing vehicles.
Foreign doctors and foreign correspondents uneasily rub elbows, one group hoping to bare the secrets of the scourge and the other hoping to flash the news.


WEDDINGS Nancy L. Maron, William Schaeffer
Nancy Laurel Maron, a daughter of Judith and David Maron of Englewood, N.J., is to be married today to William Edward Schaeffer, the son of Dr.
Michaela Kane Schaeffer and Dr.
Henry Schaeffer of Brooklyn.
Rabbi William Kloner is to officiate at the Coveleigh Country Club in Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Maron, who is 28, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a Ph.
D. in French history at New York University, from which she received a master's degree in French studies.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is an architect in New York, and her mother is a designer in his office.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Teaching Homeowners To Fix It Themselves  Applications are being accepted for a popular 10-week home repair course sponsored by Roosevelt Savings Bank and Neighborhood Housing Services of Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Anti-Terror: Vote on a bill that would give Government law-enforcement officials expanded powers, make it easier to deport aliens suspected of terrorism and limit most death row prisoners to one appeal in Federal court.
Approved 91 to 8, June 7.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
House
1.
War Powers: Vote on an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would repeal the 1973 War Powers Act.
Rejected 217 to 201, June 7.
2.
Bosnia Arms Ban: Vote on an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would require the President to lift the arms embargo against Bosnia unilaterally upon the request of the Bosnian government.
Approved 318 to 99, June 8.
3.
Foreign Aid: Vote on a sweeping foreign aid bill that would reduce overseas spending by $3 billion over two years and meld three independent agencies into the State Department.
Approved 222 to 192, June 8.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
A
A
A
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
13. Molinari (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
A
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
A
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


SUNDAY, June 11, 1995; UNNECESSARY OBJECTS: Giant Steer and Hamburgers for Store or Lawn
Are you pining for a genuine Bob's Big Boy statue, just like the ones at the roadside restaurants?
Or maybe you need a water slide shaped like a giant frog?
FAST Corporation, a Sparta, Wis., outfit (the acronym stands for Fiberglass Animals Shapes and Trademarks) has just what you're looking for.
Every year the company manufactures about 150 statues of assorted trademarked characters, from Anheuser-Busch's Bud Man to T-Bone Willie, a 12-foot standing cow brandishing a steak and a barbecue fork.
The company also features an extensive fiberglass menagerie including fish, pheasants, scorpions and dinosaurs.
The pieces are bought by water parks and amusement parks ("over half our business," according to Jerry Vettrus, company president), restaurants, zoos, museums, miniature-golf operations and civic organizations.
Occasionally someone buys one for the front yard.
And the cost?
The steer above goes for $9,000, and this year's top seller, the frog slide, costs $7,200.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $450,000
1 Irving Place  (Zeckendorf Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures, health club and pool; common charge $575; taxes $4,584, listed at $450,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $775,000
644 Broadway (Bleecker St.)  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 14-ft. ceilings, laundry room, south exposure; maintenance $1,410, 75% tax-deductible, listed at $775,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $970,000
171 East 84th Street  (Evans Tower)  5-bedroom, 4 full- and 2 half-bath condo in a 19-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining ell, 2 balconies, 3 exposures; common charge $1,601; taxes $11,312, listed at $1.5 million, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Equinox Properties; Feathered Nest)  WEST MIDTOWN  $315,000
31 West 31st Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, h/w floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,500, 62% tax-deductible, listed at $345,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Big City Management, Inc.)  BRONX
WAKEFIELD  $191,500
4617 Matilda Avenue  2-family, 80-year-old detached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,648, listed at $199,500, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star)  BROOKLYN
MIDWOOD  $270,000
1344 East 26th Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old detached stucco-sided colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, parquet floors, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000, listed at $299,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Maryl)  PARK SLOPE  $335,000
38 Montgomery Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; new kitchen, fireplace, private deck and garden; maintenance $952, 67% tax-deductible, listed at $345,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Joseph Berman)  PROSPECT HEIGHTS  $306,000
197 Prospect Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, dining room, rear deck in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, den in simplex; 1 bath in each; original moldings and detail; taxes $1,600, listed at $360,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $200,000  101-05 75th Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, attached brick colonial town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, powder room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,747, listed at $239,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)  RICHMOND HILL  $140,000
104-67 128th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, rear patio, 2-car garage; taxes $1,200, listed at $159,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Best)  STATEN ISLAND
NEW SPRINGVILLE  $175,000
93 Rockville Avenue  2-family, 25-year-old detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; taxes $2,250, listed at $220,500, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  WESTERLEIGH  $147,000
27 O'Connor Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 68-year-old colonial; dining room, remodeled eat-in kitchen and bath, semi-finished basement; taxes $1,200, listed at $149,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Ltd.)  CONNECTICUT
COLCHESTER  $64,900
1B Westchester Hills  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,864-sq.-ft. condo; family room, recreation room, patio, 2-car garage, pool and tennis courts; common charge $163; taxes $1,326, listed at $64,900, 25 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21/Tavern Green; Beazley Co.)  GREENWICH  $349,000
351 Pemberwick Road  (Hawthorne)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath condo in a 3-year-old building; renovated kitchen, family room, deck, loft space on 2d floor; common charge $154; taxes $3,055, listed at $365,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Maher &amp; Associates; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  NORWALK  $180,000
2 Maplewood Terrace  2-family, 67-year-old Victorian; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; h/w floors, 1-car garage; taxes $3,353, listed at $194,900, 22 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; William Raveis)  WESTPORT  $447,500
2 Charbeth Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old split-level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, new roof, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,417, listed at $474,900, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties)  WESTCHESTER  CHAPPAQUA  $501,000
52 Old Lyme Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; Jacuzzi, 2-car garage, 1.6 acres; taxes $10,947, listed at $519,000, 46 weeks on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Holmes &amp; Kennedy)  MAMARONECK  $385,000
8 Hall Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 68-year-old Mediterranean; stone fireplace, den, modern eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $9,443, listed at $425,000, 43 weeks on market (Brokers: Merritt Associates; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  PLEASANTVILLE  $460,000
60 Church Street  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 88-year-old stone house; foyer, library, studio, terrace, screened porch, .75 acre; taxes $10,041, listed at $495,000, 54 weeks on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Holmes &amp; Kennedy)  SCARSDALE  $605,000
180 Mamaroneck Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; family room, dining room, fireplace, modern eat-in kitchen, .50 acre; taxes $13,808, listed at $629,000, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: Dudley D. Doernberg; Julia B. Fee)  NEW JERSEY
DEL HAVEN  $50,000
27 11th Street North  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; h/w floors, deck, patio, needs work; taxes $1,156, listed at $50,000, 1 week on market (Broker: DeMusz)  HOPEWELL  $167,000
3 Fabrow Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,223, listed at $189,900, 20 months on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  HOWELL  $191,150
14 Coral Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2-car garage, walk-in closets, dining room; taxes $4,503, listed at $191,900, 38 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  WOODCLIFF LAKE  $210,000
11 Glenair Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; c/a, 2-car garage, patio, full basement, sunroom; taxes $5,092, listed at $219,900, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins; Murphy Better Homes and Gardens)  LONG ISLAND
GREAT NECK  $740,000
88 Old Pond Road 6-bedroom, 6-bath, 5-year-old Tudor; dining room, den, fireplace, sauna, finished basement, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $14,000, listed at $849,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: June Shapiro; Great Neck Realty Better Homes and Gardens)  GREAT RIVER  $237,000
6 Redwood Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old farm ranch; dining room, family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $7,700, listed at $250,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Daniel Gale Relocation; Prudential Long Island)  HOLBROOK  $135,000
3 Doradell Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 18-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300, listed at $139,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Princeton; Straub Resales)  MASSAPEQUA  $157,000
202 North Nassau Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,000, listed at $159,990, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Fitzgerald Properties; Century 21 A A)


Correction
A picture caption on May 28 with an article about the Hudson River shoreline misidentified a site in Yonkers.
The photo showed highway dividers by the river in Yonkers, not the Pierpointe-on-the-Hudson condominium development.


Aida M. Meagher And Eric L. Klun
Aida Mercedes Meagher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Meagher of New York, as married yesterday to Eric Leslie Klun, a son of Dr.
Jerome Klun of Potomac, Md., and Phyllis Klun of Maitland, Fla.
The Rev.
Oliver Mahedy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist in Silver Spring, Md.
Mrs.
Klun, 24, is the director of market research at Universal Jet Trading, an aircraft brokerage in Rockville, Md.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is the chairman of Financial World Partners, which publishes Financial World magazine, in New York.
He is a former president of The Washington Post Company.
Her mother, Gabriela Meagher, is an artist.


Ellen Melaver, Jonathon Krupp
Ellen Melaver, a daughter of Norton and Betty Melaver of Savannah, Ga., is to be married today to Jonathon Krupp, the son of David Krupp and Margo Krupp, both of Chicago.
Rabbi Jack Paskoff is to perform the ceremony at a cottage on Tybee Island, Ga.
Ms.
Melaver, who will be keeping her name, is a playwright and writing teacher.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in playwrighting from the University of Iowa.


Vesco, a Dealmaker to Dictators, Thrived in Cuba, Diplomats Say
One day in the fall of 1984, the reigning lord of Colombian cocaine, Carlos Lehder Rivas, sent an emissary to Cuba for an audience with Robert L. Vesco, the fugitive swindler wanted in the United States for stealing more than $200 million.
Under the patronage of the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, Mr.
Vesco had set himself up in splendid exile in a low-slung beachfront villa with two private jets, half a dozen cars, two yachts and a speedboat.
Average Cubans scraped by on black beans and rice; Mr.
Vesco's guests dined on lobster and champagne.


E. R. Dunning, Thomas Mulry Jr.
Elizabeth Ross Dunning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald R. Dunning of Boyce, Va., was married yesterday to Thomas Carroll Mulry Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mulry of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
John Aurelia performed the ceremony at St.
Francis De Sales Roman Catholic Church in Purcellville, Va.


Books for Vacation Reading
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1994 and suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Biographies and memoirs of people known for their contributions in fields other than literature and history are listed in appropriate categories.
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture
THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800.
By Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.


June 4-10: Hostile Bids; I.B.M. Tries to Buy A Slice of the Future
Why would the International Business Machines Corporation be willing to pay $3.3 billion for the Lotus Development Corporation, a struggling software producer that lost money last year?
The answer is that Lotus has a product that many believe could be a lucrative gateway to the future of computing.
The product is called Lotus Notes, and it is the leader in a category known as groupware -- software that lets people work in teams, tapping into the same document from computers anywhere.


Unreformed Social Security System Presents a Scary Prospect
To the Editor:
Senators Bob Kerrey and Alan K. Simpson are to be congratulated on "How to Save Social Security" (Op-Ed, May 23), in which they point out the serious flaws in our Social Security system.


Let's Think About What We're Doing in Bosnia; Folly of Air Strike
To the Editor:
I am at a loss to understand why North Atlantic Treaty Organization bombs were dropped in Bosnia while United Nations peacekeepers were on the ground.
If any schoolchild could figure out the results of such an action, why couldn't our military and the decision makers who authorized the air strike?


Destroying Illegal Drugs in the Philippines


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
Since retiring as chairman of McDonnell Douglas in 1988, I have been devoting myself full time to getting character education back into the public schools.
We don't want young people graduating into our corporations or communities who are brilliant but dishonest, who have great intellectual knowledge but don't really care about others.
SANFORD N. MCDONNELL Chairman, the Character Education Partnership Inc.
Saint Louis


Bevan M. Watt, Dale M. Lattanzio
Bevan Marie Watt, a daughter of Carol A. King of Essex Fells, N.J., and the late James H. Watt Jr., was married yesterday to Dale Michael Lattanzio, a son of Laura and Dale R. Lattanzio of Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr., an Episcopal minister, officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
Donal Fox, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Watt, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is an associate at Windels, Marx, Davies &amp; Ives, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a learning-disabilities consultant for the Watchung Borough Public Schools in Watchung, N.J.
The bride's stepfather, James P. King, is the president of Dosch King &amp; Company, road contractors in Whippany, N.J.


The Nation; Yes, Statutory Rape Is Still a Rather Big Deal
Somewhere between the Age of Innocence, to which Americans universally consign prepubescent girls and boys, and the Age of Enlightenment, in which youngsters can legally drive, often drink and generally engage in other adult vices, lies the Age of Consent, when youths can knowingly embark on a sexual relationship.
When that age begins in the United States is defined by law: it's 16 or 17 in most states.
When it should begin in fact is a matter of debate.


Exit the Fans
To the Sports Editor:
It amazes me when I read articles such as Claire Smith's "Plenty of Good Seats Available, Fans" (The Times, May 28), which indicate the surprise of baseball players and owners at the drastic falloff in attendance.
I am 45, have followed the game closely since the age of 7, but I will not be attending any major league games this year.
My decision is based on the complete disregard that the institution of baseball has shown for (1) the public that makes its existence possible and (2) the grand history of the game that makes so many of us love the sport.


Kansas City
To the Editor: I thought only a native could appreciate Kansas City's quiet sophistication and hometown charm.
So I was delighted to read Susan Spano's article revealing its treasures, "Frugal Traveler: In Missouri, History and Barbecue" (May 21).
This Midwestern mecca, which has more outdoor fountains than any city in the world save Rome, houses the finest Asian art collection in the United States, served as the cradle of jazz history, reared a young Harry Truman and perfected the art of barbecued ribs, is a place most New York travelers fly over en route to a more glamorous destination.
It's a shame they miss it.
LEANNE MOS  New York, N.Y.


Slide Rule: Mets Lose Another to San Diego
Jeff Kent can't get a hit with runners in scoring position.
Brett Butler's escape from a career-worst slump cannot yet be considered official.
Jose Vizcaino is struggling so badly that Dallas Green sat him here this evening and Todd Hundley has hit .105 on this road trip.
In other words, the Mets' offense is in trouble, and that was more than evident tonight.
With Scott Sanders on the mound for the Padres, the Mets were held to four hits -- although two of those were homers -- as San Diego cruised to a 4-2 victory.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley and Tina Turner.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Dick Fox's Golden Boys of Bandstand, with Frankie Avalon, Fabian and Bobby Rydell.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Ray Charles, Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Shaboom," a musical revue about the 50's, with poodle skirts, hot rods, malt shops and rock-and-roll with Lee Allen and Dane Anthony.
Saturday through Thursday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through June 25.
Tickets: $12.50 plus a one-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue.  (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Liza Minnelli, with Billy Stritch.
June 22-25.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "The Will Rogers Follies," a musical.
Tuesday and Friday at 7 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Through July 4.
Tickets: $20.
The Atlantic Symphony Orchestra presents a Viennese string concert and reception.
Tickets: $25.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "Hot Cha Cha." Eighteen dancers perform Latin dances, including the cha-cha, mambo, merengue and tango.
Monday, Thursday and Friday at 7:30 P.M; Wednesday at 3 and 7:30 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15; for matinees, $10.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COMING UP Clint Holmes's "Sophisticated Rhythms." Opens July 1.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with music, humor, dancing and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Ralph Pope, comedian; the dancing Williams Brothers; Dolores Park, singer, and Peter Gossamer, illusionist.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through Saturday.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue.  (800) 257-6227.
COMEDY SHOP Mike Egan, Joan Fagan and Kip Addotta.
Today at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50.
One-drink minimum.
SHOWROOM Aretha Franklin, with Brian Copeland, comedian.
Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." July 1.
COMING UP The Beach Boys, July 6-9.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Earth, Wind and Fire.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $75.
COMING UP Lou Rawls, June 30-July 3.
Donna Summer, July 5-9.
The Temptations, July 11-16.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
GRAND BALLROOM Irish Music and Dance Festival.
Today, noon to 8 P.M.
Free.
COMING UP "A Tribute to the Platters," with Sonny Turner, singer, June 19-July 30.
Saturday through Thursday, 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 or $15 on Saturdays.
John Michael Montgomery, June 23.


To Stop the Worrying, Keep Race Out of Hiring
To the Editor:
In "It's No Longer the Back of the Bus, but . . ." (From the Desk Of, May 21) the corporate lawyer Lawrence Otis Graham complains of clients becoming "suddenly fidgety and wary of my competence" when they discover he is black.


Substituting Tuna For T-Bone Steak
ON grills throughout this region, fresh tuna steaks now often replace the T-bone and porterhouse variety.
But unlike beef, which can be cooked to taste, tuna is best when left at least a bit rare in the middle.
Otherwise, it will be rather dry and tasteless.
The reason?
It has a much lower fat content than even the leanest beef.
And much to the dismay of diet experts, fat is what often carries flavor.
Tuna is excellent cooked on a grill, but the grill must be very hot and the tuna tended with care.
The outside should be seared, but in the middle there should remain at least a band of pink.
Marinades enhance the flavor.
The following marinade, for a mango puree intensified with a splash of balsamic vinegar, provides a nice glaze.
The marinade calls for only half a mango.
But the rest, along with the flesh of another mango, make a tangy salsa to serve alongside. .
Grilled Tuna With Mango Glaze Total time: 1 hour  1/2large ripe mango  2tablespoons balsamic vinegar  1tablespoon olive oil  Salt and freshly ground black pepper  4fresh tuna steaks, each 6 to 7 ounces  Mango salsa (recipe follows).
1.
Scoop the flesh of the mango from the skin and puree the mango in a food processor.
Mix the mango puree with the vinegar and olive oil and season to taste with salt and pepper.
Transfer to a dish that will hold the tuna in a single layer.
2.
Place the tuna in the dish and turn the steaks to coat both sides with the mango mixture.
Allow to marinate at room temperature for 30 minutes.
3. Preheat a barbecue to very hot.
4.
Sear the tuna steaks about two minutes on each side so the fish remains quite rare in the middle.
Baste with some of the mango puree when you turn them.
Serve at once, with mango salsa on the side.
Yield: 4 servings.
Mango Salsa Total time: 15 minutes  1 1/2large ripe mangoes  1/4cup finely diced red onion  1tablespoon balsamic vinegar  1tablespoon fresh lime juice  Hot red pepper flakes to taste  2tablespoons finely chopped fresh coriander leaves.
1.
Cut the flesh of the mangoes from the pit and the skin and dice it fine.
Mix it with the onion, vinegar and lime juice.
2. Season to taste with red pepper flakes and fold in the coriander.
3. Refrigerate, covered, until ready to serve. Spoon the salsa alongside the tuna.
Yield: 4 servings.
Steamed Sugar Snap Peas Total time: 15 minutes  1pound sugar snap peas  1tablespoon unsalted butter  Salt and freshly ground black pepper.
1.
Put the sugar snap peas in a steamer and steam over boiling water six to seven minutes, until they are still bright green and slightly crisp.
2.
Put them in a warm serving dish and toss with butter -- and salt and pepper to taste.
Serve at once.
Yield: 4 servings.


A Budget Battle Gets to Specifics
With New York City facing a $3.1 billion budget gap for the fiscal year that begins in less than three weeks, the Mayor and the City Council have moved the fight over the city's budget from the abstract political debate of recent months to specific debates over whether the city will continue to pay for a host of social services, affecting millions of New Yorkers in ways large and small -- from schoolchildren to the mentally ill.
Article, page 45.


When a Good Cigar Is More Than a Smoke
SOMETIMES, Freud once harrumphed, a cigar is just a cigar.
Not so.
Not when it's one of those expensive handmade beauties you've seen in the mitts of American men as far apart on the spectrum as Bill Clinton and Rush Limbaugh.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The United States and Japan are scheduled to begin talks in Geneva over trade in autos and auto parts and the trade sanctions the United States imposed on $5.9 billion of Japanese luxury car imports.
Tuesday The Labor Department delivers its key indicator on inflation when it releases the consumer price index for May.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent, the same as the advance in April.
The index rose 0.2 percent in March.
The Commerce Department releases retail sales for May.
Forecast: up 0.6 percent on stronger sales of home furnishings and clothing, after falling 0.4 percent in April.
Sales had jumped 0.8 percent in March.
The Senate Finance Committee holds a hearing on the tax status of the American Association of Retired Persons.
Wednesday The Commerce Department reports April business inventories and sales.
Forecast: inventories are expected to continue their rise, up 0.5 percent, after climbing 0.7 percent in March and 0.8 percent in February.
Sales did not change in March, but rose 0.2 percent in February.
The House Economic Committee discusses a bill that would nullify an executive order barring Federal contracts with companies that hire permanent replacements during strikes.
Thursday The Federal Reserve reports on the state of the American manufacturing industry when it releases capacity utilization and industrial production numbers for May.
Forecast: utilization is expected to drop again, to 83.6 percent, down from 84.1 percent in April and 84.7 percent in March.
Production should also decline, by 0.3 percent.
It dropped 0.4 percent in April and 0.3 percent in March.
International Multifoods is expected to release quarterly earnings.
Forecast: 20 cents a share.
Friday The Federal Reserve releases its report of assets and liabilities of commercial banks.


Barking and Off the Leash, Dogs Spoil Stuyvesant Park
To the Editor:
Dog owners break the law daily in city parks other than Riverside ("Pet Owners Growl: Rangers Are Too Dogged," June 4).
My apartment is opposite Stuyvesant Park, and every morning from 7 to 9 and evenings from 5 to 8 there are many dog owners present in the park with unleashed dogs.
These owners, busily conversing with each other, allow their dogs to bark constantly and to run wild in and out of areas planted with flowers.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Queens dreams: the borough of homes is also the borough of backyards.
A photo album of private visions.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Theme from "Rocky"?
Suckling pig?
That and much, much more at Oriental Manor, wedding hall extraordinaire.
MOVIE CLOCK 18  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 19  Buskers in the Financial District; a house and garden tour in Boerum Hill; summer serenades in Washington Heights.
GOOD EATING 20  Chelsea dining: from three-star glory to charm (and ballroom dancing).
SOAPBOX 21  Eyebrow rings, lip rings, tongue rings . . .
Must you?
A plaint from the minimally pierced.
Plus letters.


Recession? Markets See Little To Fear
Is this economy entering into a recession?
If so, it will be one of the least anticipated in Wall Street history.
Last week, Alan Greenspan used the word recession in acknowledging that the economy was slowing a bit faster than expected, but he quickly said a recession would not occur.
In that sentiment, he was in accord with the overwhelming Wall Street opinion.
Most believe in a soft landing, in which the growth will slow but not stop, and then gradually accelerate again.
Those who disagree tend to think that growth will be surprisingly strong.
Any respectable contrarian is tempted to think a recession is a sure thing.


Lobbying Against Doctors
IS there a doctor in the house?
Well, if there is -- and if the house happens to be a co-op, and the doctor has an office off the lobby -- there's a good chance that the doctor has a headache in the making.
"Many, many buildings in Manhattan have doctors' offices in them," said Paul T. Braverman, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in co-ops.
"And the market for those offices is now in a major upheaval."


It's a Small World. . . And Not Always P.C.
ONCE POCAHONTAS WAS A POWHATAN INDIAN WHO lived in Virginia in the 1600's.
In the new animated Disney feature "Pocahontas," she has become the very essence of healthy, spiritually adept, canoe-paddling Indian feminism -- a character assuredly drawn in the hope of offending no one.
Disney wasn't always so sensitive.
In past decades its animated films frequently drew on ethnic stereotypes, often unflattering ones, for some of its characters.
A look at a dozen Disney animated films shows that what may have seemed funny to audiences at the time would no doubt appear offensive today.
PAULA SCHWARTZ


Sports of The Times; Lukas Knows The Count On Anything
D.
WAYNE LUKAS had just won yet another triple crown race yesterday -- Thunder Gulch had something to do with that -- when somebody asked him to test the microphone for the news conference.
"One, two, three, four, five," Lukas said, deadpan.


Is It Time to Refinance? Homeowners, Start Your Calculators
AS mortgage rates have fallen the last few months to tantalizingly low levels, many people have begun wondering whether they should refinance.
"We are getting a lot of calls about refinancings, and more activity, too," said Bruce R. Lublin, president of the Homerica Mortgage Corporation in Harrison, N.Y.
"If rates fall further or even stay where they are, I can see a little boomlet occurring. It's probably already happening."


For Noncandidate Gingrich, All New Hampshire's a Stage
Racing by helicopter from event to event, Newt Gingrich barnstormed today around this first-in-the-nation primary state like a full-fledged Presidential candidate, greeted by overflow crowds, demonstrators and 130 news organizations as he tried to dispel the notion that he would rather be President than Speaker.
Even as he basked in attention and ovations that the eight declared candidates for the Republican nomination have yet to receive -- 23 television cameras recorded his arrival at the Manchester airport on Friday -- Mr.
Gingrich told New Hampshire residents that he had been playing coy about his intentions for 1996 only to lure people into paying attention to his ideas.


House Plants Step Out for a Change
All of a sudden it's summer, and the mad rush of spring planting is over. (If it isn't, you're in trouble.) Enjoy eating the peas and spinach and cutting the roses.
Bring out your house plants and repot the ones with crowded roots.
Add compost and a drink of diluted liquid fish emulsion or seaweed.
Start them out in partial shade to adjust to outdoor sun and wind.
Spray their leaves regularly to keep off dust and bugs, and don't let them dry out.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1994 Christmas issue.
THE AGENDA: Inside the Clinton White House By Bob Woodward.
Pocket Books, $6.50.
A portrait of Presidential indecisiveness.


The Bureaucracy: What's Left To Shrink?
Republicans have been complaining loudly that government is America's No. 1 growth industry, bigger than cars, computers or even health care.
The only way to curb this rampant monster?
Shift more and more responsibility from Washington to state capitals and city halls.
You'd never guess from all that complaining that the Federal bureaucracy, far from burgeoning, has been shrinking.
Nor would you guess that all the growth in government has occurred at the state and local level.


Substituting Tuna Steaks For T-Bone on Outdoor Grills
ON grills throughout this region, fresh tuna steaks now often replace the T-bone and porterhouse variety.
But unlike beef, which can be cooked to taste, tuna is best when left at least a bit rare in the middle.
Otherwise, it will be rather dry and tasteless.
The reason?
It has a much lower fat content than even the leanest beef.
And much to the dismay of diet experts, fat is what often carries flavor.


On the Highways: 11 Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 at Route 17, in Paramus.
Left eastbound and westbound lane closed Monday through Friday, 10 P.M. to 6 A.M, for bridge work.
Through July 1.


This Stock Market Sails a Sea of Calm
THE last few weeks on Wall Street may have seemed pretty turbulent to many investors, with the Dow industrial average swinging up -- and down -- by 80 points or more in a single day.
By most measures of volatility, however, 1995 has been fairly typical.
And the last three years have been practically placid.
This calm makes a future storm more likely, though, and that means investors should think about how to weather it.


A Cold Shoulder in Fair Lawn Leads to a 6-Mile Backup
Along Route 208 in Fair Lawn, the police and motorists were giving each other the cold shoulder last Tuesday.
A police crackdown on people driving along the shoulder led to a six-mile traffic jam on an already busy stretch of road, plenty of rubber-necking and angry words all around.


Betting Is Big, But Crowd Is Small
It has been six years since there were more than 60,000 people in attendance on Belmont Stakes day.
Not coincidentally, that was the same year that Easy Goer thwarted Sunday Silence's bid for the Triple Crown.
Since then, no horse has come into the Belmont with a chance to capture thoroughbred racing's greatest prize.
And this year was no exception.
The announced attendance of 37,171 was the smallest crowd in at least 48 years (Belmont began keeping the attendance in 1958).


POSTINGS: Rye Lures 160 Employees; When Avon Calls Manhattan Listens
When Avon Products announced last week that it would move 160 of its Manhattan employees to a building it owns in Rye, N.Y., it was a clear defeat for New York City in its battle to retain the cosmetics giant.
But the city will not concede the war.
"Avon still has more than 900 people here, and we want to make sure it continues to find the city a good place to do business," said Forrest R. Taylor, chief of staff for Deputy Mayor John Dyson.
Mr.
Taylor would not elaborate, but the city traditionally offers tax incentives to retain large companies.


Peacekeeping vs. an Intractable War
The dust is slowly beginning to settle on another Balkan crisis, one that has defined the elements of the intractable Bosnian war more clearly than ever before.
Unlike the crises of the last 18 months, precipitated by Serbian attacks on mainly Muslim civilians in Sarajevo, Gorazde and Bihac, the latest flare-up involved a pugnacious attempt by the United Nations to enforce its mandate.


Huntington Group Urges Zoning Against Sex Shops
A SMALL group of residents in Huntington have joined together to urge town officials to use zoning and obscenity laws to force stores selling sexual materials to close or move.
Six shops in Huntington sell entertainment materials -- books, videotapes and novelty items -- that the group of about 12 residents says promotes promiscuity and violence.
Two stores are within a half-mile on Route 110, across the road from the Walt Whitman Shopping Center.


Conference on King of Beats, Punctuated by Counter Beats
Scene: The Writings of Jack Kerouac conference at New York University, June 4-6.
Plot: N.Y.U. officials legitimize a founder of Beat literature with academic analysis.
The Review: Crazy, man, crazy.
The sessions included, "Kerouac's Prose: Reality, Fiction or Fantasy" and "Bop, Blues and Scat: The Jazz Nexus in Kerouac's Writing," and some 400 people paid the $140 fee to attend them, organizers said.


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
I was pleased to read your report on character education.
The movement provides hope that the workers of the future will be first-rate people as well as first-rate intellects.
We can expect no less if our country is to continue as the world's foremost economic power.
ROBERT W. GALVIN Chairman of the Executive Committee, Motorola Inc.
Schaumburg, Ill.


C. S. Sussman, Jeremy F. Green
Charlotte Sacks Sussman, the daughter of Herbert and Elisabeth Sussman of New York, was married on Thursday to Jeremy Francis Green, a son of Peter and Rosemary Green of Oxted, Surrey, England.
Adrian J. Wright, the Superintendent Registrar of the Cambridgeshire County Council in Cambridge, England, officiated there at Castle Lodge, a municipal building.
Ms.
Sussman, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant professor of English at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
She graduated from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in English from Cornell University.
Her father is a professor of English at Northeastern University in Boston.
Her mother is a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.


After Decades of Wariness, Forces of U.S. and India Begin to Cooperate
More than 250 miles out in the Indian Ocean, Capt.
Kizhupalli Mohanan of the Indian Navy leaned out from an observation deck aboard the Abraham Lincoln, straining to catch a view of an F-14 Tomcat fighter as it screamed down over a cobalt-blue sea toward one of the newest nuclear-powered American aircraft carriers.
For Captain Mohanan, a grizzle-bearded navy pilot with hundreds of carrier landings behind him, there was little of the first-timer's thrill in the full-throttle roar of the Tomcat's engines and the cracking impact of the 30-ton fighter hitting the deck one.


A Scotsman Best Not to Trifle With
Party Girl  Parker Posey, Omar Townsend Directed by Daisy von Scherler Mayer R 98 minutes


The Faces of Evil: Artist Sketches Criminals' Likenesses
Even when he is not on the job, Detective Stephen Mancusi finds himself looking around with a professional eye.
"Holy cow!" he will say to himself, spotting someone in a subway.
"Look at that tiny mouth." Or he will be in a bar and find himself thinking, "Gee, that guy's nose is wider than his eye."
Detective Mancusi is a police artist, one of only about 200 in the country, he said.
Based on the descriptions of witnesses, he draws criminals he has never seen, mapping a squint, a scar, teacup ears.


Midland Journal; A Natural Home for Wildlife or a Weedy Eyesore?
Most property-rights cases involve landowners who want to develop their land.
Midge Erskine and her husband, Woody, are fighting for the right to keep their land here in its natural state.
For more than two decades, the Erskines have allowed the trees and plants on their 4.4 acres to grow unmolested, much to the delight of visiting wildlife, including the more than 300 bird species that the couple say they have seen on their property.
Mrs.
Erskine, licensed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as a wildlife rehabilitator, has treated nearly 5,000 sick and injured animals in her home at no cost to taxpayers.


Six Flags Over Middle Earth
THE best vacation is still a book, a renewable ticket to places real and imaginary.
You can go when you want, stay as long as you like, and you don't have to pack a thing.
But readers planning to revisit their favorite fictional landscapes this summer should be forewarned that many of the old places aren't quite the same anymore.
Some of the great novelistic locales have been franchised or theme-parked, and in others the characters have taken over, behaving in ways the authors never intended.
This phenomenon was first noted by Woody Allen's Professor Kugelmass, who in 1977 transported himself to Yonville l'Abbaye and discovered that Emma Bovary had changed utterly.
She dressed in Halston and Ralph Lauren, and her idea of a good time was not the fair in Rouen but, instead, a weekend at the Plaza.
Visitors to Hardy country have complained of similar surprises.
During the Thatcher years, of course, much of Wessex was privatized, or else leased to the BBC, and these days tour buses clog the lanes of Casterbridge and camera towers have sprouted all over Egdon Heath.
The rustics -- the maltsters and shepherds and wheat-rickers -- have their own union now, and frequently refuse to delve, plow, thatch or perform Morris dances on schedule.
They want speaking parts.
Recently, male readers who have turned up at the beginning of "Tess," for example, expecting to see the May dance and hoping to catch a glimpse of pouting deep-red lips and of beribboned white bodices swollen by throbbing life -- life rising quick and urgent and warm, like the ancestral spirit surging anew through the sap in the twigs, bringing with it an upspringing of hope in the breast of man and beast, of stoat and weasel -- have reported a dearth of maidens.
The fertile Vale of Blackmoor is empty, except for a few Japanese tourists, and a sign in the window of the Pure Drop Inn says: "Reservations Only."


Norplant Complaints: Legitimate or Concocted?
"Will the Lawyers Kill Off Norplant?" (May 28) reported that in the five years since the silicone-coated birth-control device was introduced, Norplant has been the target of an avalanche of lawsuits brought by many of the lawyers who took on the makers of silicone breast implants and won a $4 billion settlement.
Some critics of Norplant responded with another side to the story in the following letters.
To the Editor:


So Long at the Fair
The Parachute Jump, more memorable now for a famous photograph of a man and woman stuck in mid-descent than for its dizzying 10-second drop, has been moved from Flushing Meadows to Coney Island.
The New York State Building, which once housed what the guide book called "graphic and arresting displays of New York's vast resources and its social progress," has become the Queens Museum.
The only other remnant of the 1939 New York World's Fair is the Billy Rose Aquacade.
Johnny Weissmuller (he of the awesome pecs) and Eleanor Holm (she of the frolicsome disposition) once swam there, along with a supporting cast of aquabelles and aquabeaux.
Today the foundation is crumbling, the 11,000 seats are disintegrating and no swimmer would dream of sticking so much as a toe into the pool's sorry, stagnant water.


Austrian Mail-Bomb Alert
The Austrian police put the nation on alert today after a series of letter-bomb attacks and urged utmost caution in handling the mail Monday.
Three women in Austria and Germany were wounded on Friday when letter bombs exploded in the Austrian city of Linz and in Munich.


No More Mental Patients, Some in Resort Town Say
Mayor Richard Iadanza and others in this seaside resort have their fingers crossed about Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's new housing plan for patients who will be dischargedfrom the state's nearby psychiatric hospital beginning next year.
They hope -- fervently, the Mayor says -- that the new and rehabilitated housing Mrs.
Whitman is scheduled to disclose on Monday will be scattered around New Jersey.
They say that Ocean Grove has had more than its fair share of former psychiatric patients for the last 10 to 15 years, and wants no more.


Like Disney, Giuliani Budget Could Use a Reality Check
DISNEY picked the right city for its premiere of "Pocahontas," and not only because the Mayor was willing to surrender Central Park's Great Lawn for Saturday night's extravaganza.
Something else links New York to the animated blockbuster.
Each needs a reality check.
The easy one first.


I.B.M. WINS LOTUS AS OFFER IS RAISED ABOVE $3.5 BILLION
The Lotus Development Corporation capitulated yesterday to I.B.M's initially hostile takeover bid, but not before persuading I.B.M. to raise its price to more than $3.5 billion in cash -- and to guarantee the innovative software manufacturer a degree of independence extremely unusual in what was once one of the country's most hide-bound corporations.
After International Business Machines and Lotus officials worked out the details of the corporate union, Lotus's six-person board met on Saturday and voted to accept the I.B.M. offer of $64 a share, which was $4 a share, or about $220 million, more than the company first offered last week.


'Tommy' to Close
"The Who's 'Tommy,' " a musical with book by Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff and music and lyrics by Mr.
Townshend, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The play, directed by Mr.
McAnuff, will have had 900 regular performances and 27 previews.


Fishermen Want to Tell Tales
It is not easy to catch fish for a living.
"These are hard times for working fishermen because of declining stocks of fish and increasing Federal regulations on what you can catch," Nils Stolpe of the New Jersey Seafood Harvesters' Association said last week.


Highwaymen Cancel
A scheduled performance by the Highwaymen on June 23 at the Paramount, featuring Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson, Johnnie Cash and Waylon Jennings, has been canceled because of scheduling conflicts.
Refunds are available at the box office and other ticket locations.
Information: (212) 465-6741.


CHRONICLE
The song served as one of the main protest anthems of the 1960's, but on Saturday, "Blowin' in the Wind" -- or at least Bob Dylan's handwritten lyrics to the song -- were on the auction block at the decidedly establishment auction house Sotheby's.
The lyrics were sold to a private collector for $8,625, or nearly four times their pre-sale estimate.
Among the other items that were sold were Madonna's 1969 white Mercedes convertible, which sold for $56,350, and John Lennon's handwritten lyrics for "Because," which sold for $17,250.


The Great Nondebate Leaves a Bipartisan Peace as Its Legacy
Once it was over, the snipers on the rooftops and the bomb-sniffing dogs all seemed excessively out of place in this old mill town of 13,000.
But spokesmen for President Clinton and Speaker Newt Gingrich seemed quite at home after the encounter, and immediately took up where their bosses left off.


Essay; Love-Feast Debate
"We're not far apart," said Speaker Gingrich.
"In general, I would agree," said President Clinton.


Drug Addiction Has No Single Right Treatment; Where Is the Reform?
To the Editor:
"Pataki Is Half Right on Drug Laws" by Ethan A. Nadelmann (Op-Ed, June 6) is based on the mistaken premise that New York amended, or is about to amend, the Rockefeller drug laws that have been on its books since 1973.
Despite Gov.
George E. Pataki's reform-minded rhetoric of several months ago, he did not promote or achieve any changes in these statutes during the budget negotiations recently concluded with legislative leaders.


METRO DIGEST
NASSAU'S DISTINCTION: ITS TEACHERS' PAY
Nassau Community College may not be a center for research or boast a long list of famous alumni.
It is not even easy to find, sandwiched between a resource recovery plant and a hockey rink.
But there is one arena in which the college in Garden City, L.I., is an unqualified standout: the amount it pays its professors.
Last year, in a survey by the American Association of University Professors, Nassau Community College was the highest-paying two-year school in the country.  [ Page A1. ] CURBS ON MOB ARE AIDING GARMENT TRADE
Three years after prosecutors claimed they had broken the Mafia's choke hold over vital trucking routes in New York City's garment industry, many manufacturers say that shipping costs have dropped sharply and that dozens of new trucking companies are competing for business.
Garment manufacturers estimate that in three years, the average price for shipping a dress, a pair of jeans or a blouse has plunged to 15 to 20 cents, from 40 to 45 cents.  [ A1. ] ALL ABOARD THE BEAUTY BUS, DARLINGS
Outside, the Saabs and Land Rovers air-kiss each other's bumpers as they crawl east on the Long Island Expressway.
Inside, the ladies come and go, their drying toenails held apart with puffs of cotton as they pad about from the styling chair to the table laden with salmon sandwiches and fresh strawberries to the marble-floored toilet cubicle.
This is the Magic Bus, circa 1995, where the magic is makeup and the destination is the summer swirl of high-society weddings and see-and-be-seen restaurants of the Hamptons.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  LIKE DISNEY, BUDGET NEEDS REALITY CHECK
Disney picked the right city for its premiere of "Pocahontas," and not only because the Mayor was willing to surrender Central Park's Great Lawn for the extravaganza.
Something else links New York to the animated blockbuster.
Each needs a reality check.
The real story of Pocahontas is not exactly Disney's politically correct romance, but that's show biz.
So is politics, which brings us to the city budget.
There is a cliche that budgets, like some movies, are political documents; it's a cliche because it's true.
There is, of course, a real budget problem in New York.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B3. ] SCHOOL SAFETY PANEL INTENSIFIES A BATTLE
The tension between the Mayor and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines rose sharply when Mr.
Giuliani announced the formation of a commission to investigate the Division of School Safety, giving it the ability to hold hearings and subpoena witnesses and documents from the Board of Education.
The announcement outraged Mr.
Cortines, who said that the five members of the commission, all of whom either work for the Mayor or used to work for him, were certain to support the Mayor's position of a Police Department takeover.  [ B2. ] A GIULIANI VOTING BLOC ERODES, PUBLICLY
Mayor Giuliani's troubled relationship with Hispanic New Yorkers took an embarrassingly public turn when he was met with intermittent booing as he marched in the annual Puerto Rican Day parade.
The reception was a striking turnabout for a man whose support among the city's largely Democratic Hispanic voters helped propel him to the Mayor's job less than two years ago.
But poll after poll in recent months has depicted a sinking level of support among Hispanic New Yorkers for the Republican Mayor.  [ B3. ]
The Puerto Rican Day parade in pictures.  [ B3. ]
Puerto Rican Day celebrations spilled into Brooklyn and led to clashes with the police.  [ B3. ] REGION  DISCHARGING THE MENTALLY ILL
The Mayor and others in the seaside resort of Ocean Grove, N.J., have their fingers crossed about Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's new housing plan for patients who will be discharged from the state's nearby psychiatric hospital beginning next year.
They hope -- fervently, Mayor Richard Iadanza says -- that the new and rehabilitated housing Mrs.
Whitman is scheduled to disclose will be scattered around New Jersey.
They say that Ocean Grove has had more than its fair share of former psychiatric patients and wants no more.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B9


CHRONICLE
Former Representative HAMILTON FISH Jr. and JOSEPH F. CULLMAN 3d, the chairman emeritus of Philip Morris, have never met, but they are linked by an old house upstate where their forebears dwelled.
Tomorrow evening, they will both be at the New-York Historical Society for a reception concerning the Gomez Mill House in Newburgh, N.Y.
It is believed to be the oldest extant house in the United States that was built by a Jewish owner, and members of the four major families who lived there between 1714 -- when it was built -- and 1918 will be together for the first time at the party.


Taking in the Sites; I.B.M.-Lotus Courtship Went to the Web
Wall Street's hottest takeover in months spilled onto the World Wide Web last week, where companies are exploring new ways to communicate with shareholders and employees.
As I.B.M. fired a form 14D-1 and other blunt objects at the Lotus Development Corporation -- and Lotus lobbed back a press release and transcripts -- observers on the Web absorbed the spirit of the fray while being spared the deadly dull side effects.
The popularity is not surprising: bright, cheerful Web sites like these are more attractive than a 300-page Securites and Exchange Commission form, which does not even have any pretty pictures.


New York Officer Arrested and 3 Are Suspended in Bar Fight
A New York City police officer was arrested and three other officers were suspended from the force on Saturday after they became rowdy and brawled with civilians and police officers on a boardwalk at a beachside resort in New Jersey, the police said yesterday.
The incident, in the shore community of Point Pleasant Beach, came just days after a New York City officer resigned and two others were suspended because of their participation in a drunken spree through several Washington hotels.


Treasury Selling Bills Only
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.58 percent and the six-month issue was at 5.60 percent.


At Fair for Survivalists, Fallout From Oklahoma
In their first big gathering since the Oklahoma City bombing, leaders and members of self-styled citizen militias converged here with hundreds of survivalists and seekers of self-sufficiency and holistic health for a Preparedness Expo, at which they did their best to distance themselves from the nation's worst act of terrorism.
The event was billed as a consumer fair to educate people about how to prepare for emergencies, including hurricanes, riots and "threats to our personal freedom." Booths were selling as much survival gear as herbal remedies.


Formation of Panel on School Safety Adds to Tense Battle
Beneath the high-pitched battle raging between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines over school security, there are actually points of agreement.
Both agree that the system needs substantial improvement.
Both believe the problem of violence in city schools has gotten at least slightly worse.
And both believe the New York City Police Department should be more involved.


In the Wings


Microsoft is worried that the Justice Department may force a delay in Windows 95.
FOR the Microsoft Corporation, the biggest financial worry about the Justice Department's investigation of the company's plans to market its new on-line service is the risk the inquiry poses to its new operating system, Windows 95.
Microsoft executives stressed on Friday that they had no intention of altering plans to package the access software for its on-line service, Microsoft Network, with Windows 95, which is scheduled to be released in August.


CBS Program Chief Identifies Toughest Competitor: Himself
Beyond all the other problems Leslie Moonves will face in trying to raise CBS from the prime-time ratings depths, there is the small matter of having to compete against his own products.
"On Thursday night at 8 and Sunday night at 8:30," said Mr.
Moonves, who was named last week as the new president of CBS Entertainment, "I'm going to be competing completely against myself."


A Rare Nudge for a Drop in Rates
The Clinton Administration today made its most public effort to persuade the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates, with Leon Panetta, the White House chief of staff, saying that any help from the central bank in preventing a recession would be appreciated.
Asked on the NBC News program "Meet The Press" whether the Federal Reserve should reduce interest rates to prevent the American economy from slipping into a recession, Mr.
Panetta said, "Well, it would be nice to get whatever kind of cooperation we can get to get this economy going."


CBS Program Chief Identifies Toughest Competitor: Himself
Beyond all the other problems Leslie Moonves will face in trying to raise CBS from the prime-time ratings depths, there is the small matter of having to compete against his own products.
"On Thursday night at 8 and Sunday night at 8:30," said Mr.
Moonves, who was named last week as the new president of CBS Entertainment, "I'm going to be competing completely against myself."


Musings in Front of the Small Screen
It was ordained that Bill Clinton and Al Gore would lead off Larry King's tribute to himself last week on the 10th anniversary of CNN's "Larry King Live." With Presidential aspirants already in the throes, no contender can turn down an invitation to kiss the ring of cable television's pre-eminent pop journalist.
But whatever the appearance of the Clinton-Gore team -- live from the White House -- may have done for their popularity, can it really have polished the image of the President and Vice President to have their interview interrupted frequently for plugs ("Tomorrow night: Barbra Streisand!") and commercials, including one for a toilet-bowl cleaner?
Where Has the Outrage Gone?
Not so long ago pictures from Bosnia, like those that have lately been striking the screen night after night, would also have struck a nerve in the television audience and brought calls to stop the slaughter.
What are we to make of the apparent absence of outrage over the latest scenes of civilians scurrying across sniper alley or being killed by the random rocket or just starving, and of the wishfully named peacekeepers of the United Nations on display as handcuffed hostages?


Middle-Aged Scamps Return
Edina and Patsy -- or as they prefer to be called, Eddie and Pats -- are back on Comedy Central in "Absolutely Fabulous" for their third and final six-episode season.
Played respectively by Jennifer Saunders and Joanna Lumley, the middle-aged scamps, thoroughly trend-drenched and fashion-obsessed, are as perfectly awful and hilarious as ever.
Smoking, drinking, substance abuse and other politically incorrect habits barely begin to scratch their outrageous surfaces.
The BBC show, which first hit these shores on Comedy Central nearly a year ago, was created by Ms.
Saunders, star of the "French and Saunders" series broadcast here several years ago and recently repeated.
Ms.
Saunders -- a brilliant sketch comic, much like Tracey Ullman, a former colleague -- is a bit stunned, apparently, at the international success of the determinedly horrid Eddie and Pats.
The fashion world squeals with delight even as it's lampooned.
Drag shows have been staged in Manhattan by Edina and Patsy look-alikes.
Roseanne has an option to do an American version of the series.
There's some talk of a movie.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  MBIA Inc TUESDAY  Consolidated Nat Gas Fleetwood Enterprises Flightsafety Intl Park Electrochemical Phillips Van Heusen Corp WEDNESDAY  Hubbell Inc Nicor Inc Ryland Group Inc Shopko Stores Inc South New Engl Telcom THURSDAY  Clarcor Inc General Signal Nalco Chem Co Nynex Corp Roc Communities Saul Ctrs Inc State Str Boston Corp Transamerica Corp Tyco Intl Ltd FRIDAY  Continental Homes Hldg


South African Mine Victims Are Buried


Lemieux Zips Devils Closer To the Finals
The Devils' defense was back in top form, Martin Brodeur was again stopping the shots he was supposed to stop and yet there were the Devils, less than a minute from overtime against a team that is undefeated in sudden-death games during the playoffs.
But just as it was beginning to appear that today's pivotal fifth game of the Eastern Conference finals would come down to a lucky break, the Devils created one.


Union Fights Visas For 2 Orchestras
To the old question of how to get to Carnegie Hall, there's a new answer: Call Peter Tiboris.
In what has become a veritable rite of spring, the conductor and presenter rents the 57th Street hall and fills it with college and community choruses from the hinterlands who are happy to pay their own way and then some for the privilege.


Haiti Battles to Keep Vote on Schedule
With Haitians scheduled to vote late this month in their first election since democracy was restored here last fall, organizers are struggling to keep the balloting on track and on schedule.
As many as a million voter registration cards have been reported missing, voter registration deadlines have repeatedly had to be postponed, a final list of candidates has not yet been made public, and scores of disqualified candidates are complaining that they have not been told why they cannot run.
Because of those and other delays and uncertainties, campaigning for the more than 2,200 elective offices has barely begun.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the Patents column in Business Day last Monday, about the Patent and Trademark Office's proposed guidelines on software-related inventions, misstated the agency's electronic address for comments on the guidelines.
It is: comments-software@uspto.gov


A Rural Chinese 'Catch-22' You Can Almost Smell
THE GARLIC BALLADS  By Mo Yan  Translated by Howard Goldblatt. 290 pages.
Viking. $23.95


Media: TELEVISION; Despite its uncertain status, baseball can still count advertisers among its fans.
A FEW years ago, Highbury Stadium in north London, home of the Arsenal soccer team, had to be torn up behind each goal so that the standing-room-only terraces could be replaced with seats.
To hide the construction work, Arsenal put up a plywood wall -- painted with a mural that on television looked like a crowd of living, cheering fans.
Maybe ESPN should consider something similar for its baseball games.
The sports-cable network broadcasts games every Wednesday and Sunday night, and ever since April 25, when the strike-delayed major league season began, there have been plenty of empty seats on view -- not the best promotion for the sport.


Cordiant Explores Cuts in Operations
Cordiant P.L.C., continuing to look at cutting costs, is exploring the possibility of eliminating duplication in the service, back-office and other noncore operations at the United States offices of its two agency networks, Bates Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.
"We're developing task forces to consider efficiencies," said Judy Torello, a spokeswoman for Bates in New York, in areas like office services contracts, purchasing, telecommunications and computer services, employee benefit programs and administrative systems.
The task forces will focus on outside core areas like account management, creative services and research because Cordiant wants to continue to operate two separate agency networks to avoid potential conflicts among clients.


Spell-Checker's Muse
To the Editor:
"You Say 'Internet'; the Spell-Checker Says 'Interment' " (Business Day, June 5) suggests that computer spell-checkers can be fun and games.


Laborer Killed in 10-Story Fall
A laborer working at the Tropworld Casino and Entertainment Resort plunged 10 stories to his death on Saturday.
The laborer, Frank Cucci, 23, of Hamilton Township, was removing concrete slabs from a new elevator shaft on the top floor of the casino's parking garage when he fell 100 feet down the shaft, said Daniel Keating, president of Keating Building Corporation, the general contractor.


Cross-Pollinating Asian Music and Jazz
The Asia Society has for years expanded New Yorkers' horizons by importing Asian ensembles and having them perform works from their own cultures.
But in its new Crossovers series, the society is hoping to explore interactions between Asian and American forms.
Its inaugural experiment, which ended on Saturday evening, looked at the relationship between Asian music and jazz.
Future installments will be devoted to dance and theater.
The three ensembles that participated in the series were omnivorously multicultural before they joined forces for the finale.
Kenny Endo and Jon Jang grew up in California hearing American rock and jazz.
But Mr.
Endo went to Japan to study drumming, and Mr.
Jang, a pianist, became fascinated with combining Chinese music and jazz.
And Billy Taylor, representing traditional American jazz, demonstrated in a short set with his trio that jazz has absorbed Brazilian, classical, Arabic and even rock influences.


Owners Ready to Resume Negotiations
Ready or not, the owners apparently are finally prepared to resume negotiations with the players for a new collective bargaining agreement.
That is the word delivered by people who attended the owners' meetings in Minneapolis last week.
Although Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and the chief negotiators haven't said anything about the resumption of talks, one owner said during the weekend that, based on the discussion at the meetings, he expected talks to begin "very soon."


O'Grady Back in the U.S.A., to Family's Joy and Delight
As the small jet from the Presidential fleet carrying Capt.
Scott O'Grady made its final taxi across the tarmac here today, his mother, Mary Lou Scardapane, stopped smiling and began gnawing her fingertips.
Captain O'Grady's stepfather, Joseph Scardapane, and his father, William O'Grady, embraced each other.
And as the Air Force band struck up rousing martial music the pilot -- proclaimed a hero by everyone but himself -- walked off the C-20 aircraft that returned him to the United States.


Kodak's Crusade to Open Japan Market
George M. C. Fisher, the chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company, is not the first American executive to argue that Japan tilts its competitive playing field.
He may not even be the most vociferous.
But he may be one of the most persistent.
A decade after he challenged Japan's control of its market in pagers and cellular telephones while chairman of Motorola Inc., he is at it again.
Last year he won a product-dumping action against Fuji Photo Film that has all but driven Fuji's color print paper out of the United States market.
More recently, he filed a complaint with American trade officials accusing the Japanese Government of conspiring with Fuji to protect 70 percent of the consumer photo film and paper market in Japan from competition.


Nassau College's Distinction: Its Pay for Teachers
It may not be a center for research or boast a long list of famous alumni.
It is not even easy to find, sandwiched between a resource recovery plant and a hockey rink.
But there is one arena in which Nassau Community College is an unqualified standout:
The amount it pays its professors.


Bridge
Provisional American winners in the Worldwide Bridge Contest of the World Bridge Federation have been announced by the American Contract Bridge League.
The best percentage scores Friday evening were: East-West, Linda Peterson and Eugene White, both of Beverly Hills, Calif., 76; North-South, Marjorie Baldwin and Bettie Garson, both of Akron, Ohio, 75.
The best scores in New York City and Long Island were: North-South, Ira Herman and Bill Rosenbaum, both of Manhattan, 74.5, at Cavendish at the Town Club; East-West, Janet Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., and Frank Allison of West Hempstead, L.I., 66, at the Grand Club, Franklin Square, L.I.


The Inevitable Trailer to an Outdoor Movie in Central Park


At Least 50 Are Arrested In Post-Parade Celebration
More than 50 people were arrested in Bushwick, Brooklyn, this morning when Puerto Rican Day Parade celebrations spilled into the borough from Manhattan and led to clashes with the police, officials said.
Police officers were pelted with rocks and bottles after they tried to stop people who were riding outside cars and other vehicles and driving cars festooned with Puerto Rican flags.
One officer was hit with a brick at the corner of Irving and Greene Avenues and was hospitalized with a gash near his eye, the police said.
Shattered glass from a tossed bottle injured another officer in the eyes.
One other person was reportedly injured.


Congress Preparing a Major Overhaul of Medicaid
While lobbyists and lawmakers fight over Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly, Congress is planning even bigger changes and deeper cuts in projected spending for Medicaid, which finances care for low-income people.
Medicaid started as a source of health care for welfare recipients, and many people still think of it that way.
But two-thirds of the Medicaid money is spent on people who are elderly or disabled.


Blast Suspect's Brother Gets Back to Basics
The tool shed on his farm is still in disarray after Federal agents spent four days searching it for evidence.
He is a month behind tending his soybeans, wheat and other crops.
And he is facing Federal weapons charges that he made small bombs on his farm with the two suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing, his brother Terry L. Nichols and Timothy J. McVeigh.
But today, standing outside the shed, James D. Nichols acted as if he had not a care in the world, other than the inconvenience of a curfew from 10 P.M. to 6 A.M. that he was ordered to follow by a Federal judge in Detroit.


Watnik Victor In a Turnabout
Different year, different seedings, different result.
Second-seeded Scott Watnik of Bronx Science defeated top-seeded Kunj Majmudar of New Dorp, 6-3, 6-1, yesterday to win the boys' high school title of the New York City Mayor's Cup All-Scholastic Tennis Championships at Flushing Meadows.
Last year, Majmudar was seeded second and Watnik No. 1 when he defeated his friend and doubles partner to win the title.


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Names a Partner
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group, has named John Doyle, formerly a top executive at Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, to the new position of partner and creative director for integrated marketing.


Drug Addiction Has No Single Right Treatment
To the Editor:
Ethan A. Nadelmann's attack on the proposal made by Gov.
George E. Pataki to send more New York State addicts into treatment, rather than prison (Op-Ed, June 6), is strikingly flawed.


A Hearing on Noise Barriers
Is traffic noisier on the new section of Interstate 287 in Morris and Bergen Counties than construction engineers had predicted?
Angry roadside residents in Franklin Lakes and Mahwah think so, and they want some sound-muffling walls built.
Since last fall, state transportation officials have been listening to the traffic to determine whether sound barriers need to be installed.
They will report on their studies and on future monitoring during meetings at 8 tonight in Ramapo High School in Franklin Lakes and at 7 P.M. tomorrow in the Riverdale Public School in Riverdale.


Europe Tries to Finesse U.S.-Japan Clash
Taking advantage of the bitter auto trade dispute between the United States and Japan, Europe is playing each side against the other in an effort to secure gains in the Japanese auto market for its own companies while emerging with an image as the ultimate protector of free trade.
In dealings with Americans, European officials have harshly condemned the trade sanctions Washington has threatened against Japanese car imports as well as demands by the Clinton trade officials that Japan accept target exports of American cars and car parts.
Yet in private meetings with American officials, the same European officials have said they hope the Americans succeed in prying open Japanese markets.


Tokyo Journal; Why a Nation of Apologizers Makes One Large Exception
As Japan clears its throat these days for a small, dry cough of remorse about its conduct during World War II, the surprising thing is that in most respects this is the most apologetic country in the world.
It is almost impossible to have a conversation in Japanese without each side apologizing a few times.
Collectively the Japanese people utter or bow billions of apologies a day.


Estelle Brody, Silent-Film Actress, 90
Estelle Brody, a star of British silent films, died on June 3 on the Mediterranean island of Malta, where she lived.
She was 90.
The Times of London, which reported her death on Thursday, said that Miss Brody "secured her place in the top league of British silent-film actresses after her fine performance in the title role of 'Mademoiselle From Armentieres.' " The film was made in 1926.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
The United States Department of Labor has awarded New Jersey $1 million to help about 200 unemployed people sharpen their skills, find new jobs and get meals, child care and medical care while they are out of work.
The grant will benefit 150 people who lost their jobs when the Elastic Stop Nut Division of Harvard Industries in Union closed recently and 54 people were let go at the Elizabeth General Medical Center Hospital East.


Experts See Peril for U.S. Pact To Buy Up Russian Bomb Fuel
Three years after Russia agreed to provide the United States with uranium from scrapped Russian nuclear weapons, the deal is unraveling, prompting a quiet struggle to save the accord, Federal and private experts say.
Russia was to get $12 billion in desperately needed hard currency, and the United States was to get 500 metric tons of bomb-grade uranium, which was to be diluted to make fuel for American nuclear power plants and ultimately electricity for consumers.


No Retreat, No Surrender
Back in the late 1980's, when he was winning two straight United States Opens, Curtis Strange had an aura about him, an air of invincibility, a cloak of confidence.
Run the United States Golf Association flag up the flagpole, grow the rough to calf length, make the greens like linoleum and just get out of Strange's way.
He wore that indefinable something that pushed him to those back-to-back victories.
You could almost call it a mantle of mean.


DANCE
Japanese Religious Leader Afflicts Her Objects of Envy  Keiko Fujii Dance Company Kaye Playhouse


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Everybody's a cyber critic: Mentos commercials become an unlikely hot topic on the Internet.
AS advertisers tentatively wade into the digital waters of interactive marketing, many are finding that consumers are already soaking wet from surfing the 'Net for news and opinions about products, commercials, brands and campaigns.
One of the most surprising aspects of cyberspace is the lively debate about advertising -- sometimes substantive, sometimes silly, often sarcastic and almost always skeptical -- that has developed spontaneously among computer users on the Internet.


More Family, Less Saga for Mantle
Mickey Mantle's do-or-die liver transplant -- after four decades of nonstop traveling, hard partying and profitable glorying in simply being the Mick -- has changed not only his own life.
It also completes the transformation of his three sons from surrogate teammates to surrogate nurses.
His youngest son, Danny, could already take credit for saving his father's life.
It was Danny who entered the Betty Ford Center to dry himself out in 1993.
He then urged his father, who lives with him, to do the same.
Had Mantle not stayed sober, the hospital that transplanted his cancerous liver would have refused to do the procedure.


Officers Are Elected At Industry Group
The American Advertising Federation has elected new officers, effective July 1.


Rapturous Surrender to a Whirling Role
With her extraordinary technical facility, musicality and irrepressible teen-ager's exuberance, Paloma Herrera is a dancegoer's dream.
There are unpolished moments in her dancing at the start of "Paquita," presented by American Ballet Theater on Saturday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
But it was a role debut to treasure.
Ms.
Herrera brought a slightly coltish quality to the required Spanish accents in this 19th-century Russian ballet confection, staged by Natalia Makarova.
She breezed through exponentially multiple turns.
But what made the performance so much her own was the way Ms.
Herrera lost herself within the music and dance of the sixth variation, leading the viewer on much as the bedazzled prince in "The Sleeping Beauty" is drawn through the woods to Aurora's magical kingdom.


Challenging Property Taxes
New Jersey residents who think they pay too much in local property taxes can take small consolation: the State School Boards Association agrees with them.
Members of the association voted on Saturday to start a campaign to call attention to the state's heavy reliance on local property taxes to finance schools.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about a presentation by the Supreme Court Historical Society in Washington misspelled the name of the award and the surname of the woman for whom they were named.
They are the Hughes Gossett Awards, named for Elizabeth Hughes Gossett, not Gosset.


Life's a Global Roller-Coaster Ride For the Kirov's Director
Oleg Vinogradov looked like a country squire as he sat and talked on the sunny patio of his handsome home in this bucolic suburb of Washington.
But the talk was of his difficult survival as director of the Kirov Ballet, a job he has held since 1977.
Dancegoers have been buzzing with rumors about the fortunes of the Kirov, which opens a two-week season at the Metropolitan Opera House next Monday.
Unlike the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow, where administrative battles have made the headlines, the Kirov has largely escaped the spotlight.
But there have been indications that the Kirov, too, is under siege.


More Flag-Waving in Congress
Once again a band of flag wavers in Congress offers a constitutional amendment to save the Stars and Stripes from an unseen horde of defilers.
They want to alter the First Amendment to allow Federal and state authorities to punish "physical desecration" of the flag.
Led by Representative Gerald Solomon, Republican of New York, these patriots say they can muster the needed two-thirds vote in the House by the Fourth of July.
Five years ago the Supreme Court struck down flag-burning laws because burning one's own flag, offensive as it is to most Americans, is an act of symbolic expression protected by the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech.
Flag wavers tried then but failed to amend the Constitution.
The nation will survive and the Constitution will thrive if they fail again.


Recalling La Fontaine
"La Fontaine and Friends," a program of songs (in French), narration (in English) and dance honoring the fabulist on the tricentennial of his death, is to be presented at Florence Gould Hall tonight at 8.
Some of the composers who have set the fables to music are Lecocq, Caplet, Poulenc, Gounod, Offenbach, Charles Trenet and Ned Rorem.
The songs will be performed by Amy Burton, soprano, and Philippe Boh-ee, baritone, and the dances by Valentina Kozlova and David Kierce.
John Musto will be the pianist.
Tickets, at $25, are available at the box office, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, or through Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171.


2 Genteel Giants Meet in New Hampshire
Side by side in the nation's first Presidential primary state, President Clinton and Speaker Newt Gingrich faced off in the backyard of a senior citizens center today in an encounter so muted, so polite and so carefully conciliatory that it was often hard to distinguish the sharp philosophical differences between the two men.
In the very first minutes of their unusual hourlong conversation, the President and the Republicans' most celebrated noncandidate agreed that they would support formation of a commission on lobbying and political reform.
"In a heartbeat," said Mr.
Clinton, "I accept."


Let's Bring Public Pensions Into 21st Century
To the Editor:
On behalf of the more than 500,000 retired public employees in New York State, I must respond to "The Education of George Pataki" (editorial, June 5), which links "pension sweeteners" to legislators' pet projects.


Market Place; TIE shareholders should be happy over the stock price.
WHEN shareholders of TIE/Communications gather today for their annual meeting at the company headquarters in Overland Park, Kan., there should be plenty to make them happy.
Not necessarily in the company's results, which show red ink.
Nor in its growth, which has stalled as the company tries to raise prices so it can make money.
TIE designs, installs and services telephone systems for small- and medium-sized companies.
It used to be in the manufacturing business, but got out after it went broke a few years ago.


FM Radio Stations Start To Carry More AM Fare
FM radio, which years ago lured listeners from AM by providing more varied music with far more clarity, is now embarking on an experiment: borrowing the news, talk and sports programming from its older cousin.
To capitalize on the soaring popularity of talk radio of all kinds, the continued strength of all-news stations, especially during the morning and evening rush hours, and the loyalty of sports fans, more broadcasters are bringing AM-style programming to those areas of the radio where rock, country music, jazz and classical still reign.


How Albany Works, Lesson 1: Lobbying; The Beverage Industry Pushes Hard for a Tax Break, and Succeeds
The economic studies calling for cuts in beer and soda taxes landed in legislators' offices last year along with complimentary cases of Pepsi.
In March, soda bottlers treated lawmakers to sea bass and champagne at Lutece and the Four Seasons.
The payoff arrived last week: tax cuts worth $26 million a year to the soda industry by 1997, mostly to bottlers, and $16 million a year to the beer industry, mostly to wholesalers.


At Last, Nonsmokers Get Some Relief
To the Editor:
Cigarette smokers (the minority of citizens who are addicted to nicotine) are the most pathetic complainers in New York City.
For so many years, when a smoker in a restaurant would light up a cigarette or cigar, the smoke never knew where the "no smoking" section began or ended -- so nonsmokers had to inhale smoke while they ate.
This not only endangered the health of the nonsmoker (and the smoker) but often ruined the dining experience.


CBS Program Chief Identifies Toughest Competitor: Himself
Beyond all the other problems Leslie Moonves will face in trying to raise CBS from the prime-time ratings depths, there is the small matter of having to compete against his own products.
"On Thursday night at 8 and Sunday night at 8:30," said Mr.
Moonves, who was named last week as the new president of CBS Entertainment, "I'm going to be competing completely against myself."


The Hamptons-Bound Find Luxury in Coach
Outside, the Saabs and Land Rovers air-kiss each other's bumpers as they crawl east on the Long Island Expressway.
Inside, the ladies come and go, their drying toenails held apart with puffs of cotton as they pad about, from the styling chair, to the table laden with salmon sandwiches and fresh strawberries, to the marble-floored toilet cubicle.


Patents
BY ALL accounts, last Wednesday was as frenzied for patent attorneys as April 15 normally is for accountants.
"I suspect it was probably even worse," said Donald D. Jeffery, chairman of intellectual property at Foley &amp; Lardner, a Washington law firm.
"From May 7 to June 7 we filed about 500 cases -- that's a several hundred percent increase over normal."


M. D. Naidoo, 75, Foe of Apartheid
Mooroogiah Dhanapathy Naidoo, a South African lawyer who was an active opponent of apartheid, died on June 1 in his birthplace, Durban, South Africa.
He was 75.
His death was reported on Saturday by the British newspaper The Guardian, which said he had emphysema.


Time Warner, Under Its Own Spotlight
Time magazine's dogged coverage of the controversy involving its parent, Time Warner Inc., and gangsta rap music may burnish the publication's reputation outside the company.
But it could exacerbate the strains inside Time Warner.
After years of missed opportunities and pulled punches, Time published an aggressive cover article last week about its owner.
In stark black and red type, Time asked: "Are Music and Movies Killing America's Soul?"


Celebrity Clout at Fund Raising
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, the actress Celeste Holm, the comedian Joe Piscopo and the actor Tony Randall are among those who will attend a dinner to raise funds for New Jersey Network, the state's public television and public radio systems, Wednesday evening at the Brunswick Hilton.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pianist Reconciles 2 Composers' Contrasts  Mordecai Shehori Alice Tully Hall


Shandwick Realigns U.S. Operations
Shandwick P.L.C., the public relations agency in London, is realigning its North American operations as part of a series of changes.
Shandwick North America and other corporate offices worldwide will operate under the umbrella name Shandwick International.
Golin/Harris Communications in Chicago will absorb two siblings, Hi-Tech Communications in San Francisco and A. Brown-Olmstead in Atlanta, and grow to offices in nine cities including Los Angeles and New York.


Living, Dying and the Law
Understandably, but shortsightedly, 85 percent of New Yorkers have resisted signing living wills or health-care proxies.
They do so despite the fact that under current New York law, no one, not even parents or children or siblings, may refuse life-sustaining treatment for incapacitated adult patients unless those patients signed a proxy or left "clear and convincing evidence" of when, if ever, they want treatment discontinued.
New York is one of only two states (the other is Missouri) where the courts have specifically held that family members may not make these decisions.
Last month the Family Health Care Decisions Act, which has been the subject of public hearings, public comment and several stringent amendments over the last three years, was reported out of the New York State Assembly Health Committee and introduced in the Senate.
Should the bill, which has more safeguards than any other statute of its kind in the country, pass the Legislature, New Yorkers will finally have a law that allows them to help those who can no longer help themselves.


Diagnosing Lautrec
To the Editor:
Re your report on Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's ailments (Science Times, June 6):


Muster, King of Clay, Gets His Slam Crown
First he brought a decidedly overwhelmed Michael Chang, the grown-up version of the 17-year-old 1989 French Open champion, to his knees today on the clay of Roland Garros; then Thomas Muster, the new and undisputed king of red clay, dropped onto his back and rubbed his eyes in disbelief after finally scaling and prevailing on the surface of his dreams.
"My dreams since I was a kid have come true today," said the 27-year-old Muster, who used a mighty and masterful 7-5, 6-2, 6-4 victory in the French Open final on this grim, gray afternoon to become the first Austrian to capture a Grand Slam crown.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the visit of the President of Taiwan to Cornell University referred imprecisely to a photo session attended by his wife.
It was at the garden of a building called the White House at the campus in Ithaca, N.Y., not at the White House in Washington.


City Ballet Contrasts Stillness And Action
Two great choreographers were represented by curiosities at the New York City Ballet's performance on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
Jerome Robbins's "Watermill" sometimes scarcely moves at all.
In contrast, George Balanchine's "Stars and Stripes" is perpetual prancing.
"Watermill" is a dance of retrospection set to a Teiji Ito score for chamber ensemble in which a man looks back on his life.
Much of the ritualistic choreography takes place in hypnotic slow motion.
But it is often vague as well as solemn.
Erlends Zieminch, Alexander Ritter and Ethan Stiefel appeared to represent aspects of the hero's early life, and Diana White portrayed a stately woman with whom he had an affair.


Equity Offerings This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alternative Resources Corp., Linconshire, Ill., 1.8 million shares.
Montgomery Securities.


Making The Most Of a Split
Jeff Tweedy of Wilco, which performed at Tramps on Friday night, knows how to turn simple language into profound commentary.
"We used to have a lot of things in common/But you know, now we're just the same," he sang midway through the show in "Pick Up the Change," chronicling a good relationship gone bad for no particular reason.
The same fate befell Mr.
Tweedy's former band, Uncle Tupelo, a roots-rock outfit that formed in the small town of Belleville, Ill., in the 1980's and was finally ready to transcend its status as a cult band in 1994 when its leader, Jay Farrar, quit with no explanation.
Instead of languishing, the remaining members softened their rock, renamed themselves Wilco and started performing more of Mr.
Tweedy's songs.


If Devils Leave New Jersey, Life on Rte. 3 Will Not End
The New Jersey Devils are threatening to skate into the Stanley Cup finals and then keep right on skating to a new home in Nashville.
So the Stadium Cafe, across Route 3 from the Devils' home ice at the Meadowlands Sports Complex, should be a good place to listen to the fans' anguished cries, standard background music for any team on the verge of packing its equipment bags.
"Oh yes, I heard about that last night," said a waitress, nonchalantly, as she headed off to find the owner, Craig Petrillo.


Good Riddance to That Train to the Plane
To the Editor:
New Yorkers ought to rejoice at the cancellation of the $4 billion project to build a rail line from 59th Street to Kennedy International Airport.


Foreign Aid HAs Its Uses
Foreign assistance is again undergoing the "perils of Pauline" as it wends through the Congressional gantlet.
This happens yearly, but the dangers today seem especially ominous.
With the search for budget economies so desperate, using up funds for what detractors call foreign giveaways when programs to assist needy Americans are being slashed seems unconscionable to many.
Foreign assistance, with us since the Marshall Plan, has been perhaps the most unpopular legislation to come before Congress for some years.
The increased peril it faces arises mainly from the loss of the justification the cold war provided.


New York Officers In a Rowdy Fracas
A New York City police officer was arrested and three other officers were suspended from the force over the weekend after they became rowdy and fought with patrons and local police officers at a beachside bar in New Jersey, the police said yesterday.
The incident, in the shore community of Point Pleasant Beach, came just days after another New York City officer resigned and two others were suspended because of their participation in a drunken spree through several Washington hotels.


Welcome Back, Brooklyn Style


Unicef Asks Broader Aid For Children
The United States now ranks lowest among 21 industrial countries in the amount of foreign aid it gives in relation to its gross national product, according to a new study by Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
Although American aid is second only to Japan's in dollars -- $9.7 billion as calculated by international organizations using 1993 figures -- it represents 15 hundredths of 1 percent of G.N.P.


Competition Is Cutthroat At the Paris Air Show
"World's No. 1 missile technology for all your needs," reads the pitch at this week's Paris Air Show for Spetstekhnika, a Russian company specializing in advanced air-to-ground destruction techniques.
Need a retreaded fighter aircraft, cheap?
"Defense budget cuts have forced Canada to sell their recently upgraded F-5 fighters," says a sticker on one of the planes, originally designed by the Northrop Corporation (now Northrop Grumman) of Los Angeles but modernized by Bristol Aerospace Ltd. of Winnipeg, Manitoba.


U.S. Plans Wider Links With Cubans
Once the furor over new rules on Cuban immigration dies down, the Clinton Administration plans to make an important shift in policy by announcing expanded contacts between Americans and Cubans as a way of undermining Fidel Castro.
Officials are quick to say that they plan to continue to isolate Mr.
Castro and maintain the economic sanctions of the last 30 years, which the White House actually toughened last summer.
But they contend that the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe demonstrated the value of increased contacts in the form of, for example, educational exchanges.


Salomon Is Said to Be Scrapping Its Disputed Compensation Plan
Salomon Brothers Inc. is scrapping its much-debated compensation plan that led to the departure of more than 20 senior managing directors and traders, people at the firm said last night.
In an internal memorandum distributed on Friday, Robert E. Denham, chairman and chief executive of the parent, Salomon Inc., said the firm's board, at a meeting on Wednesday, had decided to create a new plan for compensation, these people said.
Like the old plan, the new plan is expected to be based on performance, as well as other factors.


BUSINESS DIGEST
With a Sweetened Offer, I.B.M. Wins Its Prize
Lotus Development accepted I.B.M.'s initially hostile takeover offer, after I.B.M. raised its price by about $220 million, to more than $3.5 billion in cash, and guaranteed the innovative software manufacturer a degree of independence extremely unusual among its divisions.
Lotus's six directors met Saturday and voted to accept the offer of $64 a share.


1995 N.B.A. PLAYOFFS: Sports of The Times; More of the Same In the Civil Series
WHY was Clyde Drexler smiling?
Nick Anderson of the other team had just flung a marvelous clutch 3-point basket off his ear with 2.7 seconds left, but Drexler was smiling and talking to his opponent -- or as they seem to say in eastern basketball, his sworn enemy.
"I just told him, 'Good shot,' " said Drexler, who made a few good shots of his own as he scored 25 points in Houston's 106-103 victory that gave the Rockets a 3-0 lead in this series.


Trailing in Series by 3-0, Magic Won't Surrender
The sunglasses stayed in their Gucci bags, Horace Grant stayed in the sauna room and Shaquille O'Neal stayed optimistic.
The Orlando Magic can count to four, so they maintained tonight that they are not mathematically eliminated.
Defeated again by a supporting player -- this time, Houston's Robert Horry; next time, Chucky Brown? -- the eye-rolling Magic refused to say "uncle."


Has the F.C.C. Become Obsolete?; Technology Moves Fast; Determining the Public Interest Takes Time
David Margolese is a bit player on the information highway, barely a footnote in the $700 billion communications industry.
But his experience over the last five years provides a textbook example of why the Federal Communications Commission is under attack as never before.
Mr.
Margolese, head of a tiny company called CD-Radio Inc., has gambled $15 million since 1990 to develop a satellite service that beams 30 channels of music to radios nationwide.
He thinks it would a fill a big gap, reaching rural hamlets and lonely stretches of interstate highway that ordinary radio stations do not reach.


Lindsey Nelson, 76, Broadcaster For Mets for 17 Years, Is Dead
Lindsey Nelson, who brought his elegant Tennessee voice and psychedelic sports jackets to New York as one of the Mets' three original announcers, died Saturday night at Emory University Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 76 years old.
A staff person at the hospital said Mr.
Nelson died of complications of Parkinson's disease, which he had suffered from for years, and pneumonia.


A New Generation Seems Ready to Give Bisexuality a Place in the Spectrum
Steve L., a college student from New Orleans, broke up with his steady girlfriend last month.
Not long after, he invited a buddy from Louisiana State University along for a visit to his parents' house.
At 2 A.M., he says, their horseplay around the pool took an unanticipated sexual turn.
"I don't limit myself to a guy or a girl," said Steve, a 22-year-old political science major, who did not want to be fully identified because his parents do not know of his dating habits.
"Whoever comes into my life, if we hit it off, great. That's happened with a lot of people I know. They'll say, 'Guess what happened last night?' It's very accepted."


Arrest in Colombia Heartens U.S.
The capture of the most influential leader of the world's largest drug trafficking gang in Colombia on Friday was the best news United States officials had gotten in years in the long-running war against drugs.
While both officials and private experts said yesterday that the arrest of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela would probably not have an immediate impact on the flow of cocaine and heroin to the streets of the United States, they took it as a hopeful sign that after years of coexisting with the leaders of the so-called Cali cartel, Colombia may have turned the corner and decided to confront the huge multinational cocaine and heroin corporation.


Rene F. Martell, 68, Leader of Cognac Company
Rene Firino Martell, who engineered the $850 million sale of his family's cognac company to Seagram in 1988, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Nice, France.
He was 68 and a resident of Cognac, the small southwestern town that his family has dominnated for almost three centuries.
Spokesmen for the family said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Prices . . .
May  Retail Sales . . .
May  Wednesday  Inventory-Sales Ratio . . .
April  U.S.
Productivity . . . 1st Qtr.
Thursday  Industrial Production . . .
May  Capacity Utilization . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Death in the Subway
Although straphangers might be a bit skittish after the subway crash on the Williamsburg Bridge last week, the New York City subway is statistically one of the safest ways to travel.
The risk of dying on a commercial airline flight is about 15 times greater than the chance of dying in a crash or as the result of a crime on the subway.
The risks greatly increase however if, for example, you decide to venture onto the tracks, stick your head off the platform to look for an oncoming train or move between subway cars. people died in accidents resulting from such actions, or from all other causes except crashes and crime, about once every five days in the subway between 1991 and April of this year.


THEATER
Handing Down Strife By the Generations  'John and Jen' Lamb's Theater


Moving Centuries-Old Graves


Notes on Notes Users
For I.B.M., the pearl in the the Lotus Development Corporation oyster is Lotus Notes, a product used to help people work together more effectively over computer networks.
I.B.M.'s chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., last week described Notes as "a new, much more powerful way of working, learning and interacting." But coming up with a single, precise definition remains an elusive proposition, even though the software - often called groupware - is now used by an estimated 1.5 million people in some 5,000 companies and organizations.


Avoiding the Jugular
It began, like so many events in the career of Bill Clinton, with an affable, accommodating aside to one of his toughest critics.
It ended with Speaker Newt Gingrich sitting beside him, portraying himself affably as co-leader of the conversation -- and of the country.
"I want to thank the President -- he didn't have to do this," Mr.
Gingrich said at the end of their hourlong session at a senior citizens picnic in Claremont, N.H., as Mr.
Clinton scratched his cheek, brow furrowed, before standing up to say mildly, "I've enjoyed this, and I expect you have, too."


Microsoft Developing Electronic Cash Card
The Microsoft Corporation's dominant software business often seems like a license to print money.
But now the company wants to go a step further and make cash itself, at least the electronic kind.
Microsoft is developing a plan to offer plastic cards embedded with microchips, known as smart cards, that can be used to make payments, said Warren T. Dent, the director of business development for the company's consumer systems division.


For Police, She's a True-Blue Friend
She has all the accouterments of a good Cambridge liberal.
She lives in a big house not far from Harvard Square.
She drives a green Ford Explorer; has a Labrador retriever, Charlie, and is married to a Harvard University economist.
But from her basement office, using a small computer and an array of printers, Cynthia Brown has become the darling of a hefty segment of the nation's law-enforcement community.
Ms.
Brown publishes a 40-page, tabloid-style newspaper designed for, and written partly by, the police.
At $12.95 for a one-year subscription, American Police Beat is read by more than 150,000 officers nationwide.
Among its subscribers is Rush Limbaugh, the radio and television talk show host.


German Free Democrats, Trying to Halt Slide, Pick New Chief
Germany's floundering Free Democrats, once the undisputed kingmakers of national politics, ended a special congress today with a new leader, a reaffirmation of liberal thinking and a pledge to extricate themselves from the bear hug of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats.
No one, though, was forecasting an easy turnaround in the party's fortunes.


An Ailing Leyritz And Yanks Recover
Jim Leyritz was not supposed to start yesterday because his left wrist was throbbing, but he did and provided a virtuoso performance that helped the Yankees to a dramatic 10-7 victory over Seattle at the Stadium.
Danny Tartabull was supposed to start, but his ears and ego are throbbing and George Steinbrenner is upset with him so Manager Buck Showalter removed the player who does not want to be a Yankee from the lineup.
The last-minute strategy somehow worked because the Yankees won, a rarity in itself these days.
Tartabull sat in the dugout wearing sunglasses until Showalter summoned him as a pinch-hitter in the eighth inning, and his walk against Steve Frey (0-2) initiated a five-run rally that obliterated a 7-5 deficit and helped the Yankees celebrate for just the sixth time in the last 25 games.
Leyritz's single off Bobby Ayala produced the tying and go-ahead runs, gave him four hits on the day and gave the injured catcher revenge after being humbled by the Mariners on Saturday.


Seeking Moose, the Speaker Gets Hooked
Speaker Newt Gingrich came to New Hampshire to see a moose, but he got hooked first by a fly fisherman.
Before he met President Clinton in Claremont this afternoon, Mr.
Gingrich donned a pair of jeans and a plaid shirt and cruised the drizzly dawn for moose along the Androscoggin River here in northwestern New Hampshire.


Mideast Momentum
Secretary of State Warren Christopher drove into the West Bank today to visit Yasir Arafat in Jericho, then continued across the Allenby Bridge to Amman to call on King Hussein.
Standing alongside the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization -- now head of the Palestinian Authority and outfitted in his trademark garb -- or meeting with the Hashemite King in the splendor and pomp of his royal palace, Mr.
Christopher's message was the same: Keep moving, keep talking, keep searching for peace in the Middle East.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mike Mussina, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Assigned Steve Rodriguez, infielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Optioned Bob Hamelin, first baseman-designated hitter, to Omaha of the American Association.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Optioned Derek Jeter, shortstop, and Mariano Rivera, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Joseph Bauldree, pitcher.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Placed Gary Sheffield and Jesus Tavarez, outfielders, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Chuck Carr, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Russ Morman, first baseman-outfielder, from Charlotte of the International League.
Transferred John Johnstone, pitcher, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
Signed Randy Winn, outfielder, and Michael Tejera, pitcher.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Traded Chris Donnels, infielder, to the Boston Red Sox for a player to be named.
Recalled Phil Nevin, third baseman, from Tucson of Pacific Coast League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Danny Jackson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 8.
Activated Tom Urbani, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Activated Robby Thompson, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Enrique Burgos, pitcher, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.


Turkey Doesn't Curb Freedom of Religion
To the Editor:
I take exception to "A Sect of Muslims Feels Fundamentalist Threat" (Istanbul Journal, June 3).
Since the article focuses on an isolated incident that occurred nearly two and a half months ago, the timing is suspicious.


INSIDE
Drug Arrests Buoys U.S.
The arrest of a Cali drug cartel leader is seen by American officials as a sign that Columbia may have decided on a crackdown.
Page A8.
Recognition for Bisexuality
A new generation is increasingly accepting the idea of a middle ground between the poles of heterosexuality and homosexuality.
Page A12.
Mantle Family Transformed
Mickey Mantle has a new relationship with his sons, once his drinking buddies.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Rockets Take 3-0 Lead
Houston beat Orlando, 106-103, to take a decisive lead in the N.B.A. finals.
SportsMonday, page C1.


No Headline
"Who cares if you're sitting in traffic, if you're getting your nails done?" -- LINDA SIEGAL, riding the Beauty Express bus to the Hamptons.  [ B4:3. ]


How U.S. Rescued Pilots in World War II
To the Editor:
The rescue in the Balkans of Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady of the Air Force was thrilling indeed (front page, June 8 and 9).


Road Trip's Last Lemon Leaves Mets Sour
Bobby Bonilla felt like smashing lockers.
It upset him that much.
The Mets' 10-day road trip to California started sour, when Bret Saberhagen, the ace of the staff, lost a heartbreaker to the Dodgers in Los Angeles.
It ended this afternoon on an even uglier note.
Mike Birkbeck pitched seven spectacular innings for the Mets here at Jack Murphy Stadium, then had to leave the game with a sore and swollen left ankle.
Asked to protect a two-run lead, the Mets' bullpen, which has been awful most of this trip, shattered Birkbeck's shot at victory and crushed the Mets' spirit in two quick innings of work.


Mantle Takes a Few Steps
Mickey Mantle has recovered enough strength after his liver transplant to hobble a few steps from his bed, one of his doctors said today.
Although he needs some support -- "He's not ready to dash for a base," said Dr.
Goran Klintmalm, medical director of the Baylor Transplant Institute -- Mantle can make it to a chair and to the bathroom in his hospital room.
He first got out of bed late Saturday and watched some baseball.


Ms. Reno Ducks
The Clinton Administration has declined, once again, to use the authority of its Justice Department to defend the rights of homosexuals and lesbians.
Last year, it refused to join a legal battle over discrimination against homosexuals in a case in Cincinnati.
It has now decided to steer clear of a similar case involving Colorado that has reached the Supreme Court.
The Administration's diffidence is distressing.
It is not merely the rights of gay men and lesbians that are at issue here, but fundamental constitutional principles.
Cincinnati tried to amend its charter to pre-empt the right of citizens to pass laws banning discrimination against homosexuals.
In 1992, a Colorado referendum amended the state's Constitution to prevent local communities from enacting laws that would protect homosexuals.


Plots That Rely on Shuffling the Pieces
In "Home Game" at the Kitchen on Friday night, the ends meant little; the means meant much.
Developed by Todd Hivnor and a team of computer programmers, "Home Game" begins with two actors onstage, six more on videotape and an ensemble of acoustic and electrified instruments.
These, together with a collection of plot situations and character motivations, provide nutrition for a computer that artfully shuffles the ingredients and produces a story line.
Three large screens define the performing space.
From one at stage left, the two actors read the bits of narrative as the computer has arranged them.
Another screen at stage right provides cues and musical materials for the musicians.
These, like the shuddering, repetitive images of video characters on the center screen, have been configured to match the computer's story line.
When the computer shuffles again, the same elements produce a somewhat different narrative.


Nuclear Commitments
Last month, the Clinton Administration used every diplomatic weapon at its command to secure permanent extension of the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.
The treaty not only commits nonnuclear countries to refrain from developing weapons.
It also commits countries that have the bomb to move toward a comprehensive test ban and eventual nuclear disarmament.
At the time, some nonnuclear states worried that the five declared nuclear powers -- the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China -- would not keep their end of the bargain.
Decisions now pending in Washington and Paris will demonstrate whether those worries were justified.


A Grand, Gaudy Lloyd Webber Tour
Every theater composer has his favorite singers.
Cole Porter adored the trumpeting shout of Ethel Merman.
Stephen Sondheim's impressionistic ballads tapped the sensitivity of Bernadette Peters and Mandy Patinkin.
Two of the strongest mouthpieces for Andrew Lloyd Webber's ballads of pomp and flourish have proved to be Sarah Brightman and Michael Crawford.
Ms.
Brightman is currently starring in "The Music of Andrew Lloyd Webber," a touring concert of the British composer's music that played at Radio City Music Hall on Friday and Saturday evenings.
And at Friday's show, her performances of several of Mr.
Lloyd Webber's best-known ballads illustrated the artistic chemistry between singer and composer.


POP
Setting Up a Mood And Leaving Cheer Behind  Simon Bonney CB's Gallery


For These New Yorkers, Reality Gets Tougher by the Inning
The 1995 Yankees have not hit the revolving door running. Yet.
The 1995 Yankees have not produced a candidate to make New York forget the high jinks to the extremities reached by the over-the-top Eddie Whitson.
Yet.


Abroad at Home; A Chinese Puzzle
In China over the last month a number of high-ranking establishment intellectuals have joined activists for democracy in petitions to the Government.
They called for a more open society -- for "a spirit of tolerance," as one petition put it.
The Communist authorities responded by detaining some of the signers and keeping others under house arrest.
In the days around June 4, the sixth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre, there were stern warnings against dissent.


Immunizations for Children
The State Department of Health has begun notifying educational and medical professionals throughout the state that children entering kindergarten or attending day-care centers this fall will need additional immunizations by Jan. 2, 1996.
Children entering kindergarten after Sept. 1, 1995, must have received two doses of measles vaccine by Jan. 2, 1996.
Both doses must have been given after the child's first birthday.


Lindros Tumbles, Lemieux Pounces
Even a half-hour after the game, Claude Lemieux of the Devils and Eric Lindros of the Flyers were still just inches apart, next to each other in the way that a ghostly shadow sometimes appears alongside another image on a television screen.
Both were dressed in their Sunday suits, walking down the narrow corridor between the dressing rooms in the Spectrum.
This time, there were no breakaways, bumps, elbows, spears, slashes, angry words, gloves to the face, menacing stares or hostile glares.


CURB ON MOB AIDS GARMENT MAKERS
Three years after prosecutors claimed they had broken the Mafia's choke hold over vital trucking routes in New York City's garment industry, many manufacturers say that shipping costs have dropped sharply and that dozens of new trucking companies are competing for business.
Garment manufacturers estimate that in three years, the average price for shipping a dress, a pair of jeans or a blouse has plunged to 15 to 20 cents from 40 to 45 cents.


News Summary
International A2-9  NUCLEAR AGREEMENT STYMIED
Three years after Russia agreed to provide the United States with uranium from scrapped weapons, the deal is unraveling.
A1  JAPAN'S WAY WITH APOLOGIES
The issue of remorse for World War II aside, in most respects, Japan is the most apologetic country in the world.
A1  MOMENTUM IN THE MIDEAST
The goal of Secretary of State Warren Christopher's Mideast swing was not momentous agreements, but to get things moving again.
A2  FATAL BOMBING IN COLOMBIA
At least 30 people were killed and more than 200 injured when a powerful bomb exploded in the city of Medellin.
A8  A drug cartel leader's arrest raises hopes in Colombia.
A8  RESCUED PILOT'S RETURN
As Capt.
Scott O'Grady, fresh from his rescue in Bosnia, returned to his family in the United States, the White House and the military were examining why he was shot down in the first place.
A3  HAITIAN ELECTIONS AHEAD
With Haitians scheduled to vote this month in their first election since democracy was restored last fall, organizers are struggling to keep the balloting on track.
A8  SHIFTING POLICY ON CUBA
The Clinton Administration is considering expanded contacts between Americans and Cubans, such as academic exchanges, as a way of undermining Fidel Castro.
A9  Germany's floundering Free Democrats chose a new leader.
A3  Unicef study gives the United States low marks on foreign aid.
A5  National A10-13, B6-8  LOTUS YIELDS TO I.B.M.
OFFER
The Lotus Development Corporation accepted a takeover offer of $64 a share from I.B.M., a total of more than $3.5 billion, in what is the largest acquisition ever of a software company.
A1  CLINTON AND GINGRICH FACE OFF
Sharing a stage in New Hampshire, President Clinton and Speaker Newt Gingrich politely debated Medicare, foreign policy and the Federal budget.
A1  A MEETING OF SELF-INTERESTS
News Analysis: The meeting in New Hampshire was a testament to the wary mutual self-interest that made Newt Gingrich leap at the chance, and led the President to take the risk of letting him.
B6  When Newt Gingrich went looking for moose, he got an earful.
B6  RECOGNITION FOR BISEXUALS
A generation of young people is increasingly accepting what older Americans have generally denied: that between the two poles of heterosexuality and homosexuality, there is middle ground.
A12  SUSPECT'S BROTHER BACK HOME
James Nichols, whose brother is being held in the Oklahoma City bombing, is back at his farm in Michigan and following a grueling routine.
A10  MILITIAS SEARCH FOR DISTANCE
At a fair in Orlando, Fla., leaders and members of self-styled citizen militias did their best to distance themselves from the Oklahoma City bombing.
A10  A VOICE FOR POLICE OFFICERS
Using a small computer and an array of printers, Cynthia Brown has become the darling of a hefty segment of the nation's law-enforcement community.
A13  BIG CUTS FOR MEDICAID
While lobbyists and lawmakers fight over Medicare, House and Senate negotiators are at work on the final plans for even bigger changes and deeper cuts in projected spending for Medicaid.
B7  MARCH PLANNED FOR BLACK MEN
A coalition of black organizations, meeting in Houston, planned a march on Washington by a million black men.
B7  SIMPSON CASE'S LONG REACH
A year after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman were killed, the case has permeated the nation's legal and social landscape as no other trial in recent times.
B8  TRIAL SOUGHT FOR INMATE
A former journalist convicted in the death of a police officer should have a new trial because evidence was suppressed, his lawyers say.
B8  Metro Digest B1  CRACKDOWN AIDS GARMENT TRADE
Three years after prosecutors claimed they had broken the mob's control over trucking routes in New York's garment industry, many manufacturers say that shipping costs have dropped sharply.
A1  WHERE TEACHERS EARN THE MOST
It may not be a center for research or boast a long list of famous alumni.
But there is one arena in which Nassau Community College is an unqualified standout: The amount it pays its professors.
A1  BEAUTY REIGNS ON THE MAGIC BUS
Welcome to the Magic Bus, circa 1995, where the magic is makeup and the destination is the summer swirl of high-society weddings and see-and-be-seen restaurants of the Hamptons.
A1  Obituaries B10  Lindsey Nelson, sports broadcaster.
Zoilo Versalles, shortstop who led the Minnesota Twins to the pennant.
Arts/Entertainment C11-16  A union challenges two visiting ensembles.
C11  Music: Asian music and jazz.
C13  Softened rock from Wilco.
C14  A computer's story line.
C13  Dance: Vinogradov and the Kirov.
C11  Paloma Herrera role debut.
C16  Robbins's "Watermill" by City Ballet.
C16  Theater: "Music of Andrew Lloyd Webber." C14  Books: "The Garlic Ballads." C13  TV: "Absolutely Fabulous." C11  Critic's Notebook.
C14  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-9  Baseball: The Mantle clan.
C1  Yanks rediscover bats.
C7  Mets inventive at losing.
C7  Basketball: Rockets go up 3-0.
C1  Columns: Anderson on Devils.
C4  Vecsey on N.B.A.
C5  Golf: Open is for the tough.
C2  Hockey: Late Devils goal wins.
C1  Olympics: Salt Lake City bid.
C5  Racing: Lukas in control.
C3  Tennis: Muster's first Slam.
C3  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Ms.
Reno ducks.
Nuclear commitments.
Living, dying and the law.
More flag-waving in Congress.
Letters  William Safire: Love-feast debate.
Anthony Lewis: A Chinese puzzle.
Maggie Gallagher: The law on their side.
Brent Scowcroft: Foreign aid has its uses.
Bridge C16  Chronicle B9  Crossword C16


On the Annual Scoreboard of New Magazines, It's Sports 67, Sex 44
Sex sells -- no doubt about that.
It may come as a surprise, however, that for the first time in five years, sex has fallen out of first place as the leading topic for new magazines.
With 44 new sex magazines last year in the United States, 51 fewer than in 1993, the category ceded first place to sports, which accounted for 67 of the 832 magazine start-ups.


Zoilo Versalles, 55, Shortstop Who Was Mr. Baseball in 1965
Zoilo Versalles, the slick-fielding, Cuban-born shortstop who led the Minnesota Twins to their first American League pennant in 1965 and became the first Latin American player to be named most valuable player, was found dead at his home in suburban Bloomington, Minn., on Friday.
He was 55.
After an inconclusive autopsy Saturday, a spokesman for the county medical examiners office in Minneapolis said lab tests had been ordered to determine the cause of death.


Most Wanted; Intuit Still on Top
Intuit lost its hope of being bought when the Justice Department blocked Microsoft's bid, but its software is still popular.
The latest figures show that in April it had the two best selling business productivity programs for the Microsoft environment, and two of the top three for the macintosh environment.
Lotus has no top sellers on the list.
But its shareholders have something much more valuable: an offer from I.B.M., which Lotus's board accepted yesterday after it was sweetened to $64 a share.
The original offer led Lotus's stock price to leap 93.5 percent to $62.875, above the $60 I.B.M. first offered.
This made Lotus the No. 1 gainer among technology stocks last week.


Janzen Wins Kemper in Playoff
Lee Janzen had the only bogey-free round of the afternoon, then made a 12-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole yesterday to beat Corey Pavin and win the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md.
Janzen, who started the day three shots back, won with a four-under-par 67.
The 12-under 272 total gave him his second victory of the year -- he also won the Players Championship -- and the sixth of his career.


Lukas, Holding 3 Aces, Is Hoping to Cash In
D.
Wayne Lukas told Nick Zito yesterday that "your time will come," and then began plotting how to array his remarkable string of triple crown horses to take dead aim on more than $6 million in purses and on the championships beyond.
Thunder Gulch, winner of the Kentucky Derby five weeks ago and the Belmont Stakes on Saturday, came out of the triple crown final in good shape and will return to California after a highly successful spring in Florida, Kentucky and New York.
He began his travels as the second-string horse in the all-star Lukas barn but won two of the three classic races, ending with his two-length victory over Zito's Star Standard in the Belmont after his stablemate Timber Country had been scratched with a fever.


1995 N.H.L. PLAYOFFS: Sports of The Times; To Devils' Lemaire, The Trap Defense Is Just Plain Hockey
IN the Devils' quest for the Stanley Cup, it's as if their "trap" defense were snaring an endangered species.
Wildlife ecologists in the National Hockey League sneer at Jacques Lemaire's system as if he were skinning baby seals or snow leopards.
When the Devils' cerebral coach was asked about the "trap," even he winced.
"Can't you use another word for it?" he asked.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L. PLAYOFFS  Red Wings Win West in Double Overtime
After an absence of 29 years, the Detroit Red Wings are back in the Stanley Cup finals with a chance to win their first National Hockey League championship in 40 years.
Vyacheslav Kozlov's goal 2 minutes 25 seconds into the second overtime period last night gave Detroit a 2-1 victory over Chicago at Joe Louis Arena, and a 4-1 victory over the Blackhawks in the four-of-seven-game Western Conference final series.


J.-M. Ruth-Rolland, Central African Official, 58
Jeanne-Marie Ruth-Rolland, an official of the Central African Republic who served as its Minister of Social Affairs in 1992 and 1993 after being imprisoned for five years for political reasons, died on June 4 in a hospital in Paris.
She was 58.
Her death was reported in the Friday issue of Le Monde, which did not give the cause.


Administration Balks At New Job Standards On Repetitive Strain
Bowing to pressure from Congress and business groups, the Clinton Administration has decided not to issue regulations to protect workers from repetitive strain injuries, Government officials say.
Hundreds of thousands of American workers, from meat packers to computer programmers, are afflicted with repetitive strain injuries each year.
The fast-growing problem worried Government officials as far back as 1990, when the Bush Administration told the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, known as OSHA, to begin to develop a so-called ergonomic standard to protect workers.


Bomb in Medellin, Colombian Drug City, Kills 30
In a deadly illustration of the multiple security threats facing the Colombian Government, at least 30 people were killed and more than 200 wounded when a powerful bomb exploded late Saturday night in the city of Medellin during a music festival attended by thousands of people.
Colombian police and military authorities said today that they had not been able to establish a motive for the attack, which occurred one block away from a police barracks, and that no group had claimed responsibility for it.
But they said that leftist guerrilla groups and gangs of cocaine traffickers had engaged in such acts of terrorism in the past and that they were investigating both possibilities.


A Giuliani Voting Bloc Is Eroding
At a recent City Hall news conference, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced an appointment that would otherwise have drawn little attention: the new chairwoman of the Mayor's Commission on the Status of Women.
But in a uncharacteristic act, the Mayor prominently noted that his selection was a woman of Hispanic background.
Such an observation seemed distinctly out of character for a Mayor who has habitually eschewed any mention of ethnicity in announcing his appointments.
But to many, the emphasis on Amalia V. Betanzos's background underscored the depth of the problems the Mayor is currently having with Hispanic New Yorkers.


The Race For 2002 Winds Down
Salt Lake City has long been favored to be the host to the 2002 Winter Olympics.
As the selection race heads into the home stretch, the mountain-ringed Utah capital finds itself trying to maintain its perceived lead while three challengers make a final, mad dash for the tape.
On Friday in Budapest, 94 members of the International Olympic Committee will choose among Salt Lake; Quebec City; Sion, Switzerland; and Ostersund, Sweden, as host of the 2002 Winter Games.
Salt Lake City's $798 million bid is technically superior to the other three, but the vote can be highly political and the favorite is never guaranteed to win.


A Year Later: The Simpson Case Has Permeated the Nation's Psyche
A year has now passed since Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed, an occasion to be marked on Monday by public candlelight vigils and more court testimony.
But with the first anniversary of the Simpson case comes a growing sense that the trial has become an exercise in futility, a dry run for a second run-through that could be just as inconclusive.
To many lawyers and lay people alike, the proceedings in Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom seem endless, exasperating and ultimately meaningless.


Rockets Pull Within One Game of Sweep
The Houston Rockets moved a step closer to another championship.
The Orlando Magic moved one loss away from being swept.
With Robert Horry making a crucial 3-point jumper with 14.1 seconds to play, the Rockets defeated the Magic, 106-103, in Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals tonight at the Summit.
The victory gave Houston a commanding 3-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.
No team in N.B.A. history has recovered from a 3-0 deficit to win a playoff series.
And if the Rockets win Game 4 on Wednesday night at the Summit, they will repeat as N.B.A. champions.


Outflanking Goliath; Unable to Overcome Microsoft Windows, I.B.M. Tries an End Run With Lotus Notes
By succeeding in its bid for the desktop software maker Lotus Development, has I.B.M signaled the end of its quixotic quest to develop a mass market for its own beleaguered OS/2 software?
I.B.M. says no, but many analysts disagree, and they point to no less of an authority than Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the chairman and chief executive of the company.


Political Memo; Budget Brawlers Bloody, but Smiling
The ruling triumvirate of state government emerged from four months of budget talks last week pecked, scabbed and bone-tired, but all three were still smiling.
Each of them claimed a measure of victory, but nobody really wins or loses by the calculus of New York budget-making.
After all, Republicans control the governorship and the Senate, while Democrats dominate the Assembly, creating an exquisite balance of power in which each side has a veto over the final product.


Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli, Reclusive Pianist, Is Dead at 75
Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli, an acclaimed pianist known for his reclusive behavior, died yesterday in Lugano, Switzerland.
He was 75.
He had been hospitalized several days ago, according to The Associated Press.


Power Lines and Cancer: Is There a Connection?
"Currents of Fear" begins where television news-magazine stories tend to end: several mothers in Omaha whose children have cancer blame electric power lines.
Tonight's "Frontline" report goes beyond the emotions ("There's too many 17-month-old bald-headed babies in the neighborhood, and we're going to scream until someone figures out what's going on in this neighborhood," declares one mother) to an exploration of the risks of leaping to dire conclusions on the basis of shaky evidence.
Suspicions that electromagnetic fields created by America's two million miles of power lines are causing cancer are not confined to the mothers of Omaha.
Paul Brodeur, a New Yorker magazine writer who reported on apparent cancer clusters in Connecticut and California, is their main transmitter tonight.
He asserts that "millions of unsuspecting men, women and children" are being exposed to power fields that are associated with cancer, and he speaks of a cover-up by government in cahoots with the electric-power industry.


New Jersey To Relocate Mentally Ill From Shore
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today promised the shore communities that have become magnets for former patients from the state's psychiatric hospitals that the state would help resettle the patients throughout the state.
She also said that the planned closing of Marlboro State Hospital over the next two years would not revisit the problem on the towns whose tourism suffered after the last round of patient releases in the late 1970's.


Patterns
Seeking Bryant Park Accord
Michael Weinstein, the president of Ark Restaurants, has proposed that Seventh on Sixth be held responsible for any shortfall of revenue to the Bryant Park Grill that might occur due to the presence of tents in the park during the fall runway shows.


Excerpts From the Decision on Justifying Affirmative Action Programs
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court decision today in Adarand Constructors v.
Pena, holding that affirmative action programs must be subject to the most searching constitutional scrutiny.
The vote was 5 to 4.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion, which Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas joined.
Justices Scalia and Thomas wrote concurring opinions as well.
Justices John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer dissented.
All except Justice Breyer filed dissenting opinions.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice O'Connor
Petitioner Adarand Constructors Inc. claims that the Federal Government's practice of giving general contractors on Government projects a financial incentive to hire subcontractors controlled by "socially and economically disadvantaged individuals," and in particular, the Government's use of race-based presumptions in identifying such individuals, violates the equal protection component of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause.
The Court of Appeals rejected Adarand's claim.
We conclude, however, that courts should analyze cases of this kind under a different standard of review than the one the Court of Appeals applied.
We therefore vacate the Court of Appeals' judgment and remand the case for further proceedings. . . .


Stocks Recover Some of Last Week's Losses
The stock market recovered some of its losses yesterday, with the Nasdaq composite index even establishing a record.
But trading volume was moderate in advance of a week crammed with major economic reports, like the Consumer Price Index and industrial production, as well as Friday's turbulence of the quarterly expiration of stock options known as "triple witching."


Justices Say Making State Pay In Desegregation Case Was Error
The Supreme Court today cast serious doubt on the viability of a showcase desegregation plan in Kansas City, Mo., by ruling that lower Federal courts had improperly ordered the State of Missouri to help pay for state-of-the-art magnet schools and salary increases for teachers and support staff.
The 5-to-4 decision, written by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, was unclear in important respects and left uncertain the next steps in the 18-year-old lawsuit.
The Court stopped short of ordering the plan dismantled and did not find that vestiges of segregation had been erased "to the extent practicable," the standard it set in a 1991 opinion for ending Federal court control of once-segregated school systems.


Devils Trying to Forget Same Time Last Year
The road team has won every one of the five games of the Eastern Conference final series between the Devils and the Philadelphia Flyers.
The Devils, leading three games to two and returning home for Game 6 Tuesday night, said they were determined to reverse the pattern, but they were also fearful of the unusual pattern that had developed in this grueling series.
"It scares me," Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire said.
"I hope the guys work as hard as they did in Philly."


Before Brawl, Bartenders Cut Off Drinks to Officers
Four New York City police officers suspended from the force after a weekend brawl in this beachfront resort were part of a larger group of officers who were causing so much trouble that managers of a bar refused to serve them more drinks and asked them to leave, officials said.
The brawl erupted just past midnight Friday, as part of the group left the bar and one of the officers, Lisa Coliandro, 25, got into a pushing and punching match with a man she accused of molesting her, the Point Pleasant Beach police said.


Chicago's Boss Daley Inherited High-Rises
To the Editor:
"The Legacy of Boss Daley" (editorial, June 7) asserts that former Mayor Richard J. Daley's "most troubling legacy to Chicago" was the "mammoth housing projects like the Robert Taylor Homes and Stateway Gardens," which "went up along a lengthy stretch of South State Street, as Chicago began to put together the largest contiguous ghettos in the United States."


Marshall Signs With Giants
The Giants announced yesterday that they had re-signed wide receiver ARTHUR MARSHALL, who caught 16 passes for 219 yards last season.
Marshall, a restricted free agent, was obtained from Denver during the 1994 draft for a seventh-round choice.
The Giants also signed ERIC WEIR, a free agent cut by the team last August.


Relief Expert Missing in Chechnya Is Among MacArthur Grant Recipients
Frederick C. Cuny, an international relief expert who has been missing in Chechnya since April, was among 24 people awarded grants yesterday by The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
Other fellows chosen for what is popularly called the genius program include the writers Sandra Cisneros and Octavia Butler, Virginia Hamilton, the first children's author to receive the fellowship, the artist Cindy Sherman, the composer and choreographer Meredith Monk, and a variety of scientists, historians and social scientists.


S-K-I Ltd.(SKII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
MARGARET MILNER RICHARDSON, Vassar College class of '65, returned to the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., campus for her 30th reunion this weekend and gave a talk titled "Many Happy Returns." No, it wasn't inspired by a birthday or reunion-related event, but by Mrs.
Richardson's job as the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.


Herman Branson, 80, a Scientist Who Headed Lincoln University
Herman Russell Branson, a physicist and former university president who helped to broaden the financing of black colleges in the 1970's and 1980's, died on Wednesday at Washington Hospital Center.
He was 80 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Herman E. Branson.


Enough Is Enough: Showalter Lets Yanks Hear It
Buck Showalter finally witnessed one abominable performance too many by the Yankees tonight, so he let his slumping players know how perturbed he was in a clubhouse tirade following a 6-1 loss to the Tigers.
His words were stinging and they might have been overdue because the mess is sizable.
The low-key manager berated the Yankees for their sluggish play, expressed his disappointment and made it that clear he expected changes, and soon.


Hiroshima Controversy
To the Editor:
Your June 8 obituary of Bob Caron, the tail gunner on the Enola Gay when it dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, stated: "The attack killed 70,000 to 100,000 people and helped hasten the end of World War II." Six months ago the Postal Service was forced by protests to withdraw plans for a mushroom-cloud stamp bearing similar wording.
There is credible evidence that the Japanese were trying to surrender before the bombings and that the bombings did nothing to hasten the war's end.
ED HEDEMANN  New York, June 8, 1995 The writer is a spokesman for the Enola Gay Action Coalition.


Abner V. McCall, 80, Educator Who Led in Expansion of Baylor
Abner Vernon McCall, who was president and later chancellor of Baylor University for 24 years, died on Sunday at his home in Waco, Tex.
He was 80.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for Baylor, the nation's largest Baptist university.
Mr.
McCall had celebrated his 80th birthday on the university's campus in Waco on Saturday.


INSIDE
Harassing, On Line
With debate raging over the regulation of cyberspace speech, Connecticut enacted a law that would make on-line harassing a crime.
Page B4.
Playing the Hostage Card
Bosnian Serbs may now view hostages as leverage against a tougher peacekeepers' mandate.
Page A14.
Intergalactic Clue
The detection of helium in space confirms a tenet of the Big Bang theory.
Science Times, page C1.


Mothers to Have the Last Word
New mothers, not insurers, would get to decide whether 24 hours in the hospital is enough, under legislation passed yesterday by the State Senate.


Market Place; Japan's banks need shoring up if its stock market is to revive.
IT used to look like Japan had most of the money in the world and was doing a good job of gathering up the rest.
Now its financial markets are shaking because of fears the financial fabric of the country is unraveling.
Worries about the Japanese banking system -- still heavily burdened with bad loans that were made to real estate speculators during the boom years -- have helped produce the latest plunge in Japanese stocks.
Share prices are nearing, or in some cases have already fallen below, the levels reached in 1992, when it appeared that the market had reached bottom after a sharp fall.


Corrections
A headline and parts of a report in the Styles pages on Sunday about the wedding of Christina Barbara Grew eldinger misspelled the bridegroom's surname.
He is Tristan Ernest Propst, not Probst.


Mayor's Critics Assail School Safety Inquiry
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's new commission to investigate school safety was greeted with a chorus of ridicule from his political opponents yesterday.
Several former public officials criticized him for packing the panel with his employees and friends.
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch, a sometime supporter of the Mayor who agrees with his goal of turning school security over to the Police Department, nonetheless said the Mayor had made a mistake.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
The Exxon Corporation, the Formosan Union Chemical Corporation of Taiwan and the Gao Qiao Petrochemical International Trading Company of China are planning a $180 million joint venture in Shanghai to produce alkali bendene, a raw material for making detergents.  *
The British clothing chain Oasis Stores Ltd. has revived plans for an initial sale of shares to institutional investors that would value the company at $:75 million ($119 million).
Oasis, which has 69 women's clothing shops and concessions in Britain and Ireland, said it would disclose the date of the sale and the proposed share price later this month.


Taming the Asphalt Jungle; Pothole Czar Tackles the Pockmarks and Craters of Queens
On a brisk spring afternoon in Far Rockaway, Queens, it caught Anthony J. Fasulo's eye.
There, where Beach 22d Street spilled into Mott Avenue, it glinted up at him in gaping shamelessness: a pothole.
It was a small one, not yet a full-fledged crater, and certainly not one of those Bigfoot-sized ditches that pothole initiates call a "wear-and-tear." No, this was a mere thumbprint, an "A-hole" in pothole parlance, barely deep enough to rattle the handlebars of a bicycle.
A pothole-repair crew might have passed it by for more urgent fixes.


Chess; Kasparov says he lost to Joel Lautier because he forgot a move. But would it have mattered?
Ever since that king of kibitzers, Oscar Tenner of the Manhattan Chess Club, left this vale of bad moves years ago, he has been sorely missed.
Yet his legacy of trenchant comment rings on in the ears of the survivors of his audiences.
For example: After Gary Kasparov of Russia, the Professional Chess Association's world champion, had blundered and lost to the 22-year-old French grandmaster Joel Lautier in the ninth Max Euwe Memorial International Tournament in Amsterdam, he remarked that he had prepared the opening five years ago but had just forgotten a crucial point over the board.
Unfortunately, there was no Tenner present to nod sagely and pipe up with his standard, "The move I intended to make, I entirely overlooked."


Q&amp;A
Green Skies
Q.  Why does the sky sometimes turn green before a tornado?


'Basher-52, It's Good to Have You Home'


Film Receipts
The chart listing box-office receipts for the top films across the country now appears on Mondays in Business Day.


No Headline
"We are only seeing the tail of the dog. It's enough of a tail to know that it's a very big dog." " -- DR. ARTHUR F. DAVIDSEN on the significance of newly discovered helium traces in space.  [ C9:1. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.02
4.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.58
4.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.60
4.55
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.34
6.38
7.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.70
6.72
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.68
7.68
8.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.11
6.04
6.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Judge Rejects Moving a Trial
A judge refused to move the trial yesterday in the kidnapping, rape and murder of a 7-year-old Passaic girl.


In Reversal, Test Scores Rise At New York City's Schools
Elementary school students in all 32 New York City school districts raised their math and reading test scores this spring for the first time in six years.
The achievement is a significant one for the nation's largest school system, which last year absorbed $540 million in budget cuts and faces $1 billion in cuts this fall.
In recent years, the poorer districts have seen a steady erosion of student performance, and in 1992, the city had an across-the-board decrease in reading and math.


White, Good Buys Luca Stephan
White, Good &amp; Company in Lebanon, Pa., has acquired Luca Stephan Partners in New York and renamed it White Good Luca.
The terms were not disclosed.
Luca Stephan's billings are estimated at $3.5 million from clients like The Financial Times, owned by Pearson P.L.C., and Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, a unit of Bertelsmann A.G.
White, Good, with divisions specializing in public relations and design, has estimated billings of $9 million from clients like Wyeth-Ayerst International and the Wilmington Savings Fund Society.


Bad Landing in Leap to Freedom
The escape attempt yesterday at Ocean County Superior Court is not likely to inspire a made-for-TV movie.


Government Seizes Hotel That Became Drug Haven
A Federal judge ordered owners of the Kenmore Hotel to forfeit the dilapidated, 22-story building to the United States Government yesterday as punishment for letting drug dealers operate there.
A residence hotel with many poor and elderly residents, the Kenmore has become a notorious warren of crime, where crack dealers, thieves and prostitutes have roamed the hallways.
The 621-room hotel at 143 East 22d Street is the largest building in New York City ever to be surrendered to the Government.


A Case of Justice, or a Total Travesty?; How the Battle Over Breast Implants Took Dow Corning to Chapter 11
In 1992 the Food and Drug Administration summoned Dr.
John Sergent, a noted rheumatologist at Vanderbilt University, to a special meeting on silicone breast implants.
The agency had called the meeting to assess what it said was new evidence that implants caused dire and incurable connective tissue diseases like lupus and scleroderma.
Dr.
Sergent said he arrived at the session in Bethesda, Md., prepared to conclude that the implants posed a danger to women's health.
"My belief was that there must be something to it," he said.
But he was surprised to find that there were no scientific data, like broad studies of population groups linking the implants to the diseases.
All he heard were anecdotes -- case histories that in themselves proved nothing, though they could suggest hypotheses that could be tested by science.


Administration Seeks Quick Action as House Takes Up Anti-Terrorism Bill
The House Judiciary Committee today took up its version of a counterterrorism bill, with the Clinton Administration asking for $500 million over the next five years and swift passage of new laws to help fight domestic and international terrorism.
"The tragic bombing of the Murrah building in Oklahoma City on April 19 underscores the need for swift action by both the executive and legislative branch to insure that our law enforcement agencies have the legal tools and resources to investigate, prosecute and deter terrorist activity, both at home and abroad," said Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick.


New Hampshire Handshake
The only new idea in Sunday's agreeable if somewhat artificial exchange of pleasantries between President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich came from a New Hampshire senior citizen who suggested a blue-ribbon commission on political reform.
Mr.
Clinton said he would accept the idea "in a heartbeat." Mr.
Gingrich concurred, and the two shook hands on the deal.
Efforts to diminish the powerful influence of money in politics have gone nowhere fast.
A blue-ribbon commission -- in the past the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, has also spoken favorably of the idea -- might therefore make sense.
It cannot hurt and might even help, especially on the question of campaign financing.


Discarded Feathers Answer Question Crucial for Survival of Rare Bird
One of the world's rarest birds at last has a chance to help propagate its species now that scientists have confirmed that it is a male.
With no external clues for guidance, scientists turned to DNA analysis of the bird's discarded feathers for a clue to its sex, the first time the technique has been used.


Fedders Corp.(FJQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Berlusconi Wins in Vote Affecting TV Interests
Silvio Berlusconi's name did not appear on any ballots on Sunday as 27 million Italians voted on a full menu of 12 referendum questions.
But by winning a decisive victory on the three questions that threatened his television empire, the tycoon and former Prime Minister proved that he not only continues to dominate the political debate, but is also managing to survive it.


By Design; The 'Sabrina' Shift
Last summer, it was the slip dress.
This summer, the dress everyone seems to be wearing is the sleeveless shift.
It's cool on a steamy day but more covered up than a slip, so it can go to the office without an added T-shirt.
The most fashionable versions have the wide necklines favored by Audrey Hepburn in movies like "Sabrina." A solid color looks best, and the dress needs no accessories other than perhaps sunglasses.
For evening, it can be dressed up with high-heel sandals.


Chase Introducing New Electronic-Banking Account
In a new sign that the battle lines in banking are being drawn with copper wire, Chase Manhattan Bank will introduce a new service today for customers who mainly want to do business without visiting a branch.
The service, to be offered in an account package called Chase Direct, allows clients to bank by telephone, fax or personal computers.
While most other big banks in New York offer 24-hour-a-day customer-service lines, Chase, a unit of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, says its new option is the only service in which a single agent can handle questions related to deposit, credit card, loan and investment accounts.


A Round Can Be Expensive
While most of the attention this week is on the players and the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, fans with an interest in another side of the game will gather in Manhattan Tuesday night for a one-of-a-kind auction.
This high-ticket sale, to be conducted at the Waldorf-Astoria hotel following a black-tie dinner, will feature 15 items that range from personal keepsakes, hard-to-get tickets, a golf trip to Scotland and rounds of golf with such notable players as Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus, Greg Norman and even the comedian Bill Murray.
Bids of $20,000 have already been received for some items, and proceeds from the sales will benefit charities designated by the donors.


Are Retail Consultants Missing Fashion's X-Factor?
If every joke has a grain of truth, there couldn't be a better bit of fashion humor than the line Anthony F. Scarpa, a senior vice president for Chemical Bank's apparel, retail and textile division, used to open his speech to the Fashion Group International last Wednesday.
Addressing the topic -- who is killing the fashion industry, retailers or manufacturers? -- Mr.
Scarpa said, "Seeing all the retailers and manufacturers in the room, I'm inclined to say the consultants are at fault."
Funny -- except that since the results are in on the consultants' treatment of fashion as a commodity, Mr.
Scarpa's joke has more than a bit of credibility.


Lotus Deal To Generate $35 Million Just in Fees
I.B.M.'s takeover of the Lotus Development Corporation is providing rich pickings for Wall Street investment bankers and lawyers, as well as windfall gains for stockholders, particularly a handful of top executives at Lotus.
Altogether, the well-heeled professionals engineering the biggest takeover to date of a software manufacturer should garner about $35 million from the $3.5 billion acquisition, according to those involved in the transaction.
Not bad for what is so far little more than a week's work, at least in some cases.


Jays Send the Red Sox To Third Straight Loss
Blue Jays 4, Red Sox 3
Alex Gonzalez's bases-loaded single with two out in the 12th inning last night gave Toronto a 4-3 victory over visiting Boston, which has lost three straight games.


Salomon Loses Media Deal Maker
Nancy B. Peretsman, whose close ties to top executives in the media industry helped Salomon Brothers win a starring role in several of the big media deals in the last decade, resigned from the firm yesterday to join Allen &amp; Company.
Her departure came one business day after Salomon Brothers, part of Salomon Inc., scuttled a much-debated compensation plan it adopted last fall that was at least partly responsible for the defection of more than two dozen top managing directors.


Simpson Prosecutors Decide Pathologist Won't Testify
The O. J. Simpson trial was jolted today by the announcement by the prosecution that it would not call as a witness one of the more controversial figures in the case, a pathologist who performed the autopsies on the victims but who has been shown to have committed a variety of errors.
And the horror of the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman one year ago today was brought home when Judge Lance A. Ito showed reporters 58 photographs of the victims' slashed and bloody bodies.


Injuries No Hindrance To Red Sox and Reds
Jim Bowden, the general manager of the rampaging Cincinnati Reds, was talking yesterday about his team's success in spite of a spate of injuries.
"We've just been able to pick up when people are hurt or not playing well," he said.
"That's usually the sign of a good team."


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May26


Walter Landor, 81, a Designer Of Logos for Giant Corporations
Walter Landor, founder of an industrial design firm that created logos for some of the world's largest and best-known corporations, died on Friday in Tiburon, Calif.
He was 81 and lived in San Francisco and Saint Helena, Calif.
He had been in bad health for several years, said a spokesman for Landor Associates, the firm Mr.
Landor founded.


G. J. Tankersley, 74, Executive Who Diversified Gas Company
G.
J.
Tankersley, who was chairman and chief executive of the Consolidated Natural Gas Company from 1979 to 1987 and who led the company into energy exploration and production in the Gulf of Mexico, died on Sunday.
He was 74.
He died at his home in Stahlstown, Pa., from complications related to a degenerative muscle disease, said Cynthia Navadeh, a company spokeswoman.


Bonds Rise In Reaction To Comments By Greenspan
Prices of Treasury securities rose moderately yesterday in quiet trading ahead of economic reports due this week.
After opening on a positive note from overseas trading, the market gained on the weekend remarks by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, who was in Basel, Switzerland, for a meeting of the Bank for International Settlements on Sunday.
He reiterated that the risks of a "modest recession" had increased and that inflation data would be important in the forthcoming meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


CHRONICLE
BERNARD LOISEAU, chef of La Cote d'Or, the three-star French restaurant in Saulieu, Burgundy, invaded the kitchen of Restaurant Daniel on East 76th Street yesterday to celebrate the publication of the book "Burgundy Stars."
The book, written by WILLIAM ECHIKSON and published by Little Brown, describes the events that led to the elevation of Mr.
Loiseau's restaurant to Michelin's top rank in 1992 and what has happened since.


Just One More Step


Administration Moves to Blame Fed Rate Rises For Slowdown
Faced with a significant slowing of the economy as the season of Presidential politics heats up, Administration officials say the White House is gradually zeroing in on a well-known culprit: the Federal Reserve and its interest rate increases over the last 16 months.
The evolution of the Administration's stance -- which comes despite the strong objections of the Treasury Secretary, Robert E. Rubin -- began earlier this month, officials said today.
It was given voice on Sunday by the White House chief of staff, Leon Panetta, who said the Administration would welcome a move by the Federal Reserve to lower short-term interest rates.


Luby's Cafeterias (LUB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lazio Fans Riot Over Sale Talk
Fans of the Lazio soccer club in Rome smashed windows, overturned trash cans and hurled smoke bombs yesterday after reports of plans to sell the World Cup forward GIUSEPPE SIGNORI to rival Parma.
About 1,000 Lazio supporters earlier gathered outside the team's headquarters, chanting slogans and throwing coins and tomatoes.
The club finally said Signori would remain with it. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEST SCORES RISE
The math and reading test scores of elementary school students in all 32 New York City school districts rose this spring for the first time in six years.
The achievement is a significant one for the nation's largest school system, which last year absorbed $540 million in budget cuts and faces $1 billion in cuts this fall.
In recent years, the poorer districts have seen a steady erosion of student performance, and in 1992, the city had an across-the-board decrease in reading and math scores.  [ Page A1. ] TEEN-AGER RISES ABOVE A TROUBLED LIFE
Most of her young life, 16-year-old Latoya Sims was not a ward of the child protective system.
Instead, she hovered at its edge.
Home was an abandoned apartment with no toilet, or a room where she was too afraid to sleep.
They were places where she lost her dolls, her diaries, her baby pictures, her childhood.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  SUSPENDED OFFICERS PART OF ROWDY GROUP
Four New York City police officers suspended from the force after a weekend brawl in this beachfront resort were part of a larger group of officers who were causing so much trouble that managers of a bar refused to serve them more drinks and asked them to leave, officials said.  [ B6. ] SCHOOL SAFETY INQUIRY IS ASSAILED
Mayor Giuliani's commission to investigate school safety was greeted with a chorus of ridicule from his political opponents.
Several former public officials criticized him for packing the panel with his employees and friends.  [ B3. ] HALF-CENTURY-OLD ARSON CASE SOLVED
A chance encounter between a vacationing New York City fire marshal and two fellow airline passengers helped solve a 43-year-old arson case that resulted in a firefighter's death, Fire Commissioner Howard Safir said.  [ B2. ] REGION  SHIFTING FORMER MENTAL PATIENTS
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey promised the shore communities that have become magnets for former patients from the state's psychiatric hospitals that the state would help resettle the patients throughout the state.
She also said that the planned closing of Marlboro State Hospital over the next two years would not revisit the problem on the towns whose tourism suffered after patient releases in the late 1970's.  [ B5. ] BUDGET BRAWLERS BLOODIED, BUT SMILING
The ruling triumvirate of state government emerged from four months of budget talks last week pecked, scabbed and bone-tired, but all three were still smiling.
Each of them claimed a measure of victory, but nobody really wins or loses by the calculus of New York budget-making.  [ Political Memo, B5. ] A SMALL CITY CONFRONTS ITS 'URBAN-NESS'
Montclair, N.J., is not a typical suburb.
It may have been drawn that way after a former postal worker killed four people in the storefront postal station in Watchung Plaza.
Some stories made the town seem like Mayberry.
But with 38,000 residents, Montclair has more of the feel of a small city than a small town.
"This is a nice town," said Robert Calendula, a freelance landscaper, "but things do happen." Off the top of his head, he mentioned teen-agers hanging out on the streets, sometimes getting into fights, and cars getting stolen.
"Montclair," he said, "is feeling the rough side of its urban-ness."  [ Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves, B5. ] Chronicle B4


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


A Revolutionary 1923 Ballet Goes Home to Russia at Last
"Les Noces," one of the most celebrated ballets of the 20th century, finally came home on Saturday to the city that helped inspire it, more than 70 years after the choreographer Bronislava Nijinska's abstract, architectural work was first performed in Paris.
Created in collaboration with the composer Igor Stravinsky and the designer Natalia Goncharova, the avant-garde classic -- a piece of modern art that tells the tale of a Russian peasant wedding -- has never before been presented in a Russian city by a Russian troupe.


For One Girl, Rising Above Troubled Life
Most of her young life, 16-year-old Latoya Sims was not a ward of the child-protective system.
Instead, she hovered at its edge.
Home was an abandoned apartment with no toilet, or a room where she was too afraid to sleep.
They were places where she lost her dolls, her diaries, her baby pictures, her childhood.


At the Open, Canvas Comes With a Cash Lining
They are green and white settlements upon a dogleg -- tented Levittowns for a week.
They are the corporate hospitality tents of the United States Open Championship, spacious, chandeliered, air-conditioned, catered, Astroturfed encampments upon the course of the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club.
There are three encampments here, each with a name like a Florida retirement community, each surrounded by picket fences and identified with shingles outside.
All that's missing are mailboxes with decoy ducks atop them.


Behind the Veil of Thought: Advances in brain research.; Provoking a Patient's Worst Fears To Determine the Brain's Role
IT was an odd request.
The woman, a patient with obsessive-compulsive disorder, was asked to bring two towels from home to a brain imaging laboratory at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
One towel was freshly laundered; the other she had used when she washed her hands after going to the bathroom.
For the woman, that used towel was an object of horror and dread.
If she held it in her hand, it would trigger an overwhelming train of obsessions about contamination and germs, and an almost unbearable urge to wash immediately that if not acted on would set off a state of high anxiety.
But despite her loathing, the woman held the soiled towel as she lay still inside the tube of a PET scanner.


How Shock Turned to Deal for Lotus Chief
Jim Manzi insists he is in for the long haul.
"I'm not approaching this in any way as a transitional role," Mr.
Manzi said yesterday, a day after agreeing to sell the Lotus Development Corporation to I.B.M.
Mr.
Manzi will stay on as chief executive of Lotus, which will operate as an independent subsidiary, and he will be a senior vice president at I.B.M.


Employees of Lotus Meet Their New Top Boss
Some 2,200 employees of the Lotus Development Corporation today met their new top boss, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the chairman of I.B.M., and learned that a reorganization and job cuts already planned at Lotus would continue after Lotus is acquired by I.B.M.
That reorganization, which calls for Lotus to be split into four separate operating units and is likely to mean the loss of several hundred of Lotus's 5,500 jobs, had been announced in April after Lotus reported a first-quarter loss of $17.5 million -- its first loss ever.


McGraw-Hill Sues on Sales
It's not a practice they like to advertise, but publishers destroy books.
At least they try to.
In a lawsuit filed yesterday, McGraw-Hill charges that a company it hired to shred and recycle books illegally resold $12 million worth of college and professional texts to used-book sellers, with the help of six wholesalers and two brokers, and planned to sell thousands more.


An Endangered Nuclear Bargain
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Bush Administration made a shrewd deal to buy highly enriched uranium from Russia's discarded nuclear bombs for use in American civilian reactors.
It was a smart way of getting the bomb material out of Russia and keeping it off the black market.
Now the deal is in danger of unraveling.
The White House and Congress must act quickly to save it.
The bargain was simple but beneficial to both sides.
Under a 20-year agreement, Moscow would sell 500 metric tons of highly enriched uranium from scrapped nuclear warheads for $12 billion.
The bomb fuel would be diluted by blending it with other uranium, then exported to the United States.


Afloat in the Turbulence Of the American Dream
INDEPENDENCE DAY  By Richard Ford  451 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Perhaps the highest compliment a sportswriter can bestow on a basketball player is "he's unconscious!" -- meaning, he's on one of those rhapsodic shooting streaks where instinct and reflex have combined to produce a blissful state devoid of doubt and hesitation, a state of pure immediacy where touch is everything and every shot falls with perfect, unthinking grace.


An Under-Loved Favorite of Handel's
Handel's "Theodora" was poorly received in 1750 and hasn't done much better since.
Yet it was one of the composer's favorite children and remains a fine specimen of the oratorio in quasi-operatic guise.
"Theodora" presented contemporary audiences with elements it was not used to: an unhappy ending, a reluctance to employ the showy climax and a tendency toward minor-key numbers moving at stately tempos.
A good part of Handel's normal audience, moreover, had fled London in the wake of earthquakes in the city.
Handel said he preferred the chorus "He Saw the Lovely Youth" to the "Hallelujah." Didymus's aria "Deeds of kindness to display" is a masterpiece of sinuous harmonic shifts.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Dave Winfield, designated hitter, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 11.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Ismael Villegas and Brian Greene, pitchers; Anthony Ellison, outfielder; and Scott Vieira, catcher.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contract of Bob Zupcic, outfielder, from Duluth-Superior of the Northern League.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Activated Mike Hampton, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Dean Hartgraves, pitcher, to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Signed Chad Alexander, outfielder.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Martin Barnett, Melvin Pizarro, Scott Tebbetts and Justin Kennedy, pitchers, and Jared Janke, first baseman.
Midwest League  BELOIT SNAPPERS -- Activated Jeff D'Amico, pitcher, from the disabled list.
Mid-America League  ANDERSON LAWMEN -- Named Rick Atkinson assistant coach.
North Atlantic League  NEWARK BARGE BANDITS -- Signed Amed Rosado and Steve Haggard, pitchers; Davis Sayra and Rob Zachmann, catchers; Erick Eckstein, Blake Martensen, and Scott Bartucca, infielders; and Brian Carter, Kenny Key, Herb Hardcastle; and Tim Decker, outfielders.
North Central League  BRAINERD BEARS -- Signed Mark Stephens, pitcher.
MINNESOTA SKEETERS -- Named Domenic Ruffa general manager.
Northern League  ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Released Angel Cesar, shortstop.
THUNDER BAY WHISKEY JACKS -- Signed Francisco Cabrera, catcher.
Texas-Louisiana League  ALEXANDRIA ACES -- Signed Shawn Hillegas, pitcher.
Released Bobby Douglas and Shon Wilson, pitchers.
RIO GRANDE VALLEY WHITEWINGS -- Resigned Clark Viegas, infielder; Randy Morgan, center fielder; and Luis Garcia, pitcher.
Released Javier Pages, catcher, and Joey Martinez and John Connolly, infielders.
Basketball  United States Basketball League  CONNECTICUT SKYHAWKS -- Activated Jeff Stern, center, from injured reserve.
Placed Herb Blunt, center, on the taxi squad.
FLORIDA SHARKS -- Activated Travis Williams, forward, from the taxi squad.
Placed Larry Lewis, forward, on the taxi squad.
Waived Wes Mathews, guard.
JACKSON JACKALS -- Traded Fred Garner, guard, and a player to be named to the Memphis Fire for Joey Brown, guard, and Leonard White, center.
Signed Kelby Stuckey, forward, and placed him on the active roster.
Released Wesley Hardin, center, and Greg Lockhart, guard.
Placed John Taylor, guard, and Scott Adams, center, on the taxi squad.
Activated Keith Lee, center, from the injured reserve list.
MEMPHIS FIRE -- Signed Marcus Jones, Dozie Mbonu and Mike Boud, guards; Jim Keene, center; and Wendyl Daniel, forward.
MIAMI TROPICS -- Signed Malcolm Huckaby, guard.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Tuineau Allipate and Justin Goheen, linebackers, and Mike Saunders, running back.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Arthur Marshall and Eric Weir, wide receivers.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Kelvin Martin, wide receiver, to a one-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Agreed to terms with Rob Zamuner, left wing.
Signed Allan Egeland, forward.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Signed Calle Johansson, defenseman, to a five-year contract.


The School Violence Fight
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is on solid ground in suggesting that New York City's Police Department should assume responsibility for safety in the schools.
But he has come up with a uniquely clumsy and unpleasant plan for forcing the Board of Education and Chancellor Ramon Cortines to go along.
Mr.
Giuliani's impatience is understandable.
The 28 percent increase in school violence during the first six months of the school year and the misbehavior of the school guards employed by the board prove that school security should be administered by the police.


Pariahs of the Fungal World, Lichens Finally Get Some Respect
TO most who venture out of doors, lichens seem familiar, their lacy gray-green dressings everywhere adorning tree trunks and rock faces.
Yet in spite of their ubiquity, these delicate, often strikingly beautiful growths have remained largely mysterious to biologists, with even their evolutionary origins a well-kept secret until now.
Not one organism but two closely entwined, every lichen is a symbiotic pairing of a fungus with an alga.
In part because of their intimate association with algae, the lichen-forming fungi have been difficult to study and even harder for researchers to classify, leaving them to lump these species into a single group seen as not quite like the rest of the fungi.
Even the scientists who study lichens are relegated to a separate discipline, with scientific societies and meetings apart from the rest of the world's fungus biologists.


Storm And Stress Follow Mets Home
Rico Brogna shattered his bat in the batter's box.
Jeff Kent broke a helmet or two.
Dallas Green found himself on television, his expletive-laced response to a reporter's question suddenly a national example of what's wrong with the game.
Bret Saberhagen kicked himself after a decent starting performance.
Pete Harnisch kicked himself after a lousy start.
Bobby Bonilla talked about smashing lockers.
John Franco barely talked at all.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Country Home magazine will sponsor a dream house in the middle of a shopping mall.
IN the 1948 film comedy "Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House," the fictional adman of the title, while struggling to concoct a campaign for a client, mismanages the construction of his exurban castle.
If only he'd had the brainstorm that struck executives of Country Home magazine almost half a century later: the dream house is the campaign.
In an innovative program that links media advertising, retail promotion, consumer marketing and charitable fund-raising, Country Home is sponsoring the construction of a two-story, 1,500-square-foot log house inside the main rotunda of the Mall of America, the megamall in Bloomington, Minn.
The house is scheduled to be open for tours from Nov. 15 through Jan. 7, when almost five million shoppers are expected to visit the mall during and after the holiday shopping season.


Grand Union reports earnings for Year to Apr 1


Rules of Road on the Information Highway: Law Makes Harassing by Computer a Crime
With debate raging over whether to regulate the speech and behavior of cyberspace users, Connecticut today became one of the first states to enact a law that would make harassing someone by computer a crime.
The measure provoked little controversy in the Legislature, but steps into a worldwide dispute over whether the free-wheeling discussions that take place through on-line computer services and through the Internet's World Wide Web can be policed.


White, Good Buys Luca Stephan
White, Good &amp; Company in Lebanon, Pa., has acquired Luca Stephan Partners in New York and renamed it White Good Luca.
The terms were not disclosed.
Luca Stephan's billings are estimated at $3.5 million from clients like The Financial Times, owned by Pearson P.L.C., and Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, a unit of Bertelsmann A.G.
White, Good, with divisions specializing in public relations and design, has estimated billings of $9 million from clients like Wyeth-Ayerst International and the Wilmington Savings Fund Society.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARTHUR J. GALLAGHER &amp; CO., Itasca, Ill., which provides insurance brokerage and risk management services, acquired BHK&amp;R Inc.
Minn., a closely held insurance agency, for undisclosed terms.
RENT-WAY INC., Erie, Pa., which operates a chain of rent-to-own stores, agreed to buy McKenzie Leasing Corp., a privately owned rental chain, in a stock transaction valued about $18 million.
RUSSEL METALS INC., sold its White Pass Petroleum distribution business to Harbor Enterprises Inc.
Anchorage, a petroleum marketing company, for $37 million (Canadian), or about $27 million.
SHAWMUT NATIONAL CORP., Hartford, , a bank holding company, completed acquisition of 33-branch Northeast Federal Corp., Farmington, Conn., for about $182.4 million in stock.


New Technique May Point Out Coronary Risks
A cheap and painless set of tests developed in leading medical centers around the country promises to predict heart disease and stroke, and pinpoint the patients who really need aggressive therapy, far more accurately than do the traditional risk factors.
The new method includes a simple measurement of the difference in blood pressure between arms and ankles, and a noninvasive acoustic test that measures narrowing of the carotid arteries that carry blood to the brain.


Efforts Grow to Steer Elderly Retirees to H.M.O.'s
More than 50 employers across the country have joined in a program to push older retirees into Medicare-financed health maintenance organizations, which would relieve the companies of expensive obligations to provide health care coverage and transfer the costs to the Federal Government.
Although 9 elderly Americans in 10 still have traditional Medicare coverage, the companies see an opportunity to save money, profiting from the growing enthusiasm in Washington for getting more people over age 65 into health maintenance organizations.
While a shift to H.M.O.'s would mean the Government would be shouldering more of the cost, Republicans in Congress say the H.M.O.'s will slow the growth in Medicare spending.


Mesa Fails to Get Its Price And Drops Gas Field Sale
Mesa Inc. said yesterday that it had withdrawn its offer to sell its portion of the Hugoton natural gas field, considered the company's most prized asset, and that it might have to sell its holding in pieces to reduce its debt.
The company had hoped to sell the field for about $1 billion, but T. Boone Pickens, Mesa's chief executive, said the highest offer was $750 million.


Complaint Over a Strip Search
The mother of a Linden High School ninth grader said yesterday that her daughter was strip-searched by a hall monitor after another student reported $160 missing.


CHRONICLE
When it came to marking his 75th birthday, the jazz pianist DAVE BRUBECK chose to do it not in the intimacy of a jazz club, but before more than 2,000 friends and fans in concerts in the National Cathedral in Washington.
And that was just the beginning: celebrations will continue until Dec. 6, his actual birthday.
For these first two performances, Sunday evening and yesterday, Mr.
Brubeck presented the premiere of a short choral work he wrote, "This Is the Day," and an hourlong Mass, "To Hope! (A Celebration)," which he composed in 1981.
The concerts were performed by Mr.
Brubeck's quartet and by the Cathedral Choral Society, the Duke Ellington School of the Arts Show Choir and a full symphony orchestra.


New Data, New Wine, New Snags for Users
TWO new CD-ROM programs looked like fun.
The Beer Hunter, a $39.95 program from the Discovery Channel, and the Microsoft Wine Guide (also about $39.95) were perfect for a Sunday in spring.
The star of the Beer Hunter is Michael Jackson, a Briton who presents a guide to nearly 200 American brews in video, audio and text.
I started with that.
As instructed, I put the CD-ROM in, went to "run" in the "file" menu and then typed "d:setup.exe." The program informed me that one or more Visual Basic applications were running, and that I would have to close them.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about an agreement between Russia and Ukraine over the Black Sea Fleet misstated the ethnic background of President Leonid D. Kuchma of Ukraine.
It is Ukrainian, not Russian.


An Angry Man No Longer Young
When it comes to making art from rancorous complaints about the rotten state of a country's soul, the English have stood first among nations for at least 40 years. (The Russians, of course, owned the 19th century.) Think of the Sex Pistols, or the film maker Mike Leigh, or the playwright David Hare.
But the granddaddy of them all was John Osborne, whose disaffected characters began spitting vitriol over London's stages when "Look Back in Anger" opened at the Royal Court Theater in 1956.
That epochal portrait of an angry young man, yowling aimlessly amid a decaying society, was followed the next year by a more ambitious portrait of an angry middle-aged man, "The Entertainer," which has been revived at the Long Wharf Theater in a production that feels very angry indeed.


Reynolds to Expand Its Agency Roster
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company said yesterday that it planned to further expand its agency roster by seeking additional shops to handle coming project assignments.
"We are not unhappy or looking to replace anybody," Maura Ellis, a spokeswoman for Reynolds in Winston-Salem, N.C., said in confirming a report of the change this week in Adweek.
"We would just like to have a pool of people waiting in the wings if a project arises that we need some outside help on."


Days Inn Account Is Put in Review
Hospitality Franchise Systems said yesterday that it had placed in review the bulk of the account of its Days Inns of America hotel chain, ending a seven-year relationship with Bright House in Atlanta, formerly the Joey Reiman Agency.
Though the billings were not disclosed, The Delaney Report newsletter estimated them at $15 million.


Retiring Labor Chief Supports Deputy
Lane Kirkland, who has decided not to run for re-election as president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., moved today to undercut a strong dissident group's candidate by throwing his support to his longtime deputy, Thomas R. Donahue, 66, who had said last month that he would retire.
Mr.
Kirkland, 73, leader of the foundering American labor movement, confirmed publicly what he had been telling colleagues for several days: that he had changed his mind about running and would retire in August.


For $99, a Multimedia Starter Camera
HERE'S looking at you, kids.
The Connectix Quickcam, for Macintosh and Windows computers, is a gray-scale video camera that resembles an oversized eyeball with freckles and a tail.
The camera, smaller than a baseball, comes with a built-in microphone and pyramid stand.


People
*
Andrew S. Pakula was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director at the Interactive Marketing Agency, New York, a unit of Interactive Marketing Inc.
He was previously a senior partner and co-director for interactive media development at Bozell Worldwide, New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt. *
Jack Deitchman, senior partner and United States director for broadcast and programming at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group, has resigned to join Wordsworth Associates, Emerson, N.J., in the new position of managing partner.
No successor has been named at Ogilvy New York.


Players' Antitrust Appeal Rejected by Supreme Court
The United States Supreme Court yesterday closed the door on eight years of labor unrest in the National Football League by rejecting the appeals of 18 players who said they were wrongly forced to join the $200 million settlement of the antitrust lawsuit.
The decision was hailed by the N.F.L. and the players association.


Colombia Vows a Crackdown on Cartels
Buoyed by the capture of the principal leader of the Cali cocaine cartel, the Colombian Government plans an aggressive new campaign against drug trafficking organizations, senior Government officials here said.
"I don't want people to think we are on a holiday, that drug trafficking has ended" with the apprehension of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, President Ernesto Samper Pizano said in an interview over the weekend.
The arrest of Mr.
Rodriguez "is going to demoralize the other members of the cartel and facilitate their capture," Mr.
Samper added.
But he said the Government recognized that it needed to move aggressively to take advantage of that disarray.


A Sad Day for Racial Justice
The Supreme Court, a place where minorities once looked for racial justice, did what it could yesterday to halt the progress its own decisions once sparked.
In one case, a bare majority of five justices made it harder for Congress to help minorities get a share of government construction business.
In another case, the same five justices struck down a Kansas City school desegregation order that tried to use magnet city schools to draw white pupils from the suburbs where their families had fled.


Medicare Has No Use For Managed Care
To the Editor:
"Medicare, Jot This Down" (Business Day, May 31) is distressing not only because of factual inaccuracies, but also because it ignores information we provided to you.


People
*
Andrew S. Pakula was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director at the Interactive Marketing Agency, New York, a unit of Interactive Marketing Inc.
He was previously a senior partner and co-director for interactive media development at Bozell Worldwide, New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt. *
Jack Deitchman, senior partner and United States director for broadcast and programming at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group, has resigned to join Wordsworth Associates, Emerson, N.J., in the new position of managing partner.
No successor has been named at Ogilvy New York.


Floyd Returns To Scene Of Victory
Nine years have passed since he mastered this place, since he alone popped out of the great knot of golfers who were trying to win the United States Open that Sunday in 1986.
Nearly a decade has passed, his children now in college, his Miami mansion on Indian Creek Island in Biscayne Bay burned and rebuilt, his life changed.
Funny how the time goes . . . and doesn't go.
Raymond Floyd, standing in a misting rain on the practice putting green today at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, imperiously stroking putt after putt into the hole, hardly looks a day older than he did the last time he was here.


Sports of The Times; Shinnecock Should Be 'On Radio'
WHEN the 100th anniversary United States Open begins Thursday at Shinnecock Hills, he will tee off as the reigning Masters champion, but golf has always meant more to Ben Crenshaw than a green jacket.
Ask most touring pros to identify Horace Rawlins and the answer might be, "I think he made the cut at Quad Cities?" But ask Ben Crenshaw and he would say, "Horace Rawlins won the first Open in 1895 at Newport." He knows golf's history.
He knows why the great players of the past were great.
He has watched Ben Hogan hit balls.
And on a quiet afternoon during the 1981 Westchester Classic, he was sighted reading a book.


Senate Communications Bill Bogged Down on Long-Distance
The Senate, struggling today for the fourth consecutive day over a bill to overhaul the nation's communications laws, remained stuck in disputes about allowing the regional Bell telephone companies to offer long-distance service.
The majority leader, Bob Dole, who had hoped to hold a number of key votes on the bill today, delayed until Tuesday a vote on one of the most bitterly contested issues as rival industry lobbyists blanketed Capitol Hill in search of votes for their side.


Countrywide Credit Industries(CCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Gingrich Makes It Fully Clear He's Not in Presidential Race
In his last news conference here today -- the last in a four-day stretch of media "availabilities" as he barnstormed around New Hampshire -- Speaker Newt Gingrich said he recognized that the people of New Hampshire did not want him to run for President, but only because he had engineered the first Republican takeover of the House in 40 years and they felt he should not abandon the ramparts now.
The Speaker's long weekend of testing the waters seemed to indicate that he was too hot or the water too cold.
Either way, he made no mention of the numerous public surveys that show that most Americans have a negative opinion of him, that they are not completely sold on the specifics of his budget-cutting proposals and that he runs no better than a poor third.


Misadventures in Hot Dog Trade
The hot dog cart, parked outside state offices, did a booming business.
The reason, the authorities say, is that it was at the heart of a scheme that illegally distributed $40 million in unemployment benefits over 25 years.
Several people have already pleaded guilty in the case, including four former workers in the State Department of Labor who were sentenced yesterday to prison terms of 8 to 21 months.


Super Food Services Inc.(SFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 6


Bergamo Journal; How Tidings of Grief Came to the Little Sisters
For weeks, said Sister Bakita Sartore, the news came "drop by drop, like water torture," in late-night faxes from the capital of Zaire, passing along information received by radio from the hospital in the city of Kikwit, about as far away as anyone can imagine in this trim northern Italian city snuggled up to the Alps.
The grim picture that emerged was this: six Italian nurses were among the more than 150 victims of the Ebola virus epidemic in the central African nation of Zaire.


A Sister's Precious Legacy
Gail Flatow has a new memory of her sister, Alisa, the victim of a car bombing this spring in the Gaza Strip.
Yesterday, she met the man who has her sister's heart: 56-year-old Jacob Salinas.


White, Good Buys Luca Stephan
White, Good &amp; Company in Lebanon, Pa., has acquired Luca Stephan Partners in New York and renamed it White Good Luca.
The terms were not disclosed.
Luca Stephan's billings are estimated at $3.5 million from clients like The Financial Times, owned by Pearson P.L.C., and Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, a unit of Bertelsmann A.G.
White, Good, with divisions specializing in public relations and design, has estimated billings of $9 million from clients like Wyeth-Ayerst International and the Wilmington Savings Fund Society.


Burying the Dead in the Aftermath of the Colombia Bombing


U.S. and North Korea Agree On Deal for Nuclear Reactors
The United States and North Korea have reached an agreement on providing up-to-date nuclear reactors to North Korea, clearing a major hurdle toward the dismantling of that country's suspected atomic weapons program, officials said today.
"Our capitals have accepted the joint statement and authorized its release," Thomas C. Hubbard, the State Department official leading the negotiations said this morning in a telephone interview from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where the negotiations have been taking place.


Reynolds to Expand Its Agency Roster
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company said yesterday that it planned to further expand its agency roster by seeking additional shops to handle coming project assignments.
"We are not unhappy or looking to replace anybody," Maura Ellis, a spokeswoman for Reynolds in Winston-Salem, N.C., said in confirming a report of the change this week in Adweek.
"We would just like to have a pool of people waiting in the wings if a project arises that we need some outside help on."


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Earlier Animal Life Hinted
FOUR Texas geologists have reported evidence for animal life 400 million years earlier than previously assumed.
If the scientists' suspicions prove true, the discovery would be a major one, since it has been believed that animals first appeared long after the first many-celled plants.


5-4 Decision Buoys Some; For Others, It's a Setback
Some conservatives hailed the Supreme Court's ruling yesterday in Adarand v.
Pena as marking the end of an era in affirmative action -- or at least the beginning of the end.
"The era of racial preferences is finally coming to an end," said Clint Bolick, litigation director at the Institute for Justice, whose offices are in Washington.
"The Court said it had erred in creating one standard for government, another for everyone else. It's really the Court saying, 'Enough is enough.' "


Raucous Revelry in Bushwick Leads to Tensions With Police
The tradition has grown greatly in recent years.
After the Puerto Rican Day Parade in New York City, the dancing, singing and drinking don't end on Fifth Avenue; they just move to places like Bushwick in Brooklyn.
But along with the tradition of celebration, tension has taken hold, too.
In recent years, stores have been burglarized, police cars vandalized and blocks of working men and women have felt themselves held hostage by the young, often inebriated revelers.
On Sunday night, the tension became turmoil in Bushwick, a mostly poor black and Hispanic neighborhood, the night's music replaced by police megaphones, the sound of helicopters and screams.


A Big Economic Meeting, but Not Often a Success
When they gather in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Thursday, the leaders of the seven leading industrial democracies hope to lay the foundation for a "currency early warning system" intended to protect the fast-growing economies of Asia and Latin America from the kind of catastrophe Mexico suffered when its peso collapsed in December.
But in doing so, the Group of Seven may only be adding to the list of not-very-successful efforts it has made in the last 20 years of these annual economic summit meetings.


Stylish House Is New Victim in Haft Family Feud
Herbert H. Haft, whose drugstore-based business empire has been slipping from his grasp because of a bitter family feud, now finds that his former wife has foreclosed on his house here and is putting it up for auction.
Mr.
Haft failed to pay the $1.5 million balance on a note due on June 1, so the house, a mansion in the Italian Renaissance style, is scheduled for a foreclosure sale on July 5, according to a filing with the District of Columbia's Department of Finance and Revenue.


Corrections
Tables for Friday's trading in Treasury securities were omitted from Business Day on Saturday.
Readers wishing copies of the tables may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Maker Says Biotech Drug Slows Lou Gehrig's Disease
Cephalon Inc. said yesterday that its genetically engineered drug Myotrophin had demonstrated effectiveness in reducing the severity of symptoms and slowing the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the illness known as A.L.S. or Lou Gehrig's disease.
The neuromuscular disease causes rapid loss of control over muscles, and, usually, death within three to five years of diagnosis.
Until recently, the causes of A.L.S. have not been well understood, and there has been no effective treatment.
The illness affects more than 30,000 Americans, with about 5,000 new cases diagnosed each year.


Winfield on Disabled List
DAVE WINFIELD, the Cleveland Indians' designated hitter, was placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday with a strained left shoulder, retroactive to Sunday.
Winfield strained his shoulder Saturday in Milwaukee while running the bases.
He was hitting .189 in 23 games with a homer and three runs batted in. (AP)


Airport Rail Link Is Wrong Plan at Wrong Time
To the Editor:
Re "History Will Judge New York City by Its Airport Rail Link" (letter, June 8): Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is only partly right.
As it now stands, New York will be remembered for how it has squandered its transportation resources.


National Archives Remains Beset by Politics; Cuomo's Legacy
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Who Owns New York's History?" (editorial, June 2), commending the Hoyt-Rath bills before the State Legislature to replace New York's outdated gubernatorial records law.


Mexico Is Shown Paper Trail of Illicit Campaign Spending
Opposition political parties in Mexico have complained for decades about how the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party has spent on its election campaigns: lavishly, secretly and with ill-gotten government funds.
For the first time, the opposition has now offered what seems to be voluminous, documentary proof of its accusations.


A Tearful Christie Declines To Defend Olympic 100 Title
The Olympic champion LINFORD CHRISTIE, frustrated by criticism and his disputes with British track authorities, said last night in London that he would not defend his 100-meter title at next year's Atlanta Games.
The 34-year-old sprinter appeared tearful and broke down when explaining his decision on an Independent TV program.
"I'm definitely not going," he said.
"It's got to the stage now where athletics isn't my life." (AP)


No Progress in Special Talks With Japan
Trade lawyers from Japan and the United States, after explaining to each other today why they thought the other side was violating international trade rules in their bitter auto dispute, said they were going home to "ponder."
"Both sides will reflect further," said Andrew Stoler, the No. 2 official in the United States trade representative's Geneva office, as he emerged from more than seven hours of talks at World Trade Organization headquarters overlooking Lake Geneva.


Bosnian Serbs Playing Hostage Card
The Bosnian Serbs now view the United Nations peacekeepers they still hold hostage less as insurance against further NATO air strikes and more as political leverage against any strengthening of the peacekeepers' mandate, Western officials said today.
The Serbs will probably not release all the peacekeepers still being held until the United Nations Security Council formally spells out the new mandate for its Bosnian mission, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Chief of Washington Police Resigns Amid Budget Turmoil
The District of Columbia, engulfed in a severe financial crisis, suffered another setback today as Police Chief Fred Thomas announced that he was resigning after two and a half years for family and other personal reasons.
Chief Thomas, 51, who was appointed by the city's former Mayor, Sharon Pratt Kelly, declined to elaborate on his reasons for leaving.
But in explaining that he looked forward to his annual pension benefits of more than $50,000 and the chance to seek other opportunities in law enforcement, he made it clear that money was at least part of the reason.


Amcast Industrial Corp.(AIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Houston's 3-Pointers Are Putting It on Top
They made the most 3-pointers of any team during the regular season.
And during the finals, the Houston Rockets have used that weapon wisely to put themselves on the brink of another title.
With Robert Horry, Sam Cassell, Mario Elie and Kenny Smith leading the way, the Rockets' long-range attack has helped them build a 3-0 lead over the Orlando Magic in the four-of-seven-game championship series.
The inside force of Hakeem Olajuwon, coupled with Houston's perimeter shooting, has turned Orlando's defense inside out.
When the Magic plays Olajuwon one on one, he usually scores.
When it double-teams him, the Rockets usually find the unguarded man for an open 3-pointer.


Observer; Food for the Crocodile
The moderate Republicans have had it.
Moderation is out -- out, out, out -- in the new Republican Party.
Radicalism is in.
The moderates came to power in the Age of Eisenhower, flourished under Nixon and stopped Reagan from being the worst of all possible Reagans.
The radicals have detested them for years.


Nets May Expose Higgins to Draft
The Nets are expected to expose the shooting guard Sean Higgins to the expansion draft, which will take place June 24.
Higgins, who never fit into the Nets' plans last season, was in the first year of a two-year deal.
Barring a trade, Rex Walters, their first-round draft choice in 1993, could also be placed on the expansion list, which is due today at 3 P.M.


Creating a Most Youthful Following
Dance companies may be struggling to make ends meet these days, but one activity has not flagged.
New York City arts institutions have continued to offer special education projects for schoolchildren, and judging by two recent programs, those projects look like a perfect way to start developing audiences young.
Four members of the Nikolais-Louis Dance Company romped through a smart, informative examination of Stravinsky and his use of melody in a work produced by Carnegie Hall Children's Concerts late last month, with choreography by Murray Louis.
On Friday morning, the New York City Ballet performed "Swan Lake" and "The Firebird" at the New York State Theater, the culminating event of the company's Partners in Dance project.


30-Year Struggle for Art on TV
The most striking thing about Jac Venza is the way he talks.
As the creator of "Great Performances" and many descendants, and the director of cultural programming for Channel 13, he is probably the person most responsible for the performing arts' being on American television.
Still, the first thing acquaintances mention is the way he talks.
"Like a Mobius strip," said his friend Virginia Kassel, a producer.


O'Grady, at a Clinton Lunch, Prefers to Skip the Salad
Basher-52 had a hero's lunch at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue today, but when he sat down to celebrate with President Clinton over macadamia-crusted lamb chops and shiitake mushrooms, he begged just one indulgence of his Commander in Chief.
"Excuse me, Mr. President, if I don't eat my salad," said Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady, the Air Force pilot who subsisted for six days in the Bosnian hills on grass and ants after his F-16 jet fighter was downed by a Serbian missile.


In Montclair, Hope and Contradiction Are Found to Be Neighbors
THE two men standing in front of the Grove Street luncheonette had nowhere better to go while the rain held up.
"Talk to me," said the one who gave his name as Bill.
"I'll talk about anything." His breath smelled of alcohol.
"You mean you'll talk about nothing," said the other man, Paul Martin, who was in his mid-30's, maybe 10 years younger than his buddy.


Radar Captures Image Of Cigar-Shape Asteroid
PROBING the heavens with a big radar system, scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., have captured the image of the asteroid Geographos as it recently sped close to Earth.
It turns out to be a cigar-shaped rock about three miles long, the most elongated object known in the solar system.
Asteroids are usually seen only as distant points of light, even in powerful telescopes.


New Entrant in the Soda Wars: Royal Crown Draft Premium
It says "draft" on the label, it has the golden color of beer and it is in beer-like bottles, but it tastes like a cola.
It is a new entrant in the soda wars, Royal Crown Draft Premium Cola.
The Royal Crown Company, a subsidiary of the Triarc Companies, confirmed yesterday that it would be introducing its new cola next week in New York and Los Angeles.
The cola is amber-colored, served in 12-ounce glass long-necked bottles, and made with pure cane sugar, not corn syrup.
The new brand was reported yesterday in Beverage Digest, an industry newsletter.


Reynolds to Expand Its Agency Roster
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company said yesterday that it planned to further expand its agency roster by seeking additional shops to handle coming project assignments.
"We are not unhappy or looking to replace anybody," Maura Ellis, a spokeswoman for Reynolds in Winston-Salem, N.C., said in confirming a report of the change this week in Adweek.
"We would just like to have a pool of people waiting in the wings if a project arises that we need some outside help on."


BUSINESS DIGEST
An Abundance of Fees In Lotus Takeover  I.B.M.'s takeover of Lotus Development is providing rich pickings for Wall Street investment bankers and lawyers, who should collect about $35 million in fees.
The news lifted shares of Cephalon and Chiron, which co-developed the drug.  [ D2. ] Labor Chief to Retire  Lane Kirkland, president of the AFL-CIO, said he would retire in August.
Royal Crown Draft Premium Cola, which has the amber color of beer, will come in beer-like 12-ounce glass long-necked bottles and is made with pure cane sugar, not corn syrup.
The company said the introduction would cost about $7 million and initial advertising would cost $3 million.
The product's initial objective is 1.5 share points of the cola market, or about 50 million cases.  [ D4. ] Steering Retirees Toward H.M.O.'s  More than 50 employers across the country have joined in a program to push older retirees into Medicare-financed health maintenance organizations.  [ D2. ] Financial Fears About Japan  The short-term question confronting Tokyo as the Japanese stock market falls is whether the Government will risk public anger and bail out the country's troubled banks.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D10. ] House to Be Built in Mall  Country Home magazine is sponsoring the construction of a two-story, 1,500-square-foot log house inside the main rotunda of the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minn.
The three-bedroom house will be filled with products from the magazine's advertisers, and the project will be the centerpiece of a holiday issue in the magazine in 1996.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D9. ]


Five Minutes to Plead for Bases
It has come down to five minutes.
That's how much time each speaker from New Jersey's Congressional delegation will get today to plead for state military bases, including the Lakehurst Naval Air Warfare Center.
Senators Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg and Representatives Frank Pallone Jr., Robert Menendez, H. James Saxton, Chris Smith and Richard Zimmer are all signed up to speak at the final public hearing of the base closing commission.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 20


NBC Group Is Set to Bid For the Assets of Multimedia
NBC has formed a partnership with two other communications companies, Tele-Communications Inc. and Media General Inc., to bid for the assets of Multimedia Inc., which include cable television systems, newspapers, television stations, and syndicated talk shows.
An executive familiar with the plan who declined to be identified said yesterday that the three companies had decided to make the joint bid because each had a separate interest in the assets.
NBC, a unit of the General Electric Corporation, wants to acquire Multimedia's five television stations, which include four stations affiliated with NBC in Cleveland, St.
Louis, Cincinnati, and Knoxville, Tenn., as well as the company's roster of talk shows, headed by "Donahue," "Sally Jessy Raphael," "Jerry Springer," and "Rush Limbaugh."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  U.S.
AND NORTH KOREA REACH PACT  The United States and North Korea reached an agreement covering the provision of up-to-date nuclear reactors to North Korea, clearing a major hurdle toward the dismantling of Pyongyang's suspected atomic weapons program.
A1


Democrats Sue Over I.R.S. Letter
Democrats went to court yesterday to force a letter from the Internal Revenue Service out into the open.
The administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has declined to release the letter, which deals with $769 million diverted from the state pension system in 1992.
The administration has until tomorrow to change its mind, or tell the judge why it does not want to make the letter public.


National Archives Remains Beset by Politics
To the Editor:
As John Carlin takes over the National Archives, the agency's point of vulnerability bears watching.
In a 1994 dispute, a senior manager argued that no information could be released from White House documents restricted by Ronald Reagan unless the former President lifted restrictions, a stance the Inspector General publicly found contrary to law.


JUSTICES, 5 TO 4, CAST DOUBTS ON U.S. PROGRAMS THAT GIVE PREFERENCES BASED ON RACE
In a decision likely to fuel rather than resolve the debate over affirmative action, the Supreme Court today cast doubt on the constitutionality of Federal programs that award benefits on the basis of race.
Federal programs that classify people by race, even for an ostensibly benign purpose such as expanding opportunities for members of minorities, are presumably unconstitutional, the Court said in a 5-to-4 opinion.
Writing for the majority, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said such programs must be subject to the most searching judicial inquiry and can survive only if they are "narrowly tailored" to accomplish a "compelling governmental interest."


A Determined Muster Molds His Greatest Work on Clay
Pardon Thomas Muster, the new French Open champion, for making the acquisition of his latest and greatest clay-court title sound harder than it perhaps was.
Since Muster can't help delivering every shot with last-gasp effort, his straight-set termination of Michael Chang had all the audio impact of an epic five setter.
But for Muster, whose career was stunted six years ago when he was hit by a drunken driver in a Miami parking lot, the effort of reaching and winning his first Grand Slam tournament was indeed epic.


Far Right's Gains in Elections Are Raising Alarms in France
A strong showing by candidates of the far-right National Front party in French municipal elections on Sunday prompted leaders of both the governing conservative coalition and the opposition Socialist Party to call on voters to thwart the far right in the final vote next Sunday.
The far-right movement, which draws support from alienated voters in cities with high concentrations of immigrants from North Africa, came in first on Sunday in eight big cities, including Nice, Toulon, Marignane, and the Marseilles industrial suburb of Vitrolles in southern France and Noyon and Dreux in the central part of the country.


Still a Rocket, and Finally a Shooter
He is a dead ringer for the Fresh Prince of Bel-Air or Scottie Pippen, depending on the day.
Robert Horry strolls the Galleria here, signs an autograph and hears, "Wait a minute, I thought you were that actor, Will Smith." The Orlando Magic does not know what to make of him, either.
He has been automatic from 25 feet out, and it has Horace Grant's goggles fogged up.
If it is not Horry recording a record seven steals in Game 2 of this championship series between the Magic and the Houston Rockets, it is Horry airmailing a 3-pointer with 14 seconds left to sew up a taut Game 3.
He has a few mostvaluable player votes coming, to which he replied today: "Shoot, I wish. But you can't pick a screw-up like me."


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc.(HOV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Griffin Bacal Lays Off 10 Workers
Griffin Bacal in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, said yesterday that it had laid off 10 of its 225 employees, from various areas of the agency, as part of a coming reorganization.
Paul Kurnit, president of Griffin Bacal, said, "We're refocusing our business as part of a restructuring," adding that details were scheduled to be disclosed Thursday.


Pushed to Brink, Flyers Tie Fate to Lindros
Sooner or later, on his road to superstar status, Eric Lindros was destined to face a major test under pressure.
Coach Terry Murray of the Philadelphia Flyers is making sure that the test comes Tuesday night.
With the team facing elimination from the Stanley Cup playoffs in Game 6 against the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Murray said today that he would reunite the Legion of Doom line, which is centered by his young captain.


When Law Graduates Don't Fancy Law
To the Editor:
I was amused and disheartened by "Harvard Lawyers Who Find They Are in the Wrong Line" (National Edition, June 10), which reports that a recent Harvard Law School graduate has produced a documentary capturing a sense of disillusionment among her classmates about the legal profession.


The Pious Nymphomaniac of Lubbock, Tex.
"Welcome to my hometown -- absolutely nowhere," Jo Ellen Rae Harvey Fitts (played by Lisbeth Bartlett) says of Lubbock, Tex., at the beginning of Jo Carol Pierce's "Bad Girls Upset by the Truth," which runs through next Sunday at the Plays and Players Theater here.
Lubbock may be a dead-end town, but a generation of singers, songwriters, visual artists, actors and playwrights (most of them dabbling as all of the above) has proved that nowhere can be just as inspiring as somewhere.
Of this group of artists, many of them born during World War II, Ms.
Pierce is the shyest about performing.
She has never released a full album of her songs, though 19 of her fellow Texans recorded a tribute to her music called "Across the Great Divide" (Dejadisc).
Now, under the direction of Ben Levit, a group of Philadelphia actors and actresses has turned what was once Ms.
Pierce's one-woman show into a music-theater piece about the making and breaking of a pious nymphomaniac who regards her 157 sexual encounters as a search for Jesus.


People
*
Andrew S. Pakula was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director at the Interactive Marketing Agency, New York, a unit of Interactive Marketing Inc.
He was previously a senior partner and co-director for interactive media development at Bozell Worldwide, New York, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt. *
Jack Deitchman, senior partner and United States director for broadcast and programming at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group, has resigned to join Wordsworth Associates, Emerson, N.J., in the new position of managing partner.
No successor has been named at Ogilvy New York.


Morrison Is Back in the Picture (Or Is He?)
Tommy Morrison is tired. His manager is eager. Mike Tyson's people are wary.
Morrison's manager, Bill Cayton, wants Tyson soon -- especially since Morrison regained his credibility with a crushing technical knockout of Razor Ruddock last Saturday night.
Ruddock was the last man Tyson fought, four years ago.
Although Tyson captured a decision, Ruddock gave him trouble.


Connecticut Battles On-Line Harassment
With debate raging over whether to regulate the speech and behavior of cyberspace users, Connecticut today became one of the first states to enact a law that would make harassing someone by computer a crime.


Primordial Helium, Created in Big Bang, Detected at Long Last
Looking deep into time, out in the vast emptiness between distant galaxies, astronomers have made the first definitive detection of the helium created in profusion in the first two minutes after the Big Bang, the explosive birth of the universe as understood by most scientists.
This is the long-sought primordial helium, one of the two original chemical elements (the even more abundant hydrogen being the other) from which all stars and galaxies were being formed in that early epoch of cosmic evolution, some 10 billion years ago.


Fatal Arson Case Is Solved, a Half-Century Later
A chance encounter between a vacationing New York City fire marshal and two fellow airline passengers helped solve a 43-year-old arson case that resulted in a firefighter's death, Fire Commissioner Howard Safir said yesterday.
The cause of a fire in a barn in the Bayside section of Queens on New Year's Eve 1952 was a mystery until the two passengers aboard a flight to South Carolina in March struck up a conversation with Fire Marshal Robert LaSalle.
When he told them his occupation, they recalled how as children they had seen a teen-ager set fire to the barn.


Iroquois Pipeline Checked for Safety


Bowne &amp; Co. (BNE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


N.B.A. Talks Resume as Lockout Looms
With the threat of a lockout looming, negotiations between the National Basketball Association and the players association are continuing in the hope of making progress before the completion of the championship series.
According to several league officials, every N.B.A. team received written notification last week that a lockout was likely if a collective bargaining agreement was not reached by the end of finals.


Albert Fenn, Photographer, 82
Albert Fenn, a former photographer for Life magazine, died on June 4 in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 82.
Mr.
Fenn worked for Life from 1941 to 1962, beginning as a contract photographer and joining the staff in 1946.
He specialized in scientific and medical subjects, although he also covered all types of news events.
Among his major assignments were the American polar expeditions in the 1950's and the early stages of the space flight program.


What Lotus Got: Cash and Freedom
In the end, I.B.M. landed the Lotus Development Corporation by offering a little more money and a surprising measure of independence to the Lotus management team.
Is the cost too high on both counts?
The International Business Machines Corporation's promise of freedom to the Lotus management is regarded as a deft early move by Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s chairman, to reassure the Lotus staff, keeping the company's intellectual assets intact.


Agra Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


On My Mind; The Possible Dream
Here is a dream for Americans, worthy of their country and what they would like it to be.
The dream is that the U.S. could bring about the end of a system of torture that has crippled 100 million people now living upon this earth and every year takes at least two million more into an existence of suffering, deprivation and disease.


Knight-Ridder To Go on Line With Times
The full text of The New York Times will be available on the day of publication on two on-line services of Knight-Ridder Inc. under an agreement announced yesterday.
The New York Times Information Services Group and Knight Ridder Information Inc. said the services, Dialog and Datastar, would begin offering the text in early 1996 in North America.
Customers will have access to a 90-day archive of The Times, with coverage back to 1980 available in abstract format.


It's Great to Be in Boston


Four-Year Drug Ban Upheld
An International Amateur Athletic Federation arbitration panel yesterday in Monte Carlo, Monaco, upheld a four-year ban imposed on the Dutch discus thrower ERIC DE BRUIN, who tested positive for testosterone and a related drug in August 1993. (AP)


Keeping City Workers
To the Editor:
Your suggestion that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani "expend more political capital on demanding sacrifice from the city's work force in its own health care 'entitlements' " rings with elitism (editorial, June 6).
Board of Education employees survive on salaries of between $30,000 and $60,000 a year.
These workers, especially those with doctorates, could be earning more in the private sector.


Jewelry Is Reported Stolen at Trade Show
Gold and diamond jewelry worth about $2 million was reported stolen yesterday from the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, the police said.
The jewelry belonged to the Ninacci Diamond Jewel Company of Los Angeles, whose co-owner, Pirooz Nourizad, reported the theft at 10:30 A.M.


Big East Collects Six Spots
Six players from the Big East, led by Villanova's KERRY KITTLES and Georgetown's ALLEN IVERSON, were among the 12 players named yesterday to the United States team for the World University Games Aug 12-18 in Gainesville, Fla.
Other Big East players are RAY ALLEN of Connecticut, AUSTIN CROSHERE of Providence and OTHELLA HARRINGTON and JEROME WILLIAMS of Georgetown.
Also chosen are CHARLES O'BANNON of national champion U.C.L.A., JEROD HAASE of Kansas, LORENZEN WRIGHT of Memphis State, CHUCKY ADAMS of South Florida, TIM DUNCAN of Wake Forest and BRIAN EVANS of Indiana.


National Semiconductor Corp.(NSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday with an article describing uses of Lotus Notes software misspelled the surname of a doctor who uses it to locate kidney transplant donors.
He is Dr.
Mark Aeder, not Aeden.


Landlords Prospect for Olympic Gold
Some homeowners and landlords in the Atlanta area are seeing dollar signs as the 1996 Summer Olympics approach.
They envision renting out bedrooms for up to $1,000 a night and entire homes for $10,000 or more a week.
Olympics officials say reports of tight housing for the Games are more wishful avarice than reality, but that has not dampened concern among local and Olympics officials that there may be price gouging.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about a Friday night performance of "Home Game," a computerized work, at the Kitchen, misidentified its composer.
He is Neil B. Rolnick; Todd Hivnor is the software director who worked with him.


Bombing Suspect's Brother Noted Building's Vulnerability in 1988, Court Papers Say
An informer has told Federal investigators that James D. Nichols, the brother of one of the suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing, said six years ago that the Federal Building there could be leveled by a "megabomb," documents unsealed in Federal District Court in Detroit yesterday say.
The discussion took place on Dec. 22 or 23, 1988, after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, according to an affidavit by an agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Arthur Radford Baker.
The affidavit was filed in support of search warrants on Mr.
Nichols's farm in Decker, Mich., on April 21 and 28.


Authur Kropp, 37; Headed a Civil Liberties Group
Arthur J. Kropp, the president of the 300,000-member civil liberties organization People for the American Way, died yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 37.
The cause was AIDS, said Matthew Freeman, a spokesman for People for the American Way.


Virtuous Bugs and Sinning Dolphins
THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY  New Views of the Nature of Life
By Natalie Angier
278 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.
Creatures that appear loathsome to us (like cockroaches, scorpions and dung beetles) may possess fascinating, even elegant traits.
Yet creatures that demand our instant affection (like dolphins and swallows) may hide types of behavior that would repel us if we recognized them.
Such paradoxes of nature (or rather of the way humans interact with nature) provide both the title and one of the main themes for Natalie Angier's latest book.


Cordiant Planning To Take a Charge
Shareholders at the annual meeting of Cordiant P.L.C. in London were told yesterday that the agency company would take a charge of about $40 million and lay off 470 employees, or about 4 percent of its staff, as it tries to regain its footing after the ouster of Maurice Saatchi, its former chairman, and the subsequent loss of several large accounts.
The charges are expected to wipe out profits in the first half of 1995, though Cordiant should show a profit for the full year despite lower revenue, said Charles Scott, Cordiant's acting chairman and chief executive.
Cordiant had pretax profit of $24 million in the first half of 1994 and $27 million in the second half.


IN PERFORMANCE:
CABARET  Penetrating the Sensibilities Of Hart and Hammerstein  Steve Ross Oak Room at the Algonquin
It has often been pointed out that the lyrics of Lorenz Hart and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, Richard Rodgers's two main collaborators, represent almost opposite sensibilities.
Not so opposite, however, that songs by both men can't coexist happily on the same program.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Scott Kamieniecki, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Placed Steve Frey, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Bill Risley, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


A Tale of 2 Mexican Brothers, Hinting at Dark Deeds in a Murky System
When Mario Ruiz Massieu resigned last fall as Mexico's Deputy Attorney General and assailed the long-governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, most Mexicans assumed they were watching one more skirmish in the continuing struggle for their country's political soul.
Mr.
Ruiz Massieu's elder brother, Jose Francisco, a rising star among reform-minded leaders of the party, had been assassinated two months earlier outside a Mexico City hotel.
With party leaders blocking his efforts to find out who ordered the killing, Mario Ruiz Massieu raged, there was no more point in his fighting for change from within the system.


Is This Any Good Way to Elect a President?; Perot Is Here to Stay
To the Editor:
"Ross Perot, Yet Again" (editorial, June 6) states that the United We Stand America conference is not about issues but about Mr.
Perot.
It also suggests that political leaders are somehow catering to him by consenting to address thousands of United We Stand America members at the Dallas convention center.
It is a super-cynical editorial that lowers the stature of your newspaper.


Illegal Migrants' Road West Crosses Old East Bloc
On a recent Saturday morning, some three score residents of this picturesque mountain community assembled at the ski jump for a trip to the United States, first by bus to Germany, then on Lufthansa across the Atlantic.
They included a grandmother and her 3-year-old grandchild, a mother and her three children, several unemployed women in their 20's, and a few men in their 70's.
Each had paid at least $6,000.


North Korea To Get Plants From Rival
A multinational consortium led by the United States decided officially today to provide North Korea with two South Korean nuclear reactors and moved toward selecting South Korea's state-controlled electric utility as the prime contractor.
The Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization acted immediately after the United States and North Korea issued a joint statement that ended the latest mini-crisis over the Communist nation's nuclear weapons aspirations.


N.A.A.C.P. Official Is Leaving
The political director of the state National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is stepping down after five years.
The director, Walter Fields, plans to focus on partisan politics, completing his doctorate degree in political science and expanding his business, Fields Communications, a public affairs and government relations firm.


Behind Closed Doors, 37 'Leaders' Weigh In
On the surface, at least, it seemed to make sense: the City Council struggled to come to an agreement with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on a painful new city budget.
So for the last week or so, the Council's leadership has gathered in a closed room each day to discuss a host of options.
But the leadership meetings have not exactly been intimate discussions.
Indeed, three-quarters of the Council -- 37 of its 51 members -- have been named to head various committees and task forces and are therefore considered to be leadership.
The only ones not included were Council members considered to be out of favor with Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, and six of the Council's seven Republicans.


Eating Well
Asked how they liked the lunch they were eating at the Agriculture Department, children from the Cresthaven Elementary School in Silver Spring, Md., responded with a chorus of well-behaved "goods" and "greats."
But asked why they were leaving the chicken or the chickpeas and rice or the vegetable lasagna on their plates, the children sheepishly admitted they didn't like those dishes, which had been created by some of Washington's finest chefs.


John H. Finley Jr., 91, Classicist At Harvard for 43 Years, Is Dead
John H. Finley Jr., the classicist who brought ancient Greece alive and taught a generation of Harvard men how to live, died on Sunday at a Exeter Health Care Center in Exeter, N.H.
He was 91 and a resident of Tamworth, N.H.
There were close to 300 years of Harvard before he came along, and the university has continued for more than a decade since he left.
But almost from the moment he joined the faculty in 1933 until 1,000 students, including the university president, gave him two standing ovations at his final lecture in 1976, John H. Finley Jr. was the embodiment of Harvard.


Nursing Homes Look Askance at G.O.P. Plan to Cut Medicaid
The ideal of a balanced Federal budget ran into the fears of the American nursing home industry today.
To some audiences, the major cuts in Medicaid planned by the Republicans -- $175 billion to $187 billion taken from projected spending over seven years -- seems safe because the poor, for whom the program was established, are politically weak.
But by now, two-thirds of Medicaid's spending, which is estimated at $89.2 billion this year, goes to help the elderly and the disabled.
Nursing homes get half their revenue from it.


CUNY Seeks to Bar Remedial Courses Beyond First Year
The City University of New York is weighing a plan under which students would not be admitted to a four-year college unless the university believed they could complete any needed remedial work within their freshman year.
The move cuts to the heart of the 213,000-student university's mission of educating thousands of poor and immigrant students for whom English is a second language.
Under the open-enrollment policy enacted 25 years ago, the university must accept any New York City high school graduate, though it does not guarantee admission to a specific campus.


Irwin Schnurmacher, Philanthropist, 83
Irwin Schnurmacher, a philanthropist and real estate executive, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 83 and lived in Woodmere, L.I.
Through the Irwin and Sylvia Schnurmacher Foundation, he helped many organizations, including the Anti-Defamation League; the United Jewish Appeal Federation; St.
John's Episcopal Hospital, South Shore Division; Beth Israel Medical Center, and the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, of which he was a board member for more than 40 years.


Kansas City Uncertain on Its Schools' Fate
In a pockmarked neighborhood a few miles and a world away from the spiffy Country Club Plaza shopping district, a 10-year-old boy, Joseph Gause, read the troubled expression on his mother's face.
Penney Gause told her son she was upset about the ruling that the United States Supreme Court handed down on Monday.
She said the ruling, that Federal courts had improperly ordered the State of Missouri to finance improvements in the Kansas City schools and pay for raises for its teachers, would mean less money for inner-city schools like Joseph's.


Tackling New York City's Deficit
This has been a year of budget combat at all levels of government, so it is startling to see Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the City Council actually reaching agreement on New York City's fiscal crisis.
The accord that was negotiated by these two longtime antagonists looks as if it will blunt the most severe cuts in municipal services that the Mayor warned might be necessary.
But it also appears to resort to some traditional budget gimmicks while overlooking alternative savings that should have been considered.
Mr.
Giuliani deserves credit for recognizing the need for bold steps to close the city's $3 billion deficit.
But the solutions he offered originally involved an unnecessarily harsh dose of cutbacks in services, especially for the poor, disabled and young.
The Council has wisely resisted many of the cuts as dangerous and likely to lead to increased expenses down the road.


Adolph Lowe, 102, Economist Who Fled Hitler
Adolph Lowe, an adviser to the Weimar Government in Germany in the 1920's and a professor of political economy at the New School for Social Research for nearly four decades, died in Wolfenbuttel, Germany, on June 3.
He was 102.
One of a remarkable generation of Jewish intellectuals who immigrated to the United States in the 1930's and early 1940's, Professor Lowe was the last surviving member of the University in Exile, created in 1933 by the founders of the New School and the New York State Legislature expressly to snatch scholars like Professor Lowe from the jaws of fascism.


President and Other Dignitaries Eulogize Aspin as Great Patriot
President Clinton eulogized former Defense Secretary Les Aspin today as "a true and remarkable patriot who made a dramatic difference to the United States and to the people who live here."
Mr.
Aspin, who died on May 21 at the age of 56, joined the Clinton Administration at its outset after a 22-year career on Capitol Hill, the last seven years as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.
Acclaimed as the outstanding defense intellectual of his generation, he set out to reshape American military policies and capabilities for the post-cold-war era.


Texas Governor Succeeds, Without the Flash
Shortly after he became the 46th Governor of Texas earlier this year, George W. Bush ran into the state's chief fiscal officer, John Sharp.
How should the Governor address him, Mr.
Bush asked politely: Mr.
Sharp or Mr.
Comptroller?
What did Mr.
Bush's predecessor, Ann W. Richards, call him?
"She called me Darlin'," Mr. Sharp informed the new Governor.


N.B.A. Labor Talks Continue
Negotiations between owners and players continued today as the National Basketball Association tried to avoid a lockout.
Commissioner David Stern and league officials met with Simon Gourdine, the head of the players' association, and other player representatives in New York.
The league and the players operated with a no-strike, no-lockout agreement this season, but it expires when the championship series ends.
The threatened summer lockout would not affect the college draft on June 28 or the expansion draft on June 24.
However, all other business, including trades, free-agent signings, contract extension and summer leagues would shut down.


Martinez and the Indians Keep Rolling
Indians 11, Orioles 0
Dennis Martinez kept his record perfect, throwing his second shutout in three starts, and Jim Thome and Albert Belle homered last night as the Cleveland Indians routed the visiting Baltimore Orioles, 11-0.


Foreign Affairs; Blurring Lines in Belfast
There is an old joke here about a tourist who is walking in a no man's land between Protestant and Catholic neighborhoods when he is suddenly grabbed by a masked man who asks him: "Are you a Protestant or a Catholic?" The tourist answers: "I'm a Jew." And the masked man asks him: "Well, are you a Protestant Jew or a Catholic Jew?"
The joke was meant to underscore just how deeply Protestants and Catholics had divided their world into two.
No matter who you were, you had to be on one side of the line or the other.


Weak Economic Data Send Treasury Prices Soaring
Prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday as retail sales fell short of expectations and the Consumer Price Index showed only a slight rise, adding fresh evidence of an economic slowdown and subdued inflation.
The gains caused interest rates to drop back to week-ago levels as a general optimism among traders about the prospects that the Federal Reserve would ease interest rates added to gains in bond prices throughout the day.


Norman Isn't Bothered by the One That Got Away
Here he comes now, the biggest shark to hit Long Island since the giant that was reeled in off Montauk nine summers ago.
He is moving swiftly through the door, the way he always moves, consuming distance, gliding powerfully toward the dais.
Greg Norman, the Great White Shark of golf, knows how to make an entrance.
That much hasn't changed.
But he is different as he returns to the site of the 1986 United States Open, one of the big ones that got away from him.
He exudes something that can only be called a confident relaxation.
He has chosen, on this dreary, rainy day at Shinnecock Hills, to affect a sunny demeanor.
He has also opted for selective amnesia.


Anthony Could Go in the Expansion Draft
The Knicks are expected to leave Greg Anthony, Doug Christie and Herb Williams unprotected when they submit their expansion draft list on Wednesday.
The National Basketball Association expansion draft will take place June 24, giving the Toronto Raptors and Vancouver Grizzlies a chance to pick veteran players.
The other 27 N.B.A. teams are allowed to protect eight players from being selected.
No team can lose more than one player.


'Big Problem' With Officers And Alcohol, Bratton Says
In the weeks since dozens of New York City police officers cavorted drunkenly in Washington, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has focused on the problem of finding the guilty parties and trying to break down the "blue wall of silence."
Yesterday, he said the Washington melee and a weekend brawl by off-duty New York officers in Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., pointed to perhaps a deeper problem: police officers drinking too much.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Weak Retail Sales Revive Hope of Rate Cut
Retail sales rose just two-tenths of 1 percent in May and consumer prices climbed three-tenths, meaning that, excluding inflation, retail sales actually eased slightly, a sign that the economy could stall.
That renewed optimism that the Fed would cut interest rates.


France Planning Nuclear Tests Despite Opposition, Chirac Says
President Jacques Chirac of France, defying international opposition to resumption of French nuclear testing in the South Pacific, said tonight that France would resume underground weapons tests in September but would stop them once and for all by the end of May 1996.
Mr.
Chirac's predecessor, Francois Mitterrand, declared a moratorium on nuclear tests in April 1992.


Newark Cabdrivers Strike
About 1,500 Newark taxi drivers went on strike yesterday, demanding that the state take action to curb insurance rates, which they said threatened to chase them out of business.
At Newark International Airport, one of the biggest cab stops around, Port Authority officials reported only minor disruptions.


INSIDE
N.H.L.
PLAYOFFS  The Devils won the Eastern Conference title, 4-2 and advanced to the Stanley Cup finals against Detroit.
Game 1 is on Saturday.
Page B11.
Shying from a Trade Dispute
The head of the World Trade Organization wants to avoid having to rule on a trade dispute between the United States and Japan.
Page D1.
Senate Backs TV Chip
A nervous Senate supports a provision to require makers of television sets to include a computer chip to block violent programs.
Page B6.


CHRONICLE
Lead a tour, make a friend.
ARTHUR MARKS has been guiding walking tours around the city for 30 years, and the strangers who follow him through the streets of Manhattan and Brooklyn often become his friends.
So, when Mr.
Marks gives himself a party on June 21 for his 60th birthday (which is actually Sunday), a lot of people he's met over the years on his tours will be guests.


Anti-Corruption Reporter Shot and Wounded in Argentina
A prominent Argentine journalist, who had reported extensively on Government corruption, was shot in the back as he left his home for work on Monday in what free speech advocates here say is the latest attempt to silence the press through threats and attacks against journalists.
The journalist, Guillermo Cherashny, who is a political reporter for a morning radio program and a weekly newspaper, was in stable condition today after an operation to stop internal bleeding caused by two gunshot wounds, a spokesman for Rivadavia Hospital said.


Mantle Can Get Us to Sign Organ Donor Cards
To the Editor:
Five years ago my 23-year-old sister was diagnosed with a rare and untreatable liver disease.
Since that time, she has been admitted to Mount Sinai Hospital in New York 24 times with an average hospital stay of two weeks.
Her only apparent chance of survival is a liver transplant.


Stocks Rally on Expectations of Interest Rate Cut by the Fed
A crop of conflicting economic data hit the financial markets yesterday, but stocks and especially bonds rallied, as traders interpreted the reports to mean the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates, perhaps as early as next month.
The stock market has now recovered nearly all of last week's losses.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 38.05 points yesterday, to 4,484.51, not far from the 4,485.20 record set on June 6.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index gained 5.17 points, to a record 536.05, and the Nasdaq composite index advanced 6.25 points to 894.23, also a record.


Vice President Tries the Role of Publicist
In a bid to insure that the major television networks would carry President Clinton's address on the budget live tonight, the White House enlisted a high-powered lobbyist: Vice President Al Gore.
And Mr.
Gore went beyond calling news executives here this morning: he went straight to the top, to network officials in New York.


A Lonely Soul And a Beloved Poet
Mario Ruoppolo (Massimo Troisi) is the gentlest of men, a lonely soul resigned to the monotony of life on a quiet Italian island.
All that changes with the arrival of Pablo Neruda (Philippe Noiret), who suddenly becomes the island's resident celebrity.
Exiled from his native Chile for political reasons, Neruda has a transforming effect on the ruggedly beautiful setting where "The Postman" ("Il Postino") takes place.
He becomes an unlikely friend to Mario, who blossoms so beautifully under Neruda's influence that he discovers the idea of poetry as if it were new.
As a rueful, warmly affecting film featuring a wonderful performance by Mr.
Troisi, "The Postman" would be attention-getting even without the sadness that overshadows it.
This Neapolitan actor, also a writer and director and much better known to Italian audiences than to viewers here, postponed a heart operation while he finished work on this pet project.
He died (at the age of 41) the day after principal photography was completed.


Jobless Legions Rattle Europe's Welfare States
Though the headlines would suggest that European leaders are obsessed with the quagmire in Bosnia, the most intractable problem facing most of the 15 countries of the European Union is jobs.
With unemployment rates above 12 percent in France and Italy, 23 percent in Spain and about 9 percent in Germany for May, joblessness is at the highest levels since recovery from World War II, and politicians all over the Continent are under pressure to get it down.


Jeepers, Where'd You Get Those Peepers?


Unsung Chefs In a City of Stars
IN the era of celebrity chefs, it's easy to get the impression that television interviews and book offers are all part of the cook's trade today, like knife skills and wood grilling.
In fact, the Culinary Institute of America recently began offering courses aimed at helping chefs deal effectively with the media.
In truth, for every chef given a photo spread in a color-drenched magazine, there are hundreds who rarely have time to read a magazine, much less appear in one.
Cities like New York are rich with talented, dogged workaholics who do their jobs day after day with little or no recognition.
Some simply shy away from the limelight; others work for high-profile restaurateurs who handle the publicity.
And still others are just building steam in their careers, awaiting their big moment.


No. 2 Treasury Official Quits; New Nominee Led Peso Rescue
Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Frank N. Newman announced his resignation today, and President Clinton said he would nominate Lawrence H. Summers, the Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs, to replace him.
Mr.
Summers oversaw the American-led bailout of Mexico, and ran into strong criticism last winter from Congressional Republicans for failing to foresee the collapse of the Mexican peso.
That criticism has diminished in recent months as the Mexican financial situation has improved with that international help.


Food Notes
Decadent Dieting
Can high fashion be compatible with lush desserts?
When Elena Castaneda, who owned a dress shop on the Upper East Side, teamed up with Steven Hanson, who owns Park Avalon, Isabella's and Coconut Grill, to open a bakery, she wanted to emphasize low-fat confections.
The result, Madison Avenue's Honest Bakery, 1006 Madison Avenue (78th Street), opened yesterday.
Ms.
Castaneda worked for two years with the chef, Craig Rutman, to develop the likes of the Chocolate Decadence Cake ($20), which tastes decadent indeed but has only 200 calories a serving, 30 percent of them from fat; homey blueberry crumb cake ($20), with 330 calories a slice but only 11 percent of them from fat, and an intense brownie ($2.50), 210 calories, a mere 12 percent of them from fat.


Budget's Pleasant Surprise: A Tax Cut
New Yorkers who own co-ops and condominiums will find a pleasant surprise in the budget agreement reached last night at City Hall: they will get a tax cut.
So will business owners who pay a tax on their rent.
But residents who rely on the city for a variety of services and income supplements will have to make do with far less, to pay for those tax cuts and to fill a $3.1 billion gap in the budget.
From hospitals to classrooms to welfare payments, the new budget, which still faces a full City Council vote, will force New Yorkers to change their expectations of what their city government will do for them.


U.S. and Japan Told to Solve Trade Dispute
When the World Trade Organization opened its doors in Geneva early this year, it was billed as the powerful new global referee that would rule on trade disputes that once bogged down in the old international trade bureaucracy.
But the new head of the organization made it clear today that he would prefer not to have the battle between Washington and Tokyo over auto trade become the first test of his group's legal powers.
Urging the United States and Japan to settle their trade dispute quickly, Renato Ruggiero, the organization's Director General, issued a bluntly worded warning during an hourlong interview with reporters here.
He called the argument over access to Japan's automobile and auto parts market "a delicate matter with nationalist implications" in each country.


Sports of The Times; Prodigal Son Sells Ribs For Family
THE mail may have been a little slow in the Third Ward yesterday.
Offices may have been running a bit behind.
Deliveries may have been late.
Blame it all on the line at Drexler's, the line out into the street.
The regular customers wore polite but bemused expressions at the 30-minute wait for the ribs.
They were being nice about all the visitors clogging up their lunch hour.
It was for a good cause.
Drexler's was making money and Clyde Drexler was one game away from his ring.


Rivals' Specialists On the Oil Industry Join Morgan Stanley
Seeking to re-establish its investment banking prowess in the energy industry, Morgan Stanley &amp; Company said yesterday that it had opened an office in Houston and raided its competitors to hire seven bankers and analysts who specialize in oil and gas.
The firm basically gutted the energy group at the CS First Boston Corporation, hiring six professionals including Gordon Hall, a managing director who was the top oil service and equipment analyst last year in Institutional Investor's annual survey.
The seventh banker hired, Douglas MacKenzie, came from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
6.02
4.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.57
4.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.56
4.46
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.11
6.34
6.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.70
7.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.68
8.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.08
6.11
6.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Knudsen Says It Still Needs New Loans
The Morrison Knudsen Corporation said today that it had reached an agreement with its bankers to maintain some existing loans, but was unlikely to avoid bankruptcy without significant new loans in less than a month.
The company also said that even if it survived the summer, which looked increasingly problematic, the value of its stock was likely to be watered down significantly as part of the financial revamping that would ultimately be required.


Toward Democratic Jury Service
A measure scheduled for a vote today in the New York State Assembly would correct a big defect in New York's justice system by abolishing the state's absurdly long list of automatic exemptions from jury duty.
The legislation has already won unanimous Senate approval, with strong backing from Chief Judge Judith Kaye.
It would do much to insure that the burden of jury service is shared more fairly and that juries are drawn from a cross-section of the population.
For years, court reformers have been trying to get Albany to broaden the jury pool.
But the Legislature, bowing to organized interest groups, has been more interested in expanding the list of exempt professions.


Parents End School Boycott After Oakland District Says It Will Replace Classrooms
Moments after the first school bell rang last week at Lazear Elementary School here, a group of preschool pupils rattled their tiny tambourines, parents clapped and cheered, and the principal relished an otherwise routine morning task: ordering the pupils into their classrooms.
Parents had ended what educators say was one of the longest school boycotts in the country, in which they kept about 500 pupils out of class for three weeks.
They had been protesting the continuing use of shoddy portable classrooms installed 40 years ago as a "temporary measure" and the planned construction of a shopping center that would take the school's playground as a parking lot.
They contended that the developers should contribute toward a new school.


There's No Place Like 'Home'
There are more spectacular finishing holes.
The 18th at Pebble Beach is far more dramatic, the 18th at Bay Hill more diabolical.
There are better known closers, like the final at the Blue Monster course at Doral, the last at Augusta National and the home hole at St.
Andrews in Scotland.
But the 450-yard 18th at Shinnecock Hills, where the U.S.
Open is being played this week, is a brute, as daunting a final hole as there is in major championship golf.
When the Open was last played here in 1986, it played to a stroke average of 4.5, the most difficult hole on the course and the second-most difficult par-four finishing hole of the year on tour.


In Step on Racial Policy
Important as the Supreme Court's affirmative action ruling was for constitutional doctrine, and revealing as it was of the Court's current center of gravity, there is a sense in which the decision on Monday was very nearly beside the point for the rapidly unfolding debate over racial preferences.
While the Justices made Federal affirmative action policies subject to strict judicial scrutiny, a rigorous examination that may doom many programs, the fact is that affirmative action was already being dissected under the harsh spotlight of strict political scrutiny.
And it is in the political arena, not the courtroom, where the fate of affirmative action will ultimately be decided.


Workers Protest Whitman
The rally at the State House yesterday was one of the biggest this year, with more than 500 state workers chanting, "No justice, No peace" and "Whitman's got to go." The rally was called by the Communications Workers of America, the largest state workers' union.
They are unhappy with contract negotiations and with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's legal attempts to prevent a strike vote.


Christian Group Coaches School Board Candidates
Eager to expand its foothold at the local political level, the Christian Coalition has begun a nationwide series of seminars on how to win a seat on a school board.
The message at the first seminar, in late May, was largely one of avoiding confrontation -- "smile as much as you can" -- and steering clear of a specific religious agenda.


CHRONICLE
KATE MOSS traveled from New York and NAOMI CAMPBELL from Berlin to sashay down a London runway wearing designs by STELLA McCARTNEY on Monday.
What's more, the two supermodels, who normally get up to $10,000 a day, did not charge a fee for the show.
So who, one might wonder, is Stella McCartney?
She is the 23-year-old daughter of PAUL McCARTNEY and a member of this year's graduating class at the Central St.
Martin's School of Art in London.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Watched by a Red-Eyed Raven, Poe Goes Berserk and Beyond  'Homo Americanus' Bouwerie Lane Theater
Even though it would be psychic suicide, it is tempting to see every performance in the run of a play by Assurbanipal Babilla, just to find out if the work is the same from night to night.
While programs usually say Mr.
Babilla writes these oddities, they leave an impression that the wildly energetic actors -- each with a different plot in mind -- make up roles as they go along.


Clinton's Statement on Plan to Balance Federal Budget by 2005
Following is President Clinton's statement last night on balancing the Federal budget, as recorded by The New York Times:
Good evening.
Tonight I present to the American people a plan for a balanced Federal budget.
My plan cuts spending by $1.1 trillion.
It does not raise taxes.
It won't be easy but elected leaders of both parties agree with me that we must do this and we will.


Is This Any Good Way to Elect a President?
To the Editor:
Your June 6 news article on five New England states moving to shift their Presidential primaries to the same day, together with "The Specter of Perot Haunts Major Parties" (also June 6), argues for a fundamental change in how we select a President, the most powerful person in the world.


Wine Talk
WHEN I first went to visit Nicolas Joly some years ago, I frankly didn't know what to make of him.
Mr.
Joly is a wine maker who lives and works at Savennieres, not far from the city of Angers in the Loire Valley.
He owns and manages a 21-acre estate known as the Clos de la Coulee de Serrant, where he makes one of the most famous white wines in the world.
It bears the same name as the estate.
Coulee de Serrant, which was famous at the court of Louis XIV, has been made from the same small vineyard for 600 years.
It is made exclusively from the chenin blanc grape, a variety that has been downgraded in an epoch that has seen the sauvignon blanc move into the favored position among white-wine grapes in the Loire Valley.
The Joly family has owned the estate since 1959.


Mets Call Up Pulsipher, And the Future Is Now
Since the present doesn't look too pleasant, the Mets yesterday pointed to the future by calling up the 21-year-old left-hander Bill Pulsipher from Class AAA Norfolk.
Technically, Pulsipher replaced the right-hander Mike Birkbeck, whose contract was sold to the Yokohama Bay Stars of the Japanese Baseball League, but the significance of Pulsipher's arrival is much greater than that.
In fact, General Manager Joe McIlvaine called it "a great day for the organization."


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The scene is an Upper East Side movie theater; the time, a recent Saturday night before a showing of "Braveheart," Mel Gibson's epic of medieval Scotland.
A casually dressed Harrison Ford approaches, joining a young woman already on line.
People in the line notice, but true to Manhattan style, they are successfully blase about having a superstar in their midst.
Mr.
Ford, however, has arrived shortly before the film's start, and there has been a steady stream of ticket buyers for more than 30 minutes.
When he and his partner arrive at the ticket window, they are informed that all tickets have been sold.
Harrison Ford, whose screen presence has attracted millions of viewers and dollars to the movie industry, has been turned away at a theater's doors.
A look of astonished disbelief on his face, he turns away from the ticket window, spreads his arms in a helpless gesture, looks upward and walks away.
JOHN RACOOSIN
. . .
Dear Diary:
I recently celebrated my fifth anniversary in New York City.
Reflecting on an inventory of my life's changes during the five-year period, I was surprised to find:
* 4 apartments
* 3 health clubs
* 2 jobs
* 1 hair stylist. RACHELLE L'ECUYER
. . .
Dear Diary:
Overheard while exiting a showing of "The Bridges of Madison County," in New City, N.Y.
Teary-eyed woman to her male companion: "That was just wonderful. Don't you think so?"
Male companion, smiling: "I think you owe me a 'Braveheart.' " CAROLYN A. GREENE
. . .
Dear Diary:
I am in line at the Theater Development Fund's booth in the World Trade Center, in front of a woman who is using her cellular telephone to contact her fellow theatergoers about available choices.
In a final call to a friend named Eric, she offers her peculiar take on a lively issue in the current theater scene:
"Well, we finally decided on 'Love! Valour! Compassion!' because you recommended it so highly." Pause.
"Oh! I didn't know it had naked guys in it." Short pause.
"Are they your kind of naked men, or mine?" Pause.
Deep sigh.
"Oh, Eric, it's always your kind of naked guys!" MICHAEL TUETH
. . .
Dear Diary:
The concert at Avery Fisher Hall had just concluded.
My wife and I rose from our seats.
She exited to the left; I departed to the right.
Realizing she wasn't with me, I scanned the auditorium; she was nowhere to be seen.
I must have appeared perplexed: an usher asked if she could help me.
"I've lost my wife," I said with increasing concern.
The usher, somewhat less worried, shrugged her shoulders.
"Well," she said, "easy come, easy go." HAROLD SMALL
. . .
A Brooklyn Heights street at lunch hour.
Mother is striding purposefully with Daughter, about 4, in tow.
Mother: "No, not wolves. I was wrong to say that he was brought up by wolves. Wolves are remarkably sociable with highly developed nurturing skills."
Daughter looks quizzically at mother.
Mother: "We have that book on wolves at home. Perhaps I should have said bears."
Daughter: "But bears . . ."
Mother: "No, pigs. What I meant was pigs. He must have been brought up by pigs. . . ."
And then they turned the corner.
I would have loved to hear the zoological upshot of that conversation.
BETH PROPPER


Pataki Turns to Term Limits (Yes) and Regents (No)
With only about two weeks left before the Legislature breaks for the summer, Gov.
George E. Pataki introduced bills today that would fulfill three major campaign pledges.
One would establish term limits for statewide elected officials.
Another would allow citizens to initiate statewide ballot referendums.
A third would abolish the State Board of Regents.
All three proposals face steep uphill fights in the Democratic-controlled Assembly.
And even if those fights were won, all three also require amendments to the state's Constitution -- a long and cumbersome process.


Bid Deadline Is Seen for Multimedia
Bidders for Multimedia Inc., including groups led by NBC and Ellis Communications, have been given a June 21 deadline to submit their offers, executives familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
Multimedia, whose assets range from the syndicated television show "Donahue" to newspapers, is expected to bring about $1.5 billion, or more than $41 a share, in a sale.
But a deal is apparently complicated by tax implications and the diversity of its holdings.


A 'Quixote' in Which Joy Tilts at Chaos
Just as some types of escapist films are labeled summer movies, so there are certain choreographic works that could be called summer ballets.
One well-known 19th-century Russian example of this genre is Marius Petipa's "Don Quixote," which American Ballet Theater brought to the Metropolitan Opera House on Monday night in a new production staged by Kevin McKenzie and Susan Jones.
To put it bluntly, "Don Quixote" has always been a mess.
Yet companies keep performing it because it is such a jolly mishmash.
The merriment in Ballet Theater's new version is nonstop.
And the dancing, particularly by Paloma Herrera and Julio Bocca, is spectacular.


Where Once Stood a Dump, Sculptors Cavort
AS usual, things were shaping up quite nicely at Socrates Sculpture Park on the Queens side of the East River.
Peter Lundberg was crystallizing dreams in concrete.
John Clements was bonding wood and steel, and Joel Graesser was welding metal constructions and excitedly thinking of what he might do with a 50-foot length of huge iron links he had been promised by a tug boat captain.
The three are artists in residence at the city park, off Vernon Boulevard in Long Island City, which along with the Isamu Noguchi Museum two blocks away has turned a corroding stretch of muscular industrial waterfront into a cutting edge oasis of creativity.


ON A PLAY DATE WITH: Captain Kangaroo; Fighting Demotion to Mr. Marsupial
IT tends to surprise people to learn that Captain Kangaroo is not 110 years old.
Only now, on the eve of his 68th birthday, does Bob Keeshan look unmistakably like the Captain, the benevolent grandfather he created on television in the pre-Barney days of its youth.


Special Pleaders: The lobbyists' art.; On $700 Billion Data Highway, Persuasion Has a Polite Frenzy
On the Senate floor, lawmakers sparred into the night over legislation aimed at overhauling the communications industry and promoting the so-called information superhighway.
But the action today was far more intense in the anteroom just outside the chamber's door, where Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, wading through dozens of lobbyists, found himself collared by William Signer, who wanted to talk about burglar alarms.


Corrections
Credits with a theater review yesterday about the John Osborne play "The Entertainer" at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven omitted two actors and their roles.
They are Stephen Turner (as Frank Rice) and Frank Lowe (William Rice).


At Last, Strawberries
Sweet, fragrant strawberries are finally ripe for picking at farms throughout the region.
The season was delayed several weeks because the spring weather was so cool.
The berries, fragile beauties best consumed within a day of picking or purchase, are $3 a quart at most farm stands and in the Greenmarkets.
Retail shops may charge as much as $5 a quart or $1.75 to $2.50 a pint.
The season should last through the first week in July.


Sabres' Muckler Gives Up Only His Coaching Duties
JOHN MUCKLER stepped down as coach of the Buffalo Sabres yesterday and signed a three-year deal with the team to remain general manager.
Muckler, who guided the Edmonton Oilers to the Stanley Cup in 1989-90, reached the second round of the playoffs only once in his four years as coach of the Sabres.
He had served as coach and general manager for the last two seasons, but said having both jobs was too demanding.


Market Place; Orange County, Calif., pays a price for a step toward recovery.
ORANGE COUNTY, Calif., now in a bare-knuckles brawl with its existing bondholders, went to the market yesterday for more money -- and got it.
In its first debt offering since filing for bankruptcy protection in December, the sunny-but-insolvent county found willing investors for $295 million of new insured "recovery" bonds.
Money flowed, even though many big municipal bond buyers, outraged about the investing ways of Orange County, sat out the sale.


Germany's Car Trade Flourishes With Japan
To the Editor:
Lawrence Chimerine and James Fallows, in "Japan Deserves a Tariff" (Op-Ed, June 9), their defense of the imposition of 100 percent tariffs on Japanese luxury cars, use expressions such as "primitive," "misleading," "faulty" and "red herring" when dealing with the opinions of those who doubt the wisdom of the measure.


Insurance Agents Win Again on Bank Bill
House Republican leaders tentatively agreed today to limit any further expansion of federally chartered banks' ability to sell insurance.
The agreement addresses insurance agents' objections to a bill that would repeal the legal barriers that have separated the banking and securities industries for 62 years.
The deal represents another lobbying victory for insurance agents, who have also blocked Clinton Administration plans to allow bank mergers with insurance companies.
Bank lobbyists opposed today's arrangement, and one of them, Edward Yingling of the American Bankers Association, said that his group might withhold its support from the entire legislation.


Liar Can Still Get Compensation
Lying on a job application does not disqualify a person from collecting workers' compensation, the State Supreme Court ruled unanimously yesterday.
The case involved Ahmed Akef, who worked at a building products manufacturer, Celotex, where he was exposed to potentially hazardous dust in 1987 and 1988.
He eventually became disabled with acute bronchial illnesses.


Full Ties to Hanoi Urged
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has formally recommended that President Clinton establish full diplomatic relations with Vietnam, senior Administration officials said today.
Although Mr.
Christopher's recommendation was sent to the White House last week, it has not yet been sent to Mr.
Clinton and remains on the desk of Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, the officials said.
Mr.
Clinton is not expected to make a decision on the politically sensitive issue soon, they added.


Yanks Respond to Scolding With a Victory
Maybe it was George Steinbrenner peering at them from behind the first-base dugout, furiously scribbling notes.
Maybe it was the fresh memory of mild-mannered Manager Buck Showalter berating them after their humiliating performance here Monday.
Maybe it was time for Jack McDowell to finally win.
Maybe it was because of Mike Stanley.
Whatever the combination of reasons, from being fearful to wanting to have fun, the Yankees galloped to a 10-4 victory over the Detroit Tigers tonight at Tiger Stadium.
Stanley's offensive heroics were definitely more influential than anything Steinbrenner, Showalter or McDowell did as he pounded a grand slam off Mike Moore, doubled home two more runs and knocked in a career-high six runs to give New York only its second road victory in 13 games.


An Elite Status for Streete-Thompson
In his final political science paper at Rice University, Kareem Streete-Thompson explored how the gubernatorial mighty have fallen.
The paper was titled, "Ann Richards and Mario Cuomo: How They Couldn't Have Their Doritos and Eat Them Too."
"It dealt with how the two of them went from almost being guaranteed re-election to being voted out of office," Thompson said in a recent interview.
"It shows that nobody's safe."


First Data to Acquire Archrival in a $6.6 Billion Deal
The First Data Corporation agreed yesterday to a $6.6 billion takeover of the First Financial Management Corporation, its archrival in the rapidly growing business of credit card transaction processing.
The merger would combine two of the country's largest independent processors of those transactions for banks and retail merchants.
And the new company would be well positioned in the evolving field of so-called electronic commerce -- the shift away from the use of cash and checks as a form of payment for goods and services in favor of credit cards, debit cards and other media that transfer assets in flashes of electronic data.


Appeal by Convicted Killer of 5
John List does not deny that he killed his wife, mother and three children in their Westfield home in 1971.
But he says his conviction in 1990 was unfair.
In a petition filed in Superior Court, Mr.
List argues that jurors should get to hear his claim that he suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder acquired during World War II.
A judge is scheduled to hear his request for a new trial on Friday.


Yangon Journal; Burmese Generals Ask Less Spit, More Polish
With darting eyes and a conspiratorial whisper, an anxious Burmese merchant agreed to lead a prospective customer to the source of this newly illicit drug.
"You must follow me," he explained, making his way through the dark maze of shops in a covered spice market, the air filled with a fragrant mist of curry powder and cinnamon.


Kent Puts Slump Aside And Drives Mets Home
Jeff Kent has been the poster child for the Mets' disappointing start.
Expected to be a cornerstone of this young team, he has been mired in a seasonlong slump, too busy searching for his own answers to lend advice to others.
But maybe, just maybe, that's about to change.


Bail Raised For a Judge Facing Trial
In a voice taut with rage and skepticism, a justice in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday lambasted a Housing Court judge who had been indicted for bribery and extortion and raised his bail because he had left New York without her permission.
Calling the housing judge "an unreliable person," she acidly noted that he did not even show up at his own eviction trial.
The Supreme Court justice, Joan B. Carey, had originally set bail at $10,000 after the indictment of the housing judge, Arthur B. Scott Jr., and ordered him to request her consent before he left the city -- a common condition for bail.


Closed Talks Held on Saving Watersheds
Over the objections of environmentalists, Gov.
George E. Pataki's office has been mediating confidential talks between officials from New York City and a galaxy of small communities near the city's upstate reservoirs on keeping the watersheds clean without stifling local economic growth.
The goal, according to a statement issued by the Governor's office after the latest meeting, on Monday, is "a global settlement of all watershed issues" by mid-August.
The city is under a mandate from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency to protect the watersheds or face the need to build a multibillion-dollar filtration system.


Sun, Seeking Savings, Decides To Cut 800 Jobs and Dividend
The Sun Company, a leading refiner and seller of gasoline in the Northeast, said yesterday that it would eliminate 800 jobs and cut its dividend in an effort to lower its operating expenses by $110 million a year.
Sun said the 800 jobs represented about 5.5 percent of its work force and included a cut of about one-third of its corporate staff of 1,200 people.


Success in Europe After Fiasco at Met
Francesca Zambello still bristles at the memory of the hostile reception given to her production of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" at the Metropolitan Opera two seasons ago, but that "boo-fest," as she puts it, has clearly done nothing to damage the young American director's growing recognition in Europe.
This season, her debuts at London's two opera houses have been hits.
She won a coveted Olivier Award for her production of Mussorgsky's "Khovanschina" at the English National Opera, while her production of Britten's "Billy Budd" at the Royal Opera House, which opened on May 30, was warmly received by most British critics.


Senator Challenges the Practices of a Retirees Association
Taking on one of the nation's most formidable lobbying groups, a senior Republican Senator charged today that the American Association of Retired Persons had misrepresented its members' views, violated Federal tax law and abused its mailing privileges.
The Senator, Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, held what he said would be the first in a series of hearings to investigate the group, which has 33 million members and has for years been an influential voice in national debates on Social Security, Medicare and health policy in general.


MCA to Distribute Dreamworks' Films Abroad
Dreamworks S.K.G. and MCA Inc. announced yesterday that they had entered into a long-term agreement for MCA's Universal Pictures to distribute Dreamworks' films outside the United States, Canada and Korea.
MCA will also distribute Dreamworks music and its films on home video.
Wall Street responded positively to the news, sending shares of Seagram, the new owner of MCA, to $30.875, up $1.50.
Because of the track record of Dreamworks' owners, Wall Street is betting they will supply Universal Pictures and MCA Records with successful projects.


The Wedding Reception That's Chilly to Children
HANAN FAREED BARRETT knew she would raise a few eyebrows when she had her wedding invitations engraved with the message "Adults Only."
But don't get her wrong.
Mrs.
Barrett says she loves children.
Even has two grandchildren of her own. (They weren't invited to the wedding, either.)


Washington Seeks Delay on Expanding U.N. Force in Bosnia
Facing a stinging rebuke from Congress for a failure to consult with lawmakers, the Clinton Administration is stalling Security Council action on a crucial resolution that would authorize an expansion of peacekeeping forces in Bosnia.
A sharp letter today to Secretary of State Warren Christopher from the chairmen of three influential House panels, raising questions about the cost of the expanded forces, suggests that the Administration will have a hard time voting for the resolution anytime soon.


Yankees Receive Surprise Visitor
Stunned, exasperated and impatient about the inept fashion in which the Yankees have been playing, George Steinbrenner made an unexpected appearance at Tiger Stadium tonight to observe his sputtering team from behind the dugout.
The man in charge in the dugout, Buck Showalter, is the one Steinbrenner will probe for reasons the team with the second-highest payroll in the major leagues has lumbered to the fourth-worst start in club history.
Steinbrenner said he planned to spend some time with Showalter while remaining in Detroit for a few days, but he answered quickly when asked if the manager's job was in jeopardy.


From Senator Dole, the Republican Response to the President's Proposals
Following is Senator Bob Dole's response last night to President Clinton's statement on balancing the Federal budget, as recorded by The New York Times:
Good evening.
I'm Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader.
I'd like to offer a few thoughts in response to the President on behalf of the Republicans in Congress and around the country and the millions of Americans who have waited so long for their leaders to rein in our runaway Government.


CHRONICLE
HENRY KISSINGER won't have to bend when he's knighted by Queen Elizabeth on Tuesday in Buckingham Palace.
And please don't call him Sir Henry.
The Queen will make Mr.
Kissinger an Honorary Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of St.
Michael and St.
George, one of the top honors Britain can bestow on a foreigner, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Court Opens Condos to Politics
The enormous Galaxy Towers condominium complex may be private property, but that does not necessarily mean it can shut its doors to campaigning politicians, a state appeals court ruled yesterday.


Big Telescope Is First to Find Brown Dwarf, Team Reports
In the first major discovery by the new Keck Observatory in Hawaii, the world's most powerful telescope, astronomers reported today what they said was the first confirmed sighting of a brown dwarf, one of those elusive theorized objects bigger than a planet but not quite a star.
So small and dim are the supposed brown dwarfs against the dark background of space that the search for them has taken astronomers to the limits of their telescopes' observing capabilities.
Several brown-dwarf candidates have been reported in recent years, only to be eliminated by subsequent research.


Virus Imperils Texas Shrimp Farms
Kieth Gregg, the manager of Harlingen Shrimp Farms, first knew that something was wrong one day last month when he saw a flock of sea gulls hovering and diving over one of his shrimp ponds here on the Laguna Madre of South Texas.
The gulls were relishing an uncommon feast: dying shrimp.
"This thing spread like a forest fire," Mr.
Gregg said, shaking his head.
"There was no stopping it. I just sat there and watched it, and in a matter of three days, my shrimp were gone. Dead."


No Headline
"This thing spread like a forest fire. There was no stopping it. I just sat there and watched it, and in a matter of three days, my shrimp were gone. Dead." KIETH GREGG, a Texas shrimp farmer.  [ A16:1. ]


One Man's Fables, Many Men's Tunes
Jean de La Fontaine usually ended his rhymed French fables with morals and aphorisms, delivered with wry grace after the crow, grasshopper, lamb or frog had learned his lesson.
This 17th-century Aesop's writings codified our ideas about sour grapes, blind love and knowing your place.
But if that was all there was to his poems, they would hardly have attracted the many composers they did.
What need is there of harmonic subtlety or contoured melody to deliver pedagogical lessons in behavior?
Instead, as an unusual concert showed at Gould Hall on Monday night, composers were drawn to the spirit and style of these tales, which surround their messages with Gallic gamesmanship and a love of graceful gesture.
The French Institute/ Alliance Francaise created a "musicale celebrating the tricentennial of the fabulous fabulist," as the program put it, by weaving English narration around settings of La Fontaine's fables and interjecting into their midst a pas de deux from Poulenc's "Animaux Modeles," which was also based on La Fontaine.


McKay Is Making His Mark Outside Michigan
Think of the lower peninsula of the state of Michigan, the part that looks on the map like a big, left-handed mitten.
Imagine this mitten clenched into a fist as big as the Joe Louis monument that stands in downtown Detroit, down the street from Joe Louis Arena.
Now think about Randy McKay, who played college hockey in Michigan, married a woman from Michigan, bought a house in Michigan and teaches at a hockey school in Michigan.


Addressing Unwed Fathers, Whitman Attempts to Make Amends
Christine Todd Whitman, Republican Governor, came face to face today with Andre Talbert, unwed father of 2 1/2-year-old Andre Jr.
Fatherhood, they both agreed, was no game, whatever that other woman had told Mrs.
Whitman about young black men and their babies and the "jewels in the crown."
At the back of most people's minds at the kickoff of Fathers Appreciation Week for the Young Father's Program at the University of Medicine and Dentistry, was how Mrs.
Whitman got entangled last winter in the "jewels" dispute, about race and responsible parenthood.


One Man's Fables, Many Men's Tunes
Jean de La Fontaine usually ended his rhymed French fables with morals and aphorisms, delivered with wry grace after the crow, grasshopper, lamb or frog had learned his lesson.
This 17th-century Aesop's writings codified our ideas about sour grapes, blind love and knowing your place.
But if that was all there was to his poems, they would hardly have attracted the many composers they did.
What need is there of harmonic subtlety or contoured melody to deliver pedagogical lessons in behavior?
Instead, as an unusual concert showed at Gould Hall on Monday night, composers were drawn to the spirit and style of these tales, which surround their messages with Gallic gamesmanship and a love of graceful gesture.
The French Institute/ Alliance Francaise created a "musicale celebrating the tricentennial of the fabulous fabulist," as the program put it, by weaving English narration around settings of La Fontaine's fables and interjecting into their midst a pas de deux from Poulenc's "Animaux Modeles," which was also based on La Fontaine.


Senate Backs Microchip To Let Parents Control TV
Amid a cascade of nervous vote-switching by Republicans, the Senate approved a measure tonight that would require makers of television sets to install a special computer chip that would let parents prevent their children from watching violent programs.
The new requirement for a "choice chip" was included in a much broader telecommunications bill being debated by the Senate.


Transit Unit Plans Cuts At Rush Hour
Riders could face longer waits and more crowded rides on 10 subway lines and 57 bus routes under a Transit Authority money-saving package that includes the first broad reductions in rush-hour subway service since the early 1980's.
Starting in September, the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 trains would run less often, followed in November by reductions in the A, D, L and Q trains, according to a report the Transit Authority sent yesterday to officials of its parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
In most instances, trains would take a minute or two longer to arrive, and the total number of trains running on weekdays would be reduced by just 1.3 percent, the report says.


Former Officer in Chinatown Admits That He Took Bribes
A former police officer pleaded guilty yesterday to accepting bribes from organized crime figures in Chinatown for years and alerting them to police raids on illegal gambling dens and prostitution houses.
John Gaw, who worked under cover in Chinatown as part of the Public Morals Squad, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to two counts of corruption.
He admitted that in exchange for monthly cash payments from Chinatown criminals, he furnished information about law enforcement actions planned against gambling parlors and brothels between 1988 and 1994, virtually his entire tenure on the police force.
He resigned from the department several weeks ago.


Metro-North Unions Relax Their Deadline for Walkout
Although Metro-North unions can legally strike next week, they said yesterday that they would delay a walkout at least until July 15, as long as the railroad does not impose new work rules before then.
Officials of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the parent of the railroad, quickly accepted that condition, but with some trepidation.


When Office Air Is Hazardous; At an East Side Building, Employees Complain Over Fumes
Your mind clouds over.
You feel your head, heavy, gently sinking onto your desk.
Or a nauseating drumbeat bores into your skull, and your nostrils suddenly fill with the plastic odor of -- is it Band-Aids?
Or, if you are one of the worst hit, an invisible hand grabs your lungs and the world goes black.
That is how employees describe the strange spells that sometimes strike them at an East Side office building used by Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The air in the building, they say, is so bad that workers often step outside -- not to smoke, as many office workers do these days, but simply to breathe.


Murder Charges for Baby Sitter in the Death of a Child in Brooklyn
Demitria Melvin's three years of life had not been easy.
Born to a crack-addicted mother, she still suffered the residual effects of the drug, which sometimes left her a bit hyperactive.
On Saturday morning, her foster mother, wanting to run some errands, took Demitria to a neighbor's apartment in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
But it was the last time the mother would see Demitria alive: while she was away, the neighbor, Pamela Carter, beat the child because she would not sit still while having her hair braided, the police said.


City's Tax Trade-Off
To the Editor:
"Back to You, Mr. Mayor" (editorial, June 6) states that New York City property taxes are low in comparison with those imposed by other localities.
While that may be accurate, New York City also imposes a substantial income tax -- the other localities do not.
I will be moving from New York City this summer to a nearby locality that imposes higher property taxes.
I can afford to do so, in part, because I will no longer have to pay New York City income tax.
JED C. ALBERT  Bayside, Queens, June 8, 1995


The U.N. Trap: No Peace to Be Kept
When Serbian gunners fired on Danish peacekeepers outside the embattled Bosnian town of Tuzla last year, the Danes did not hunker down.
They shot back, letting loose more than 70 rounds from the formidable cannon on their Leopard tanks.
The brief battle had two consequences.
First, United Nations officials moved to restrain the Danish soldiers from overstepping a theoretical line drawn between peacekeeping and peace enforcement.


Energy Department Research Is Defended by Outside Panel
With Congressional committees considering deep cuts in the Energy Department's research budget and some lawmakers suggesting that the whole agency be dismantled, the department today issued a report by outside experts who strongly defended its research programs.
The report's authors called the proposed budget cuts short-sighted, and said that a continuing program of broad energy research financed largely by the Federal Government was "essential to our nation's future well-being."


New York City Mail No Longer the Worst
The Postmaster General yesterday declared New York City's postal service the most improved.
Of course, there was much room for improvement.
The city ranked worst last year.
Today's worst?
San Juan, followed by Westchester County.
Article, page B1.


Banishing Game 6 Ghosts, Devils Set Sights on Cup
With the memory of last spring's stunning comeback and elimination by the Rangers lingering vividly, the Devils were under extreme pressure in the same Game 6 scenario against the Flyers tonight.
But this time they responded in grand fashion, took the gigantic step that eluded them last spring and marched into the Stanley Cup finals for the first time with a 4-2 triumph over Philadelphia.
When Scott Stevens, the spiritual leader and captain of the Devils, was handed the Prince of Wales Trophy symbolic of winning the Eastern Conference finals, the sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena made a deafening noise that could probably be heard in Kansas City, Denver and, yes, even Nashville.


Tears and a Juror's Flight In a Grueling Day in Court
Face to face for the seventh day of gruesome photographs, and with the father of one of the murder victims beginning to weep, an alternate juror at O. J. Simpson's trial suddenly waved her hands in front of her this afternoon and fled the courtroom.
After calling a 10-minute break, Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court comforted the jurors, saying, "This has been difficult testimony, the last few days, and if at any time during these proceedings you feel uncomfortable, just let me know."


Route 3 Pile-Ups Happen Again
Drivers on busy Route 3 are instructed to merge as they approach a bridge construction site near Giants Stadium, and merge they did yesterday -- right into each other, over and over again.
Between noon and 3 P.M., the police reported eight accidents, but no serious injuries, in the eastbound lanes leading to Berry's Creek Bridge.
Yesterday's bonanza for body shops follows a pair of chain-reaction pile-ups on the bridge itself on Monday that damaged 15 cars.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Disappearing-Act Finale for Magic?
The Orlando Magic expected to find a championship, opened the wrong door and ended up at a seminar.
The Houston Rockets are about to send the prodigies back to Disney World, although the Magic has one last wish before summer: register on the scoreboard.
The Rockets lead their National Basketball Association championship series by three games to none and can finish No. 1 on the ladder for the second year in a row with a victory Wednesday night.
Mario Elie's T-shirt today read, "Two The Hard Way," but conquering the Team of the 21st Century -- the Magic -- has actually been elementary.


Bring Mr. Vesco Home
With millions of dollars supposedly salted away from financial swindles and drug deals, Robert Vesco has eluded American law enforcement for 24 years, living in Costa Rica, the Bahamas and most recently Cuba.
Now his luck may have soured.
The Cuban authorities have tossed Mr.
Vesco in jail and seem ready to bargain with Washington for his return to the United States to stand trial on a variety of charges.
The Clinton Administration should take advantage of the chance to gain custody of Mr.
Vesco.
If the chill between Havana and Washington is reduced in the process, all the better.
Mr.
Vesco fled the United States in 1971 with more than $200 million the Government says he looted from mutual funds.
In return for shelter from the Justice Department, he provided a range of services to the foreign leaders who gave him sanctuary.
He lived well in his various hideaways, maintaining luxurious homes and yachts.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Concert of American Works, With Stress on the Picturesque  Manhattan Chamber Orchestra Alice Tully Hall
The Manhattan Chamber Orchestra, a freelance group started by Richard Auldon Clark in 1987, devoted its Sunday evening concert to the picturesque side of American composition.
Henry Cowell, though best known for works that use dissonant clusters, was represented by


Consumer Prices Up 0.3%; Retail Sales Barely Rise
The Commerce Department reported today that consumers raised their spending by just two-tenths of 1 percent in May, to a level of retail sales that remained below that of March, a sign that the economy could be about to stall.
In a separate report, the Labor Department calculated that consumer prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent for the month, meaning that retail sales, which account for about one-third of economic activity, actually eased slightly after allowing for inflation.


A Campier Ashman, Including Songs Disney Cut
There are song lyrics in which a single word dropped in at exactly the right moment can spin a number straight into the comic stratosphere.
Take "manicotti." In "A Day in the Life of a Fat Kid in Philly," Howard Ashman and Jonathan Sheffer's funny, heartbreaking lament of an overweight boy who is persecuted by his peers, his mother pops into the song to warn: "Hey, don't fill your plate up like that, Fatty./ You think manicotti comes free?"
The song, written for an unfinished musical called "Fatty Goes to the Opera" and performed by John Ellison Conlee, is the high point of "Hundreds of Hats," an aggressively zany new revue at the WPA Theater that pays tribute to Mr.
Ashman's work.
Although the show, directed by Michael Mayer, is not well sung and often becomes hysterical in its attempt to generate excitement, it is a serviceable showcase for many of Mr.
Ashman's lesser-known lyrics.


In America; Giuliani's Bludgeon
Having stalked the Schools Chancellor for more than a year, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani believes he has found the issue that will allow him to home in for the kill.
The Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, is vulnerable on the issue of crime.
There is a lot of it in the city's schools, and the Board of Education's Division of School Safety has not been up to the task of combating it.
Mayor Giuliani, who despises Mr.
Cortines, has demanded that the responsibility for school safety be turned over to the Police Department, which the Mayor controls.
Mr.
Cortines and the school board have refused.


Book Notes
Mystery Author
In one of its more bizarre publishing adventures, Random House has paid a six-figure advance for a novel by an unidentified author that offers, among other things, what appears to be a veiled account of Bill Clinton's 1992 Presidential campaign.
The details of the roman a clef, as well as the author's identity, are being closely guarded by all involved.
In fact, even Harry Evans, Random House's publisher, insists that he does not know the author's name.


The Princess of Eco-Kitsch
Wise Use warriors, beware.
Anti-environmentalists, hold that backhoe.
Clean Water Act amenders, mend your ways.
You may have thought you could ride the wave of hostility to Federal regulation all the way to developers' paradise, but you'd better think again.
Disney's new movie, "Pocahontas," makes it clear that you are faced with a far more formidable champion of the environment than anything the Wilderness Society can mobilize.
The Mouse has gone Green, and this summer millions of 6-year-olds will respond to those Singalong Bouncing Ears and follow the leader deep into the virgin woods.


One Man's Fables, Many Men's Tunes
Jean de La Fontaine usually ended his rhymed French fables with morals and aphorisms, delivered with wry grace after the crow, grasshopper, lamb or frog had learned his lesson.
This 17th-century Aesop's writings codified our ideas about sour grapes, blind love and knowing your place.
But if that was all there was to his poems, they would hardly have attracted the many composers they did.
What need is there of harmonic subtlety or contoured melody to deliver pedagogical lessons in behavior?
Instead, as an unusual concert showed at Gould Hall on Monday night, composers were drawn to the spirit and style of these tales, which surround their messages with Gallic gamesmanship and a love of graceful gesture.
The French Institute/ Alliance Francaise created a "musicale celebrating the tricentennial of the fabulous fabulist," as the program put it, by weaving English narration around settings of La Fontaine's fables and interjecting into their midst a pas de deux from Poulenc's "Animaux Modeles," which was also based on La Fontaine.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ACORDIA INC., Indianapolis, the seventh-largest insurance broker in the United States, signed a letter of intent to acquire McElroy-Minister Co., an insurance brokerage firm.
The terms of the purchase were not disclosed.
CROSS TIMBERS OIL CO., Fort Worth, a developer of oil and gas properties, has sold all the common shares it held in Plains Petroleum Corp. through open market transactions valued at $17 million.


3 Airlines Charting Austerity Course; Delta and Two Small Carriers Are Thriving by Cutting Costs
It is the airline industry's version of a limbo party.
Beset by competition from low-fare carriers, the nation's airlines have largely given up trying to control the prices they charge for their seats and are struggling instead to drive their costs below an ever-lowering bar.


Who Should Reform School Safety Office
To the Editor:
Who should be in charge of safety in New York City's schools?
After reports documenting police corruption, brutality, careless discharge of weapons and drunken rioting, citizens must realize the Police Department is not the agency to reform the Office of School Safety.


Gonzalez Gets Even More Surly as Bowe Bout Nears
Someone made a big mistake this morning: waking up Jorge Luis Gonzalez at 7:30 to do an interview.
"Is this fight you're having with Riddick Bowe Saturday night some sort of wrestling fiasco?" the reporter inquired.
No wonder Gonzalez was screaming eight hours later when reminded of the episode.


Mail Reported 83% on Time In New York
The Postmaster General invited reporters to a catered lunch today, eager to share some good news: postal service in general was showing marked improvement, and New York City was showing the most improvement of all.
Of course, that is partly because the city had so much room for improvement.
The Postal Service audits ranked New York dead last among major cities in service last year, and in the latest figures it has just barely crawled off the 10-worst list.


A Navratilova-Graf Team
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and STEFFI GRAF received a wild-card entry yesterday for the women's doubles draw at Wimbledon, ensuring Navratilova's 23d consecutive appearance at the championships.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  BOSNIA MASSES TROOPS  As the Bosnian Serbs released more United Nations peacekeepers, a Bosnian Government force of unprecedented size was massing northwest of Sarajevo.
A1  PEACEKEEPING'S LIMITS  As the United Nations debates the future role of the beleaguered military mission in Bosnia, an incident from last fall illustrates the limits of peacekeeping.
A14


2d Name Change For New York Shop
For the second time in three months, the New York agency formerly known as Burkhardt &amp; Christy has changed its name to reflect a change in ownership.
In March, Burkhardt &amp; Christy became Burkhardt Christy MacDougall Mitchell to reflect the additions of Mal MacDougall, 63, recently named vice chairman and chief creative officer, and Marty Mitchell, 55, recently named president and chief operating officer.
Now the agency is becoming Christy MacDougall Mitchell as Ron Burkhardt, chief executive and executive creative director, sells his 50 percent equity stake in the agency to Mr.
MacDougall and Mr.
Mitchell.
Another partner, Judy Christy, 43, continues as chairwoman and succeeds Mr.
Burkhardt as chief executive.


Bass Takes Hornets' Post
BOB BASS has shelved his retirement plans to become the head of the Charlotte Hornets' basketball affairs.
Bass, 65, who left the San Antonio Spurs last year after two decades as a coach and executive, was introduced yesterday as the Hornets' vice president of basketball operations.
He replaces DAVE TWARDZIK, who last month was named general manager of the Golden State Warriors. (AP)


Senate Panel Seeks to Save Russian Atom-Arms-for-Peace Deal
The Senate Energy Committee sought today to save an East-West deal in which Russian nuclear warheads are to be turned into a peaceful bonanza, even as a businessman testified that the first phase of the venture had gone relatively smoothly and the Administration said any flaws that might endanger the deal could be straightened out.
"We do not believe that this agreement is in serious jeopardy," Charles B. Curtis, Undersecretary of Energy, told the committee.


N.L.R.B. Delay Is Likely
Lawyers for baseball club owners and players plan to discuss today a mutual request for postponement of the National Labor Relations Board trial scheduled to begin next Monday on unfair-labor-practice charges against the owners.
Although Edwin Bennett, the administrative law judge, has to approve any such request, the trial most likely will be put off, giving the two sides additional time to settle the charges.
Postponements of N.L.R.B. trials generally are granted if all sides agree.


This Time, Clinton Is Trying Selective Health Care Strategy
The health care proposals unveiled by the Clinton Administration tonight are a far cry from the vast restructuring it proposed in 1993.
But Administration officials presented the new plan as the "first, serious steps toward health care reform."
While details were sketchy, the Administration cast its health plan as one protecting the solvency of the Medicare program, which covers 37 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries, and even providing a modest expansion of benefits.
A 20 percent copayment by patients for mammograms would be eliminated, the Administration said, and new forms of managed care would be offered.


Serbs Free More U.N. Captives; Bosnia Troops Mass at Sarajevo
The Bosnian Serbs released another group of United Nations troops today as a large Bosnian Government force was reported massing in the Visoko area northwest of Sarajevo.
Anticipation was growing that the Bosnian Government force, estimated at between 20,000 and 30,000 troops, would soon attempt to break the 38-month siege of Sarajevo.
A United Nations officer warned that such an offensive could cause thousands of casualties.


Group Seeks A Reopening Of Hearings On Tobacco
Asserting that the tobacco industry had "surreptitiously" obtained its 1979 working papers about the cancer-causing effects of tobacco, the American Cancer Society yesterday called on Congress to reopen hearings on the nation's tobacco makers.
The assertion came in response to the disclosure last week of the existence of documents showing that Philip Morris Inc. had conducted 15 years of nonpublic research on nicotine, finding that it affected the body, brain and behavior of smokers.
Papers from the cancer society were among the documents.


A Changing Vision for a Giant
It was one of the great conglomerates, built by Harold S. Geneen, a master at the games of acquiring and divesting, and perhaps the best manager ever at understanding how sometimes-foolish accounting rules could be used to his benefit.
Now the ITT Corporation, once called International Telephone and Telegraph but having long since pulled out of those businesses, is to be split into three companies.
That move, made by Mr.
Geneen's successor as chairman, Rand V. Araskog, is in keeping with the current Wall Street belief that simpler is better and the pure plays are more likely to get investors' interest.


Sex Fantasy Research Said to Neglect Women
PSYCHOLOGISTS holding a revisionist view of sex fantasies say that most of the last 50 years of research on the subject has been blind to the true nature of women's erotic yearnings and sexuality.
The studies "have largely been skewed to a male's idea of what's sexy," said Dr.
Harold Leitenberg, a psychologist at the University of Vermont in Burlington who published a comprehensive review of more than 200 studies of sexual fantasies in a recent issue of Psychological Bulletin.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A sunny forecast for ad spending grows even brighter.
SLOWDOWN, schmodown.
The leading forecaster of advertising spending has again revised upward his already optimistic projections for this year and issued an initial assessment for 1996 that is equally rosy.
"Despite a lot of negative rhetoric" about the potential for a weakening national economy, "the media marketplace is still very firm and expanding," said Robert J. Coen, senior vice president and forecasting director at McCann-Erickson USA in New York.


Personal Health; Protection from the sun: when a little isn't enough.
ALARMED by exploding rates of skin cancer and especially of deadly melanomas, a coalition of health, environmental and consumer organizations has taken its message about sun protection to the movies.
Along with movie trailers and sales pitches for popcorn, candy and soft drinks, many viewers of feature films this summer will see a 40-second spot teaching them about the "UV Index" and how to prevent hazardous overexposure to the sun.
The coalition, called Partners for Sun Protection Awareness, worked with the National Weather Service to introduce the UV Index on an experimental basis last summer.
The service has declared the index a success and this year expanded its distribution to 160 cities, where daily predictions about ultraviolet exposure accompany the weather report in newspapers and on radio and television.
Schering-Plough HealthCare Products Inc., the maker of Coppertone sunscreens, has teamed up with the Orbital Sciences Corporation, a private weather forecasting company, to bring daily UV Index reports to 527 more cities, towns and resorts nationwide.
What Is the UV Index?
Ultraviolet, or UV, light is one of many things in life that are best taken in small doses.
A little UV helps the body make vitamin D; too much can cause painful sunburn and skin damage and eventually result in skin cancers, premature aging and wrinkling of the skin and cataracts.


Algeria's Incendiary Mix Of Poverty and Islam
Merzak Allouache's film "Bab el Oued City" presents an ominous, intensely atmospheric portrait of a working-class neighborhood in Algiers.
It is a place where poverty, Islamic fundamentalism and the materialist mass culture beamed into people's homes via satellite fuel an incendiary mix of conflicting attitudes.
At the center of the film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a scrawny young bakery assistant, Boualem (Hassan Abdou), who impulsively steals a loudspeaker that has been blaring fundamentalist polemics at night and keeping him awake.
The theft enrages Said (Mohammed Ourdache), a hotheaded young fundamentalist leader who patrols the area with his posse of hangers-on, and he determines to find and punish the culprit.
The film, which was shot on location in Algiers, portrays Said and his sidekicks as neighborhood bullies who pump iron together in a gym and wield power through physical intimidation.
The local Islamic imam (Ahmed Benaissa) disapproves of their tactics but is helpless to do anything.
They are the new generation, and he is the old.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  McNeil Bounces Back
The defending champion Lori McNeil fell behind by 1-4 but recovered to beat Tina Krizan of Slovenia, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday and advance to the third round of the DFS Classic grass-court women's tournament in Birmingham, England.
"My service warmed up and I began to hit the ball a little harder," said McNeil, who was joined in the third round by Meilen Tu, the 17-year-old 1994 United States Open junior champion from California.
Tu went through at the expense of Meredith McGrath, seeded seventh.
McGrath, 24, led by 4-1 in the first set but eventually had to retire with a strained Achilles' tendon when Tu was ahead, 7-5, 1-0.


Starting Point for Talks
What President Clinton said tonight about the budget is not nearly so important as the fact that he said something at all.
The proposals he made for lowering spending, reducing taxes and balancing the budget over 10 years will not be approved by this Republican Congress.
But they will be the starting point for the negotiations between the White House and Congress later this year that will ultimately determine how far the Republicans will get in their drive to revamp the Federal Government.


New Head Expected At Modern
The Museum of Modern Art's board is expected to elect Ronald S. Lauder as its chairman today, replacing Agnes Gund.
The move, people familiar with the board's agenda say, is intended to take advantage of the strengths of the two.
Ms.
Gund, who has been the Modern's chairman for the last two and a half years, will become the museum's president, a job she held from 1991 to 1993.
A spokeswoman for the Modern said the museum was neither confirming nor denying the report.
While the expected changes may seem like a demotion for Ms.
Gund, museum insiders say the job of president, which involves daily, hands-on work in addition to fund-raising, is something she enjoys.
They say the work of the chairman, which is more of an ambassadorial position, is less interesting to her.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 9
June 2
June 10
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.8
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.3
Gasoline stocks
208.8
208.7
219.2
Distillate stocks
115.9
116.3
113.8
Crude imports, daily
6.9
7.8
7.2
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.6
2.1
Crude stocks
325.8
325.3
326.6
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.6
95.0
96.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


PRESIDENT OFFERS PLAN TO BALANCE FEDERAL BUDGET
After weeks of debate about how to confront the Republican-controlled Congress, President Clinton tonight sketched his own plan for balancing the Federal budget -- but over 10 years not 7.
He would do so by slowing the growth of Medicare spending far less than the Republicans want and making up the difference with reductions in corporate subsidies and other domestic spending.
In a brief televised address from the Oval Office, Mr.
Clinton committed himself to balancing the budget by 2005 -- three years after the Republicans propose to -- with spending cuts of $1.1 trillion.
Those would be stretched out to be less severe than Republican alternatives, and accompanied by the President's previously proposed tax breaks, much smaller than the Republicans have proposed and narrowly focused on the middle class.


Amateurs, Proceed With Badges
It took Jerry Courville eight qualifying attempts to finally make it to the United States Open.
But when he arrived at the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club this morning, making it onto the course proved to be almost as difficult.
"They didn't think I was a player," Courville said after his practice round today.
"But the guy saw the badge and finally let us in."


Prosecutors Who Switch Sides
There is a long history of Justice Department officials and Federal prosecutors leaving the public payroll to make more money as criminal defense lawyers, but Michael Abbell may have taken the practice to a new level.
According to a Federal grand jury in Florida, not long after giving up a senior Justice Department post directly involved in fighting international drug trafficking, Mr.
Abbell became house counsel to the Cali drug cartel and an accomplice to drug smuggling.
Only a trial can determine whether Mr.
Abbell, who denies the charges, crossed the line between defense lawyer and criminal conspirator.
But it is already clear that the ethical standards governing the switch from government employment to private practice are inadequate.
No government lawyer with access to sensitive law enforcement and intelligence information should be permitted to move into private practice dealing with clients who can benefit from that information.


In Defeat, Lindros Learns His Limits
The questioner was seeking the type of admission that can be made only once a playoff run is complete and a season has ended in defeat.
At the other end of the hallway, the New Jersey Devils were headed to the Stanley Cup finals.
Eric Lindros was headed home after his first defeat in a National Hockey League playoff series.
Before Lindros left, he stared into the bright lights with hurt and anger in his eyes, and listened.
"Did they wear you down?" he was asked.


ITT, the Quintessential Conglomerate, Plans to Split Up
The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it planned to split into three companies that would be spun off to its shareholders, ending one of the most storied conglomerates in corporate America.
The move appears to be the largest uncobbling of corporate assets since the Government forced the breakup of American Telephone and Telegraph in 1984.


Agee Is Host at Benefit
Tommie Agee, center fielder for the Mets' 1969 World Series champions, will serve as host at a sports dinner and auction to benefit the United Negro College Fund tonight at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Items associated with Babe Ruth, Muhammad Ali, Michael Jordan, O. J. Simpson, Mike Tyson, Larry Bird and others will be auctioned.
Information is available at 326-1211.


Clinton Names First Liaison To Gay and Lesbian Groups
Having disappointed many homosexuals since taking office, the Clinton Administration began reaching out to that alienated constituency on Monday by creating a new post: White House liaison to the gay and lesbian communities.
Today, members of the Administration held briefings for 40 lesbian and gay elected officials from around the nation.


Rutgers Ends Group's Financing
President Francis L. Lawrence of Rutgers University has canceled a financing agreement with the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group.
The university said the student chapter of the group did not sufficiently detach itself from the group's lobbying arm, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Under a recently signed state law Rutgers is not allowed to use student money to support lobbying efforts.


Steve Silver, 51, Creator of Revue That Captivated San Francisco
Steve Silver, the creator and producer of "Beach Blanket Babylon," a San Francisco musical revue that has run to sold-out audiences for 21 years, died on Tuesday at his home in San Francisco.
Mr.
Silver was 51.
The cause of death was AIDS, said Charles Zukow, a spokesman for Mr.
Silver's production company.


101,000 Layoffs Are More Than 'Sobering'
To the Editor:
"Payrolls Trimmed by 101,000 in May" (front page, June 3) is loaded with employer-biased language that obscures the real impact of the widespread layoffs it reports.


COUNCIL LEADERS AND MAYOR REACH ACCORD ON BUDGET
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the leaders of the City Council agreed last night on a $31.1 billion budget for New York City that would include the largest cut in spending since World War II and reduce a wide range of services affecting most New Yorkers in ways large and small.
The agreement would leave intact most of the Mayor's spending cuts and political priorities, reducing spending on welfare and Medicaid, extracting concessions from the unions and cutting the budgets of almost every agency except the Police and Fire Departments.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI AND COUNCIL AGREE ON BUDGET
Mayor Giuliani and the leaders of the City Council agreed on a $31.1 billion budget for New York City that would for a second year reduce the size of municipal government and cut spending on a wide range of services, affecting most New Yorkers in ways large and small.  [ Page A1. ]


G.O.P. Didn't Win the Cold War by Itself
To the Editor:
Re "Who's an Isolationist?" (Op-Ed, June 6): I agree with Senator Bob Dole that President Clinton's claims that Congress is undermining his authority in foreign policy are unfair.
However, many of Senator Dole's other remarks are inaccurate and misleading.


2 Are Killed in Home Fire Traced to Cigar
Dr.
Daniel Tansman had much to savor late Monday: a prosperous business, a long and happy marriage, a granddaughter's bas mitzvah on Saturday.
He decided to smoke a cigar before he went to bed, and because he did, officials say, he and his wife are dead.
The cigar fell onto a chair in a first-floor den, starting a fire that filled the two-story house at 457 Mayfair Drive South in Mill Basin, Brooklyn, with smoke that suffocated Dr.
Tansman, an optometrist, and his wife, Hilda, as they slept upstairs, Michael Vecchi, Chief Fire Marshal, said yesterday.


34 Arrested in Drug Dealing
The Drug Enforcement Administration got a tip that a heroin dealer from New York City wanted one of its Newark agents dead.
The agency began an investigation that ended yesterday with 33 men and 1 woman arrested, facing charges of selling heroin and cocaine.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  THE NEW BOSNIAN ARMY  What had been a ragtag collection of thugs, kids and patriots who once faced the Bosnian Serbs with hunting rifles has emerged as a credible fighting force.
A1


For Devils, A Quick Return To Reality
The notion did not require a team meeting, or a strongly suggested thought-for-the-day from the coach.
The idea seemed to take hold individually, beginning late Tuesday night, when the New Jersey Devils secured the first spot in the Stanley Cup finals in the 21-season history of a once-nomadic and still uncertain franchise.
New Jersey's approach began to take shape without any work or structured discussion yesterday, a day off for the Devils after the Eastern Conference victory over Philadelphia was completed in six games.
Maybe the Devils have known enough disappointment to understand the importance of directing their emotion toward the next task.
Perhaps a series against the Detroit Red Wings, the strongest team in the National Hockey League, is more than enough reality.


NEW YORK CITY'S BUDGET: THE IMPACT  Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later; Education
The school system will lose about $900 million, which officials have warned will lead to the elimination of thousands of school jobs, increases in class size and curtailment of programs, like some languages, music and art, that go beyond the bare basics required by the state.
At one point during the tortuous budget process, Board of Education officials had estimated that the one million-student system faced cuts of up to $1 billion in the fiscal year that starts on July 1, but Tuesday's late-night agreement between the Mayor and the City Council led to the restoration of about $100 million in threatened cuts.


No Headline
"The average golfer is nuts. If they have to, they will play naked in the snow." -- DAVID WOLKOFF, who owns a 24-hour course.  [ B1:2. ]


Cities Make Final Pitches For Games
It looked like a cocktail party without any cocktails.
Inside the crowded lobby of the Budapest luxury hotel, small clusters of men in jackets and women in evening dresses exchanged handshakes and pleasantries with varying degrees of sincerity as they prepared for a night at the Hungarian Opera.


Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later
As the City Council moved sluggishly to turn its budget agreement with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani into law, elected officials and advocates yesterday criticized the deal as painful for New Yorkers, while fiscal monitors warned that the agreement could unravel and force more budget cuts in the months ahead.
Two of the city's fiscal monitors raised significant questions about the $31.1 billion budget agreement that included the largest cut in total spending in 50 years.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Named Bob Engle assistant general manager for player personnel.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Mark Torres, Chadwick Cooper and Christopher DeWitt, pitchers.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Craig Hentrich, punter.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Eric Turral, wide receiver.
Recalled Melvin Crawford, cornerback, from waivers.
Waived Sherdrick Bonner, quarterback, and Mark Whittemore, wide receiver.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Melvin Hayes, tackle; Tyrone Davis, wide receiver; and Eddie Mason, linebacker.
Waived James Thornton, tight end.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Eric Fontenot, defensive tackle.
Waived Kendrick Jones, wide receiver, and Gerald Owens, defensive tackle.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Gary Conklin, quarterback. Waived Rob Colley, punter.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with John Lynch, safety, and Santana Dotson, defensive lineman.
College
OHIO VALLEY CONFERENCE -- Extended the contracts of Dan Beebe, commissioner, through 1997-98.
Named Murray State president Dr.
Kern Alexander president and Southeast Missouri State president Dr.
Kala Stroup vice-president for the 1995-96 academic year.
ALFRED -- Named Matthew Kerwick men's lacrosse coach.
ARIZONA STATE -- Announced the addition of a women's varsity soccer program for the 1996-97 academic year.
BALL STATE -- Named Leah Wooldridge women's assistant basketball and Mark Krusz women's graduate assistant basketball coach.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Liz Fagan women's assistant lacrosse coach.
Assigned women's assistant volleyball coach Kim Diehlman additional duties as assistant softball coach.
DENVER -- Named Joy Selig assistant gymnastics coach.
INDIANA, PA. -- Named Frances Nee associate director of athletics.
MONTCLAIR STATE -- Named Fernando Barboto women's soccer coach.
SACRAMENTO STATE -- Named John Volek football coach.


Circuit City Stores Inc.(CC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Swinging Or Looking, Mets Still Go Down
The future arrived at Shea Stadium yesterday in the form of a lanky young left-hander named Bill Pulsipher.
For the present, though, the Mets could sure use some hitting a lot more than another starting pitcher.
The Mets stranded 10 more runners last night, five in scoring position, as Chris Hammond scattered seven singles and matched his career high with eight strikeouts in outdueling Dave Mlicki (4-2) in a 4-0 Marlins victory.
The Florida left-hander also scored his team's first and last runs.


Mandela Tries Step to Reduce Rival's Power
In his most direct attack yet on the power base of his most nettlesome rival, President Nelson Mandela today proposed changes in the traditional chieftancy system that would clip patronage strings to local chiefs from provincial governments.
At its simplest level, the proposal would create standardized payments and benefits for the chiefs to be financed directly by the central Government, giving hundreds of traditional leaders many of the same perquisites as national legislators.


Return of Rail Line to Be Studied
The West Shore Line once carried rail passengers along the Hudson River waterfront between Weehawken and Rockland County.
Service stopped in 1959 with the demise of the Weehawken ferry that served the line.


The Ghosts of Departments Past in Childhood's Local Mall
MY parents have traveled 175 miles in one direction, and I 250 in the other.
We have converged on a shopping center a mile or two from our old neighborhood in the Virginia suburbs.
It is called Seven Corners, and it was a fixture in our lives for 25 or 30 years.
We are looking for the boys' section in the department store where, one day when I was 3 or 4, I charged down an aisle toward a door marked POSITIVELY NO ADMITTANCE .
I do not remember why I went running across the linoleum floor, careering between counters that were way over my head, like a too-tall maze leading everywhere and nowhere in an M. C. Escher drawing.
I do not remember how my mother, in a panic, chased after me and caught me before I disappeared through the forbidden door.


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Belmont Inaugurates Twilight Simulcasts
New York racing extended its new betting horizons into the evening hours yesterday when it inaugurated an experiment in twilight simulcasts after the live racing at Belmont Park was finished.
Five races from Churchill Downs were televised into the second floor of Belmont's clubhouse, where the simulcasts were beamed and concession stands kept open to launch the experiment.
The program will consist of five races on weekdays and four on weekends, mostly from Hollywood Park in Los Angeles, but also at times from Churchill Downs in Louisville, Arlington in Chicago and Golden Gate in San Francisco.


The Modern Moves Into a New Era
"Knock on wood," Ronald S. Lauder said, rapping his knuckles on the early-20th-century Viennese coffee table in his office at Estee Lauder, the cosmetics company founded by his mother.
It was Tuesday, and he was talking about the vote that would take place the following day to decide whether he would be the next chairman of the board of the Museum of Modern Art, succeeding Agnes Gund.
Yesterday Mr.
Lauder got his wish.
Ms.
Gund, a collector and donor, will resume the post of president, solidifying her role as a hands-on administrator, which she likes.
And Mr.
Lauder, formerly vice chairman of the museum's board and co-chairman of its finance committee, got the big bouquet from the board, and the implicit invitation to be even more generous.


House Panel Adopts a Broad Measure to Fight Terrorism
In its haste to advance anti-terrorism legislation, a House committee today voted to classify as a terrorist act almost any crime in which a gun was used.
Such a classification would mean that any street crime or crime of passion involving a gun, whether or not it was fired, could be investigated and punished by the Federal Government.
The only exemption would be if the gun was used for "mere personal monetary gain," as in a robbery.
The bill would also brand carjacking as a terrorist act.


Mantle's Recovery Is Proceeding Well
Dr.
GORAN KLINTMALM, the medical director of the Baylor Institute for Transplant Sciences in Dallas, said yesterday that MICKEY MANTLE has begun digesting solid foods and that a biopsy drawn by a needle inserted into his new liver showed it is functioning properly without signs of rejection.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $280.5 million of notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 5.74 percent and are priced at par.
Federal Home Loan Bank, is selling $250 million of debentures due in 2002 through First Tennessee Bank.
The debentures are priced 99.50 to yield 7.09 percent.
The issue is callable in six months and carries an interest rate of 7 percent.


Aaron Karush Dies; Psychiatrist Was 83
Dr.
Aaron Karush, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, died on Monday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 83 and lived in New Rochelle.
The cause was a heart attack, a university spokeswoman said.


Official Seen as Quitting Houghton Mifflin
Joseph A. Kanon has resigned from his post as executive vice president of the Houghton Mifflin Company and as director of the publishing company's trade and reference division, people in the publishing industry said yesterday.
The resignation is expected to be announced formally today by Nader F. Darehshori, chairman and chief executive of Houghton Mifflin, which is based in Boston.


Interactive Parents
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Should Your Toddler Be a Techie?" (June 1): My 3-year-old son knew and recognized all the letters of the alphabet long before he was 3 and with no computer at his disposal, just some good old-fashioned one-on-one with his mom.


Aid Groups Say Summit May Only Worsen Poverty
More than 145 private social-aid organizations, including Oxfam and Greenpeace, denounced the expected outcome of this week's economic summit meeting today, saying it would increase poverty in developing countries.
At last year's meeting of top leaders of the Group of Seven industrial democracies, the participants agreed that this year's meeting, which begins here on Thursday, would mark the start of a review of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to insure that they are in a position to lead the world toward greater prosperity in the 21st century.


Dodgers' Nomo Is Dazzling With a 16-Strikeout Game
Dodgers 8, Pirates 5
Hideo Nomo struck out a major league season-high 16 in 8 innings, pitching Los Angeles past the Pirates, 8-5, last night in Pittsburgh.
Nomo's 16 strikeouts set a Dodger rookie record and were 2 short of the major league rookie mark of 18 set by Montreal's Bill Gullickson in 1980.


William Sodeman Sr.; Medical Educator, 88
William A. Sodeman Sr., a cardiologist and medical educator, died on Saturday in a nursing home in Tampa, Fla.
He was 88 and had lived in Tampa since his retirement about 20 years ago.
Dr.
Sodeman was a former president of Jefferson Medical College, now Thomas Jefferson University, in Philadelphia.


Public Defender's Flaw: He's No Lawyer
He fooled his wife.
He fooled his clients, more than 1,000 of them.
And he fooled the legal establishment in Madison County in upstate New York -- until a complaint from a dissatisfied defendant brought the truth to light.
Steven M. Welchons, 32, spent more than two years posing as a successful and popular public defense lawyer even though he had never been licensed as a lawyer, never passed the bar exam, never attended law school and never even graduated from college, officials said yesterday.


International Briefs; Microsoft's On-Line Plan Faces European Review
The Microsoft Corporation's plan to equip its forthcoming Windows 95 operating system with access to its new on-line service will be scrutinized by the European Commission, a commission director-general, Stefano Micossi, said yesterday.


Where to Find It
IT'S easy to ignore floors.
People walk on them, scuff them and grind their heels into them.
But like furniture, floors are a basic design element with the size and scope to be a room's star attraction.
"I have always considered the floor to be the fifth wall of a room," said Juan P. Molyneux, a Manhattan interior designer.
He adapted elements from an inlaid wood floor in the Pavlovsk Palace in Russia on an intricately painted floor at the recent Kips Bay show house in Manhattan.


Fordham Radio Tower Ruling Satisfies No One
Rising truncated from the green tufts of trees surrounding it, Fordham University's unfinished radio tower hovers over the Bronx like the abandoned erector set of a disgruntled child.
On Tuesday, the city's Board of Standards and Appeals upheld a ruling that the much-disputed tower can stay on campus, as long as it is moved 25 feet.
No one seemed happy with the ruling; an official with the campus radio station described the idea as "foolish," and the New York Botanical Garden is upset that the tower will still be shadowing its lush landscape.
Plans call for the tower to rise to 480 feet.


Shift at Burnett
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago said yesterday that Richard J. Zobel, chairman of its Europe, Middle East and Africa region, had resigned after two years, effective immediately.
Mr.
Zobel, 49, who is based in London, is stepping down "for personal reasons," said Lisa Lagger, a spokeswoman, adding that he was considering another, undisclosed position with Burnett.
Kerry M. Rubie, 55, the group president for the region, who is based in Chicago, succeeds Mr.
Zobel and will relocate to London.


The Computer Gap
To The Home Section:
Your May 25 article "Computer Gap Worries Blacks" points to alarming computer usage figures in both the African-American and Latino communities compared with whites.
However, the article quickly dismisses the computer gap in the Latino community because it is "understandable as a language problem."


Changes Made At Bates Unit
Bates USA in New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., said yesterday that it had renamed McCaffrey &amp; McCall Direct, its direct marketing unit, as Bates Direct.
Michael Sugzda, 41, executive vice president and group account director of McCaffrey Direct, was named to head Bates Direct in the new position of president.
He reports to Robert M. Henry, 48, who previously headed McCaffrey Direct as executive vice president; Mr.
Henry was recently promoted to the new position of chairman of Bates Integrated Marketing Services.
Also, Guy Mastrion, 36, senior vice president and creative director of McCaffrey Direct, was named executive vice president and creative director of Bates Direct.


Echlin Inc.(ECH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Return to Montana And Teen-Age Turmoil
Despite its elaborate title, "The Ranger, the Cook and a Hole in the Sky" is just a simple old coming-of-age yarn.
It is based on a more-or-less autobiographical story by Norman Maclean, the author of "A River Runs Through It," which Robert Redford made into a fine film starring Brad Pitt.
This production on ABC is not in that class, but it meanders along amiably and has enough beautifully photographed scenery to do a nature film proud.
It's the summer of 1919.
The 17-year-old Mac, played by Jerry O'Connell ("Sliders"), is doing another stint as forest-ranger assistant to the leathery, taciturn Bill Bell.
Bell, reputed to be the best ranger in the West, is portrayed by the cowboy everyman Sam Elliott ("The Sacketts"), who appears here cleanshaven instead of with his usual scruffy and imposing mustache.
It turns out he bears a striking resemblance to Elliott Gould.


New Clues in Balancing the Risks Of Hormones After Menopause
Researchers at Harvard Medical School have found in a large study that women who continue to use hormone replacement therapy for five or more years after menopause are 30 percent to 40 percent more likely to develop breast cancer than women who have never used menopausal hormones.
The finding is the latest in a series of conflicting studies on the relationship between hormones and breast cancer.
Although estrogen has long been known to be able to promote the growth of some existing cancers, its possible role in causing breast cancer has been highly controversial.


An Immigration Debate's Real Issue
The title of tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate, "Resolved: All Immigration Should Be Drastically Reduced," is not inaccurate, but it cushions a pricklier opinion.
Let's call it: "Resolved: The Sort of People Now Entering the Country Are Changing the Character of the United States for the Worse."
The fount of disagreement is a new book, "Alien Nation: Common Sense About America's Immigration Disaster," whose author, Peter Brimelow, is present to argue the affirmative, along with Daniel Stein of the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), an anti-immigration lobbying group; Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington, widely credited with being the brains behind her husband Michael's losing race for the Senate seat from California last year, and, you guessed it, William F. Buckley Jr.
All express concern mixed with indignation at the ostensible threat to American ways.


Rockets Sweep to 2d Straight Championship
A magnificent playoff run by the Houston Rockets ended with a victory, a sweep and another title.
Repeating as champions of the National Basketball Association, the Rockets defeated the Orlando Magic tonight, 113-101, before a joyous crowd of 16,611 at the Summit.
Starting the playoffs as the No. 6 seed in the Western Conference, the Rockets overcame severe odds and major adversity, led by their extraordinary center, Hakeem Olajuwon.
Unanimously named the most valuable player of the finals, Olajuwon had 35 points and 15 rebounds in the clincher .


An Air Force Laboratory May Get a Reprieve
In what may signal a reprieve for an upstate New York military installation, a member of the Presidential commission on base closings cast doubt yesterday on the Air Force's estimates of what it would cost to close its high-tech laboratory in Rome, N.Y., and move it elsewhere.
Over the last seven months, the Air Force has released three different estimates of how long it would take to recoup the costs of closing Rome Lab: in October, it estimated the payback period at more than 100 years; in February, it reduced that estimate to four years, and last month, the estimate was changed again, to six years.


Assessing the Impact Of New York Budget
After weeks of anger and rallies over the possibility of deep cuts in New York City's new budget, City Council leaders, arguing that the city's fiscal plight left little room to maneuver, reached a deal with Mayor Giuliani with surprising speed.


Sports of The Times; The Trials of a Pro Female Pitcher
HOLLYWOOD pitch to Penny Marshall for the sequel to "A League of Their Own:" She could have been Marcia Clark, but she played real hardball instead.
Sold.


A Ragtag Bosnian Army Becomes a Credible Force
The Serbs still shell this city, as they have for more than three years.
But there is a difference today.
The outgoing mortar fire from Bosnian Army positions is often as intense as the Serbian bombardment.
The 82-millimeter mortars, brought through the dank tunnel that is this city's single connection with the outside world, are only the most visible sign of the emergence of a credible Bosnian Army from the ragtag collection of thugs, kids and patriots armed with hunting rifles who faced the Bosnian Serbs in 1992.


Rainy Prelude to the Championship


Relatives of Slain Children Join Albany Lawmakers to Push for Bills Aimed at Violent Crime
Flanked by the relatives of high-profile crime victims, Democratic and Republican lawmakers held dueling news conferences in the Capitol today to trumpet their concerns about violent crime.
In the morning, Gov.
George E. Pataki, Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco and key Republican state senators endorsed legislation that would increase sentences for repeat sex offenders against children and require sex offenders to register their addresses with the state, a bill roughly modeled after New Jersey's "Megan's Law."


COMPANY REPORTS
INTUIT INC., Menlo Park, Calif., a personal finance software maker, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell one million shares in a secondary public offering.
NATWEST HOME MORTGAGE CORP., Jersey City, a unit of NatWest Bank, agreed to buy assets including $37 million of mortgage servicing rights from Union Financial Corp., a subsidiary of Union Federal Savings Bank.


Gingrich Reaching Out To Washington Residents
To dispel any idea that the Republican-controlled Congress intends to impose its own solutions to the District of Columbia's problems, Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that he would attend monthly meetings around the city with local residents to consider their ideas for change.
Mr.
Gingrich made the unusual offer after a two-hour meeting with Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and the City Council, all Democrats or independents, to discuss how to make Washington into what the Speaker said he would like to see: "a jewel of a capital city."


The Air at Shinnecock Is Tart With Perfection
Every so often, the forces that govern golf converge in a sweet symmetry.
The top players in the game find their strides simultaneously, a major championship date falls on the calendar and a superior course is the appointed venue.
Such a time has come to Long Island.
At 6:45 A.M. on Thursday, when Fulton Allem of South Africa hits the opening tee shot in the 95th United States Open at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, the curtain will rise on a championship that has as much promise as any in the lustrous history of the event.


For O'Brien, Hard Work Replaces the Hype in His Quest for Olympic Gold
Dan and Dave.
The names were so alliterative and innocuous.
They might have been two guys who wore identical suits and sang pop songs on "The Ed Sullivan Show." But they weren't entertainers, they were decathletes in a clever ad campaign that promised more than it could deliver before the 1992 Summer Olympics.
"Who is the world's greatest athlete -- Dan or Dave?" the Reebok ad asked.
"To be settled in Barcelona."


When Will Japan Concede Its Wartime Past?; Reflection, Not Apology
To the Editor:
Japanese is an amazing language, well tailored to meet the needs of a homogeneous culture centered about the avoidance of interpersonal friction.
At times our own representatives in Washington use such Nippon-talk, but even at their best they lag far behind their Japanese peers.


Good Economics Joins With Very Good Politics
When Republicans made their promise of a balanced budget a keystone of the 1994 election campaign, no one was surprised.
The party had long paid lip service to the goal, although not a single balanced budget was produced in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan or Bush years.
But now even the Democrats have jumped aboard.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House minority leader, returned from a retreat with his troops a few weeks ago and proclaimed, "All of us believe our budgets must be brought into balance."


Akiva Kohane; Jewish Aid Official, 84
Akiva Kohane, a Jewish international aid official, died on May 27 at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 84 and a resident of Boston.
The cause was heart failure, the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee said.
He had retired in 1990 from the organization, for which he was country director for Poland.


Lawyers for Bomb Suspects Say Admissions Came After Threats
A lawyer for the man charged with engineering the World Trade Center bombing said yesterday that his client admitted to the authorities in Pakistan that he had been involved in the 1993 bombing, but made his admission only after the officials there had threatened him.
And the lawyer said that shortly afterward in court, the defendant, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, "contradicted" the admissions, which had been tape-recorded by the authorities.


Spare the Rod
To The Home Section:
How emotionally healthy adults could spank their own children is beyond comprehension ("Parent and Child: Spanking Is Becoming the New Don't," May 11).
If we hit, punish or shame our children, they just learn to fear us.
It is so much more beautiful if our children can feel completely safe in our presence.


Accounts
*
Chesebrough-Pond's USA, Greenwich, Conn., a unit of Unilever N.V., to Lunt Sausville Burek Advertising, New York, to handle the business-to-business advertising account of its customer marketing division, previously unassigned.
The billings were not disclosed.


Strawberry Pinstripes? Tailor Isn't Needed Yet
George Steinbrenner was coy and noncommittal as he discussed Darryl Strawberry's possible future with the Yankees today.
While the team's owner indicated that a deal had not been reached with the former Mets outfielder and that he did not even consider the two sides to be near an agreement, Steinbrenner refused to respond when asked if Strawberry might join the Yankees soon.
In the ongoing soap opera, the World of the Yankees, Strawberry might be the next well-known and well-traveled character to begin calling the Bronx his home.
Steinbrenner is intrigued by the prospect of helping to rehabilitate Strawberry and feels that signing him might motivate his team and maybe attract fans.
The once-implausible notion of the 33-year-old Strawberry in pinstripes has grown extremely serious.


Jets Sign Three More Draft Selections
The Jets signed three more draft choices yesterday, leaving only their top pick, KYLE BRADY, and MATT O'DWYER, the second-rounder, without contracts.
The three latest additions are a pair of fourth-rounders -- MELVIN HAYES, an offensive lineman from Mississippi State, and TYRONE DAVIS, a wide receiver from Virginia -- and EDDIE MASON, a North Carolina linebacker and sixth-round choice.
Previously, the Jets signed their second pick of the first round, HUGH DOUGLAS, the pass-rusher from Central State of Ohio, as well as fifth-round and seventh-round picks.
Brady is the tight end from Penn State and O'Dwyer was an offensive lineman for Northwestern.


Adelphia to Buy Cable Systems
The Adelphia Communications Corporation has agreed, along with its Olympus Communications joint venture, to acquire several cable television systems for a total of about $124 million in cash.
Olympus, a venture between Adelphia and FPL Group Inc., plans to buy Leadership Cable, a company that serves the West Palm Beach, Fla., area.
In addition, Adelphia plans to buy the cable systems of the Eastern Telecom Corporation, which serves the Pittsburgh area, and First Carolina Cable TV L.P., which serves New England.


Two in a Row! It's a Streak For the Yanks
It took the Yankees almost a month to do it.
It took Manager Buck Showalter berating them for their shoddy approach.
It took George Steinbrenner's presence behind their dugout.
It took the Tigers as their opponent.
Mix together back-to-back days of dependable baseball and the Yankees finally discovered the recipe for a two-game winning streak with a 12-3 victory tonight.
Showalter probably felt like Knute Rockne, Steinbrenner probably felt strange because he was, if anything, a silent motivator and, most pertinently, the Yankees felt like an authentic team.
They bashed Detroit for the second straight day, hitting three homers and spoiling Pat Ahearne's major league debut.
Melido Perez was effective for six and two-thirds innings in boosting the Yanks to consecutive victories for the first time since May 20-21.


CHRONICLE
Almost everywhere he has gone in the last month, DAVID ROCKEFELLER has been greeted with a refrain of "Happy Birthday" or a birthday cake.
The patriarch of the Rockefeller family turned 80 on Monday and everyone, it seems, has wanted to wish him well.
Some friends made presentations at meetings of the numerous organizations with which Mr.
Rockefeller is involved; others gave parties.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Grow Another Row
Bursting with broccoli?
A surfeit of squash?
The question of what to do with an abundance of vegetables is being considered early this year, well in advance of the harvests.


Core Industries (CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Inventor's House, Now a Landmark
MANY houses become landmarks because of their designs, but some are designated because of their occupant.
From 1902 until his death in 1928 at age 80, Lewis H. Latimer, an African-American inventor who worked with Alexander Graham Bell on the telephone and Thomas Alva Edison on the light bulb, lived in a Queen Anne-style frame house in Flushing, Queens.
In March, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated it a landmark, and there are plans to turn it into a museum.


U.A.W., Ranks Thinning, Elects a Fighter as President
The United Automobile Workers union today elected its first new president in 12 years -- Stephen P. Yokich, a charismatic leader and deft tactician with a carefully cultivated reputation as a hothead.
Leaders of union locals are hoping that Mr.
Yokich, whose outbursts of temper have delighted the rank-and-file and, at times, have kept the auto makers off balance, can reverse the U.A.W.'s steep membership slide and restore its political clout.


Circle K Corp.(CRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Getting Business to Clear the Air
Industry would get a break on red tape, and the state would do better meeting Federal clean air standards.
Those are the goals of an agreement, announced yesterday, that is intended to provide businesses with strong financial incentives to think about the environment.
For example, if companies cut pollution more than they have to, they can sell the right to pollute to somebody else.
Several environmental groups said they will wait and see if the air clears up.


Meyer H. Mencher; State Regulator, 90
Meyer H. Mencher, a former New York State assistant attorney general, died on Monday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 90 and a resident of Manhattan.
Named to the Attorney General's education bureau in 1960, he was in charge of enforcing teacher and administrator licensing.
He later monitored employment regulations in the securities industry and oversaw reviewing of home-improvement building codes and fraud.
He retired in 1977.


Lawyer Suspended For Missing Court
Stephen G. Murphy, a noted New York lawyer, has been suspended from the New York State Bar for one year.
The disciplinary action was ordered in a decision on Monday by five justices of the State Supreme Court Appellate Division, Second Judicial Department.


Sports of The Times; Season Over, With Hopes For Another
WEARING their old colors of red and gold for the last time, the Houston Rockets won the championship that gave them enduring respect last night.
They swept the Orlando Magic, 113-101, to win the National Basketball Association championship for the second straight year.
In a sign of continuing greed by ownership, the Rockets are committed to changing their colors and logos to sell more gear to ardent consumers next season.
But at least there is more hope for a next season.


Perry Says Pilot Had Little Warning Before Downing in Bosnia
Defense Secretary William J. Perry acknowledged today that the military knew shortly in advance of the downing of a United States F-16 fighter jet in Bosnia that it was being tracked by a hostile missile radar.
But the Secretary told a House panel that there were still many unresolved questions about how quickly reliable information was relayed to the F-16 pilot, Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady.


Economic Scene; Is a trade war coming? In some industries, it's already here.
AS Washington and Tokyo duel over autos and the Europeans fidget on the sidelines, there is talk that this ugly tiff between political allies will mark the beginning of a real trade war.
But a low-intensity global trade war has been under way for decades, with protectionists from all the economic powers using rigged national laws and sympathetic government bureaucracies to sabotage the foreign competition.
In the United States, the warriors range from flower growers to bicycle makers, and their weapon of choice is laws barring imports below "fair market value" -- a term only lawyers and lobbyists attempt to define.
Two current cases, steel pipe for the oil industry and cement for road and home building, show the corrosive effects.


World News Briefs; Colombia Links Blast To Militia Groups
The Colombian authorities said today that urban militias that may have been acting at the behest of drug traffickers were behind the bomb attack in Medellin last Saturday that killed 29 people.
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa said at a news conference that the police had not identified the militia group responsible for the bombing.
However, he said the police believe that the bombers may have been paid by drug traffickers in Medellin or in northern Valle, an area just north of Cali.


2 New Jersey Cities to Play Ball
Two New Jersey cities Newark and Atlantic City -- will be getting baseball teams and new stadiums, the organizers of a new league say.
They are among six cities chosen yesterday to join the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball Clubs, which will feature former major leaguers and up-and-coming young players.


Hong Kong Deports 100 Vietnamese Refugees


Stern Says Labor Deal Could Be Struck Soon
Negotiating in the first hour rather than the 11th, the National Basketball Association is shockingly close to agreeing on a new collective bargaining agreement, according to the commissioner.
David Stern, at a news conference here tonight, said that representatives for the players union and the owners were negotiating without coffee breaks, that "substantial progress is being made" and that a special Board of Governors meeting has been scheduled for New York on Tuesday.


NEW YORK CITY'S BUDGET: THE IMPACT  Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later; Health
The Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's 11 public hospitals, will have to grapple with about $75 million in cuts, forcing it to trim thousands of workers.
Corporation officials say they will try to avoid layoffs by offering buyouts to a range of employees, a tactic it has already used to cut 6,000 employees.
Still, the budget cut is less than agency officials had expected under the Mayor's earlier plan.
The administration had initially proposed cutting about $111 million.
The amount rose to about $145 million during negotiations, before dropping again, said Dr.
Bruce Siegel, president of the hospitals agency.


O'Neal's Season Is Over, But His Work Isn't Done
Shaquille O'Neal can put the Orlando Magic down now.
They have been on his back for nine months, but now his time is finally his own.
Schooled by Hakeem Olajuwon this week, O'Neal expects to be back at Louisiana State University next week.


When Will Japan Concede Its Wartime Past?; The 'Comfort Women'
To the Editor:
Re "Japan Expresses Regret of a Sort for the War" (front page, June 7): You report that Japan's governing coalition agreed on a parliamentary resolution expressing "remorse" for causing "unbearable pain to people abroad, particularly in Asian countries" during World War II.


SENATE SUPPORTS SEVERE PENALTIES ON COMPUTER SMUT
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today for a measure that would impose heavy fines and prison terms on people who distribute sexually explicit or other "filthy" material over computer networks, in the most aggressive step yet by Congress to regulate cyberspace.
Voting 84 to 16 in a session rife with lurid talk about child pornography and on-line descriptions of bestiality, advocates of tough regulation easily overwhelmed objections from a handful of lawmakers who said the measure would violate constitutional rights to free speech and threaten the growth of computer networks.


Market Drifts in Wait of Data and 'Triple Witching' Tomorrow
The stock market drifted yesterday, closing mixed but essentially unchanged as stock traders pulled back in advance of new economic data due today and the turbulence of a "triple witching" tomorrow -- the quarterly expiration of three kinds of stock options contracts.
Several important economic reports might clarify or further muddy the picture of a seemingly slowing economy but with surprising sectors of growth, like strong demand for computer chips.
The reports include factory use and industrial production, which will provide important clues to the economy's strength.


When Talent Gets Lucky
Every June more artists, writers, scientists and other Americans than would ever dream of admitting it wake up humming "Maybe this time, I'll be lucky" -- lucky enough to win a MacArthur grant and the temporary security and freedom it confers.
Of course it takes more than luck.
It takes talent, application and achievement to catch the eye of the judges who choose the recipients of unrestricted five-year grants of $30,000 to $75,000 a year from the John D. and Catherine MacArthur Foundation.
The 458 winners since the program's inception in 1981 have come from many disciplines -- so it is anybody's guess who will be in the next group.


New York Calls for Precincts To Control Police Monitoring
Trying to halt a series of scandals in the New York City Police Department, the Mayor and Police Commissioner yesterday announced a new set of anticorruption measures whose cornerstone is a sweeping overhaul in the way officers suspected of misconduct are monitored and investigated.
Until now, the responsibility for policing the force has rested mainly on Internal Affairs Bureau investigators who did their work in strict secrecy, leaving precinct commanders and other top officials largely in the dark about corruption investigations.


U.S. Acts on Ex-Soviet Bloc Drug Trade
To the Editor:
Re "Drug Smuggling Growing in Ex-Communist Lands" (news article, June 5): This Administration shares concerns that the former Soviet bloc countries are fostering international criminal organizations specializing in drug trafficking.
Within our limited resources we are providing help in training, technical assistance and intelligence.


Bureaucrat-Bashing Can Lead to Tragedy
To the Editor:
In light of the terrorist bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal building, "The Bureaucracy: What's Left to Shrink?" (Week in Review, June 11) highlights both the travesty and tragedy of bureaucracy-bashing.


Debating Affirmative Action


Cyprus Shores Wash Dirty Money
The offshore banking system on this Mediterranean island is being used to violate United Nations sanctions imposed on the rump Yugoslavia and to launder hundreds of millions of dollars made illicitly in Russia, say Western diplomats, bankers and even some of those involved in the business.
About three dozen of the 500 Serbian companies set up in Cyprus are believed to have links to the Government in Yugoslavia, which now consists of Serbia and Montenegro.


Japan to Pay Women Forced Into Brothels
In an effort to atone for Japanese behavior during World War II, the Government today announced the establishment of a fund to help tens of thousands of women whom the Japanese Army forced to be sex slaves during the war.
The fund is an attempt to settle a longstanding irritant in relations with other Asian countries by showing remorse for forcing "comfort women" -- as they were called -- to have sex with troops in front-line brothels.
Most of the women were Korean, but some were Dutch, Indonesian, Filipino and Chinese.


Dismayed Greenwich Confronts a Message of Hate in a Yearbook
Five senior boys at Greenwich High School in Connecticut concocted a message of racial hatred and slipped it in code form into the yearbook, where its discovery has cast a pall over year-end festivities and thoughts of commencement, school officials said yesterday.
The five are believed to have conspired months ago to plant the message, each using a word or portion of a word, which, taken together, spell out "Kill All Niggers."


Alliance Commun. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Mexican, Fighting Extradition, Denies Assassination Cover-Up
A former high-ranking Mexican official, accused of attempting to cover up an investigation into the assassination of his brother, tried to fight extradition today, contending that the Mexican Government had fabricated its case against him.
The official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, defended himself publicly for the first time since his arrest three months ago.
He spoke at the second day of a hearing before a Federal magistrate to rule on Mexico's request that he be returned to face charges of obstructing justice during the investigation that he led into the slaying of his brother, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, a prominent politician, on Sept. 28, 1994.


NEW YORK CITY'S BUDGET: THE IMPACT  Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later; Arts
Even after the City Council restored $13.5 million in cuts proposed by the Mayor, the Cultural Affairs Department faces $4.6 million in reductions.
About $2.9 million is to be cut from the city's $58 million in subsidies to the operating funds of a group of 32 of the city's major arts institutions, places like the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Brooklyn Museum, the New York Hall of Science and Lincoln Center.
The budget cut will likely be across the board and affect things likes guards' salaries, maintenance and upkeep.


Julius Burger, 98, A Conductor, Dies
Julius Burger, a pianist, composer and conductor whose compositions were revived in a concert at Alice Tully Hall in 1991, died on Monday at his home in Queens.
He was 98.
Mr.
Burger studied music at the Vienna Academy, then joined the Berlin Opera as assistant conductor.
He was also assistant conductor at the Metropolitan Opera in the 1920's, then returned to Europe, where he worked as conductor and arranger with Otto Klemperer at the Berlin Staatsoper and arranged music for the BBC in London.
He moved to the United States in 1939 and soon rejoined the Met, again as assistant conductor.


Foote, Cone Official Won't Be Replaced
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding has decided not to replace Michael D. Koelker as corporate creative development director.
Mr.
Koelker, 56, an award-winning copywriter, died of cancer last Thursday.
In March, Mr.
Koelker relinquished his duties as executive vice president and executive creative director of the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone.
They were assumed by Paul Wolfe, previously a partner at the Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG unit of Euro RSCG in New York.


Tee and Moonlight; Golf Course for Those Who Like to Play in Dead of Night
It was 11:48 P.M., and James Escalona did not know where his golf ball was.
Moments before, he had rocketed his tee shot into the pitch black sky above the Heartland Golf Park, a golf course dedicated to the proposition that some golfers are so hopelessly in love with the sport that they will even play in the absolute dead of night.


Johana Harris, Pianist, Composer And Teacher, 82
Johana Harris, a pianist, composer and teacher and the widow of the composer Roy Harris, died on June 5 at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 82.
Mrs.
Harris, whose original name was Beula Duffey, was born in Ottawa on Dec. 31, 1912.
In the early 1920's she studied with Henry Puddicombe, a student of Liszt, and at his suggestion she moved to New York in 1924 to study with Ernest Hutcheson at the Juilliard School.
A year later, at the age of 17, she joined the Juilliard faculty as an assistant.


After Uproar Over Budget, Anger Fades To Handshake
For weeks, members of the City Council had roared about unconscionable cuts at the core of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed budget.
Demonstrators had marched in fury on the sidewalks outside City Hall, and lobbyists had frantically swarmed through its corridors.
The Council Speaker, fearing the worst, had even gone out on a limb and proposed a modest tax increase to head off some of the cuts.
But when the Mayor and Council leaders finally reached agreement on the budget late Tuesday in a friendly handshake beneath the City Hall dome, the scene held an air of unreality.
The negotiations had been concluded so swiftly and so amicably -- Speaker Peter F. Vallone called it "the most cooperative budget negotiation we've ever had" -- that many observers wondered if this was still the same budget that cut spending more than any other since World War II.


Staples Spot Wins Top Radio Prize
Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York took top honors last night, winning the $100,000 prize for the best radio commercial at the fourth annual Radio-Mercury Awards presentation sponsored by the Radio Creative Fund of New York.


Where the Quiet Holds No Terror
THREE and a half years and a lifetime ago, in a public housing project on the other side of town, Darlene Walker's life was circumscribed by nightfall.
"You wanted to be in before the sun went down," said Ms.
Walker, 32, the mother of two girls, 10 and 9.
"You'd hear gunshots on weekends. You'd get used to it, and when you got used to it, you'd get very depressed. My children saw things they shouldn't see, up close and personal. You'd stay up at night consoling them."


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(PPSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Harbor Is Cleaner
New York Harbor is cleaner than it has been in years, according to the first comprehensive survey of conditions in the 300 square miles of waterways surrounding New York.


International Briefs; Body Shop Reports Rise in Global Sales
The cosmetics retailer Body Shop International said yesterday that its worldwide sales rose 15 percent in the first quarter.
But the company's chairman, Gordon Roddick, said at the annual shareholders meeting in London that while total sales were up, sales excluding new stores were flat in the first three months of the current financial year.
"This figure reflects comparable store sales growth of 2 percent in the U.K., a decline of 8 percent in the U.S.A., and growth of 3 percent in other international markets," he said.


Flea Market in Zoning Peril
THE Annex Antiques Fair and Flea Market is a shopping sideshow that has blossomed every Saturday and Sunday for 27 years on empty parking lots in the West 20's like a ragtag village of Brigadoon.
But it may be dismantled in its present form under a proposal to rezone a stretch of the Avenue of the Americas.
The proposal calls for changing the designation of the blocks flanking the avenue from West 24th to West 31st Streets from manufacturing to commercial-residential.
This would permit the construction of stores and apartments on the empty lots.
Twenty percent of the apartments would be reserved for low or moderate-income tenants.


Stay the Course, This Time
President Clinton's decision to propose a 10-year plan to balance the budget surprised and angered Democratic leaders in the House and Senate.
They read it, correctly, as a clear signal that the White House will look after its own political needs.
That calls for an urgent strategy to make Mr.
Clinton look like a leader rather than a spent force drifting toward the end of a one-term Presidency.
There is a certain justice to Mr.
Clinton's indifference to Congressional Democrats' wishes.
In 1993 and 1994 they failed to deliver the votes that would have gotten him off to a successful start.


A Consumption Tax Would Hit Poor Hardest
To the Editor:
Representative Bill Archer's "sweeping changes" for the Federal tax system (news article, June 7) might be better described as a giant leap in the familiar direction of cutting taxes for the wealthy, while increasing the tax burden on the middle class and working poor.


Clinton Team And G.O.P. Debate Deficit
A day after President Clinton issued his own plan to balance the Federal budget, his emissaries met Republican leaders on Capitol Hill today to explore the prospects for a compromise plan to erase the deficit.
To the astonishment of some and the sputtering frustration of many Democrats in Congress, the two sides ended the session with an arm's-length embrace and agreed to continue talking.
Still, it was not clear where those talks might lead.


Bribery Jury Hears Testimony Against Ex-NASA Contractor
A former Federal agent who worked undercover in a series of Federal operations investigating corruption in the awarding of NASA contracts at the Johnson Space Center near here concluded his testimony in the trial of the only person to plead not guilty in the cases.
The defendant, Dale Brown, is charged with one count of paying a $500 bribe to a Federal agent posing as an associate of an Army procurement officer.
In all, the Government indicted 13 people on a variety of offenses in the operations.


Simpson Jury Members -- Bored, Maybe; Undisciplined, Surely; A Ho-Hum Etymology
To the Editor:
Re "The Simpson Jury's Right to Be Needy" (Op-Ed, June 9): The word "boredom," for the tedium that Patricia Meyer Spacks finds so pervasive among the O. J. Simpson jurors and in society itself, is a relative newcomer to our English lexicon.


Bridge
In the struggle to qualify to represent the United States in the World Championships scheduled in Beijing in October, an upset seemed in the making here today.
At the midpoint of a 96-deal semifinal match, the top-seeded team, headed by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., trailed by 42 imps against a group led by Steve Zolotow of Las Vegas.
In the other semifinal, the second-seeded team, led by Jim Cayne of Manhattan, led by 61 imps against Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., and his third-seeded squad.
In the once-beaten bracket, which will produce a second team to play in Beijing, teams headed by Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., Andy Goodman of San Francisco, Martin Scheinberg of Manhattan and Doug Simson of Columbus, Ohio, survive.


Oklahoma Bombing Linked to Arkansas Robbery
Federal investigators now have evidence linking the two principal suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing to the robbery of an Arkansas gun dealer last November and speculate that this may explain how the bombing was financed.
In what could quite literally be the key to the case, a bank safe-deposit key stolen in the robbery of the gun dealer's home in November was found when Federal agents searched the Herington, Kan., home of one of the bombing suspects, Terry L. Nichols, in April.


For Houston's dignified superstar, it's a whole new transition game.
HAKEEM OLAJUWON, the Houston Rockets' center, is strong, dependable, humble, talented and graceful.
Leading his team to a second consecutive National Basketball Association championship, Mr.
Olajuwon possesses many requisites for endorsement-world riches.
So where are his cheeseburger, sneaker, computer, soda and car commercials?


Essay; Break the Siege
Bosnian leaders are certain that a tacit understanding was reached between the Serbs and the U.N.: Return peacekeeping hostages, and the starvation and murder of Sarajevo civilians will go on undeterred by future NATO air strikes.
Proof that this Muslim despair is well founded is in the U.N. acceptance of the taking of heavy weapons from U.N. control by the Serbs; the U.N., with most of its hostages back, shrugs off the loss.


New Strategy Puts Clinton On His Own
In his New Hampshire appearance with Newt Gingrich and in his nationally televised address in support of a balanced budget, President Clinton has sought to present himself this week as the New Democrat he ran as in 1992: an independent, centrist leader.
This posture, best captured in the President's comment Tuesday night that the budget debate "must go beyond partisanship," is squarely aimed at those who voted for Ross Perot as well as other politically volatile independents who now make up about a third of the American electorate, aides say.


Robert Louis Meyzen, 68, Dies; Was Co-Founder of La Caravelle
Robert Louis Meyzen, co-founder of La Caravelle, the French restaurant that 35 years ago set the standards for haute cuisine, died on Tuesday at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Robert Olivier Meyzen.


3 Software Makers Propose Rating System for Internet
Hoping to provide an alternative to legislation that would censor material posted on the Internet, three software companies yesterday proposed a voluntary rating system and an electronic filter that would allow parents and other individuals to block access to sexually explicit content.
The three companies -- the Microsoft Corporation, Netscape Communications Inc. and Progressive Networks Inc. -- announced the move just as the Senate approved a measure that would make it a criminal act to knowingly distribute obscene material over computer networks.


New Suspect Is Ruled Out In Bombing
Federal authorities today ruled out another man who they thought might be John Doe No. 2, the mysterious suspect in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
This time it was an Army private at Fort Riley, Kan.
Some investigators had believed that the man, Pvt.
Todd Bunting, might have been the suspect, later called John Doe No. 2, who was observed by a clerk at Elliott's Body Shop, a truck rental agency in Junction City, Kan., on April 17, two days before the bombing, with Timothy J. McVeigh, one of two men charged in the blast.


Best Buy Co.(BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Supreme Court Rejects A Double Jeopardy Plea
In a victory for the Federal Government's strategy in drug prosecutions, the Supreme Court ruled today that the Government may prosecute someone for conduct that a judge has already taken into account in increasing the sentence for a separate crime.
By a vote of 8 to 1, the Court rejected the argument that the constitutional protection against double jeopardy bars the Government from making dual use of the same conduct, once to increase a sentence and once to form the basis for a separate criminal prosecution.


World News Briefs; China Reaches Accord With Women's Groups
China and the organizers of a huge international forum on women planned for this summer in Beijing have reached a compromise on a dispute, with China agreeing to increase by 20,000 the number of foreign participants it will admit and the forum accepting a site it had earlier rejected.
The forum, for nongovernmental groups, will run in conjunction with the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women.
The two events were assigned nearby sites in Beijing, but China announced in April that the forum's sessions would be held at Hairou, 30 miles outside Beijing.


Forest City Enterprises Inc.(FCE.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Neither Snide Nor Soggy, Stills Plays to Nostalgia
It is practically impossible, this late in the century, to sing "Woodstock" with a straight face, or at least without irony.
But Stephen Stills, who performed at Tramps Tuesday night, managed it, and managed to make it seem as if he cared.
The ecstatic reaction to the song from a sold-out audience was partly emotionalism; these were baby boomers returning to an adolescence that had national importance, a time in which the personal directly affected the political.
But the response also had to do with the beauty of Mr.
Stills's handling of the material.


George H. Duncan, Radio Executive, 63
George H. Duncan, a radio executive who helped establish a new kind of rock-and-roll programming format in the late 1960's and 1970's, died on Saturday while playing in an alumni lacrosse match at Cornell University in Itacha, N.Y.
He was 63 and had homes in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Montecito, Calif.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


New Woven Designs From Laos
IN Laos, when a woman would traditionally weave cotton and silk textiles in ocher, indigo and other natural colors, her designs would identify her ethnic group and be sold in the villages, but never abroad.
Carol Cassidy, an American weaver who has lived in Vientiane, the capital, since 1989, has changed that.
In 1990, she estabished Lao Textiles, where Laotian women weave her designs -- 2,000-year-old motifs in contemporary patterns.


Commercial Renters to Get a Break
For many of the 600,000 owners of co-op and condominium apartments in New York City, the budget worked out by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Council leaders includes a happy surprise -- a tax cut.
But before anyone breaks out the champagne, consider this: depending on your tastes, the toast may cost more than your tax windfall brings in.
The cut, totaling $17 million, will save co-op and condominium owners an average of just $28.33 a year.


English Gardeners; Sissinghurst Still Speaks Of Vita And Harold
SITTING in Nigel Nicolson's dark little writing room at Sissinghurst, you wonder how such a tall man can work in such a place.
He writes with his back to a small window, and there is only enough space to pace about four steps in any one direction.
"I call it the Virginia Room, because I edited Virginia Woolf's letters here," said Mr.
Nicolson, 78, gesturing to the bronze bust of the novelist with her long, contemplative face, which sits on the bookshelf overlooking his desk.


International Briefs; Airbus Creates Unit To Build Military Craft
Airbus Industrie said yesterday that it was creating a subsidiary with an Italian partner to develop a cargo transport for military and civilian use.
Airbus, which is made up of four aerospace companies from Britain, France, Germany and Spain, is joining the Italian aerospace concern Alenia to produce a transport that would compete with the American C130J made by the Lockheed Martin Corporation, the Airbus president, Jean Pierson, said.


Frederic G. Worden, M.I.T. Professor, 77
Frederic Garfield Worden, a retired professor of psychiatry and former director of the Neurosciences Research Program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died last Tuesday at his home in Jamestown, R.I.
He was 77.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for the Fagan Funeral Home in North Kingstown, R.I.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.97
4.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.43
4.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.37
4.49
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.14
6.11
7.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.54
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.55
8.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.10
6.08
6.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


International Briefs; In Brief
Portugal's Government yesterday approved the sale of the country's largest cigarette maker, Tabaqueira.
The cabinet decided the state would first sell 80 percent to a single investor, either domestic or foreign, through a system of bids.
The rest will be sold in shares to workers and small investors.
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and Kvaerner A.S. of Oslo, Europe's largest shipbuilder, said yesterday that they would collaborate to design new composite materials for use in ships, oil platforms and other sea structures.
Graham Group P.L.C. offered yesterday to buy Erith P.L.C., a British maker of building materials, for $:55.4 million, about $88 million, and Erith's board has recommended that shareholders accept.


Tansi, Congolese Novelist, Is Dead at 48
Marcel Sony Labou Tansi, a novelist considered by many to be Central Africa's greatest writer, died yesterday in Foufoundou, a remote village in the Congo countryside where he had gone for treatment of AIDS.
He was 48.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, including pneumonia, The Associated Press reported, quoting Eugene Banguissa, the former Mayor of Brazzaville, the capital.
Mr.
Tansi's wife, Pierrette, a nurse, had died four days earlier, also from AIDS complications, The A.P. added.


Prices Retreat In Quiet Day After Gains On Tuesday
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday in quiet trading, as some investors sold to consolidate the large gains they had made in Tuesday's huge market advance.
Certainty that the Fed will ease sometime soon has given way to uncertainty as to whether it will act soon enough to keep interest rates from rising, traders said.


Knight Strikes Back at the N.C.A.A.
BOB KNIGHT, censured for his conduct at a post-game news conference during the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in March, issued his own reprimand to the N.C.A.A. tournament committee last night.
On Tuesday, the N.C.A.A. reprimanded Knight and fined Indiana University $30,000, the most severe financial penalty ever imposed by the Division I men's basketball committee.
But Knight, in a statement released through the Indiana sports information office, said seven members of the nine-man committee either now represent or have headed the athletic departments at other schools where N.C.A.A. violations occurred.
He noted the reprimand mentioned a similar sanction against him and Indiana after the 1987 N.C.A.A. tournament, and he proposed an "eight-year purity plan that would require all members of the tournament committee to be so guilt-free."


Houston Sweeps Orlando for N.B.A. Title


Nature, Never An Ally, Is Hostile With Met
Even at its shiniest, nature is not a friend to the performing arts.
When in a darker mood, nature becomes downright hostile.
An example is the beginning of this summer's "Met in the Park" series on Tuesday with an unstaged rendition of Verdi's "Rigoletto" that the Metropolitan Opera will trundle to six outdoor locations this month.
With a little good weather, the normal transaction would have taken place: grass and trees upstaging art.


Merger of Small Management Firms Is Aimed at Giant Competition
The Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Company and the Duff &amp; Phelps Corporation said yesterday that they had agreed to merge their profitable, relatively small investment management businesses into a larger company they hope will better compete with industry giants.
The new company, to be called Phoenix Duff &amp; Phelps, will have about $35 billion of assets.
That would make it one of the 20 largest asset managers in the country, executives of the two companies said, although it would remain a relativley small force in the mutual funds market.


Good for the Masses
To The Home Section:
I was delighted to see "Design Help, Free for All" on May 25.
It's about time that the home retail market is making design services available to its customers.
Design does not have to be perceived as something left to an elite cadre of professionals.
Design can bring delight to people's lives by giving them problem-solving skills, enhancing visual and spatial skills and providing an opportunity for unique personal expression.


This Is One Invitation That Comes Regrets Only
Alas, it is too late to warn Yankees fans about being careful what they wish for because it looks as though they're going to get it, full-bore.
Darryl Strawberry seems to be headed to the New York Yankees.
If all the rational thought and care that went into building the Yankees into a contender last year is undone it is because of the emergence of the chairman of the Yankees' long-dormant reviving crack baseball committee: George Steinbrenner.


Calendar: Shows, Lectures, A Tour
British Architecture  National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street; (212) 369-4880.
An exhibition of 80 drawings, models, photographs and paintings about contemporary British architecture, with projects by the architects Norman Foster, Richard Rogers, Jeremy Dixon and Julia Barfield, starts Wednesday and continues through Sept. 17.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M., Fridays until 8 P.M.
Admission is $3.50; those 65 and older, $2.
Glass and New Galleries  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
An exhibition of 105 glass objects highlighting the museum's collection of 20th-century glass, including works by Tiffany, Lalique and Sarpaneva, starts Tuesday and continues through Oct. 29.


High Court Rules an Award On Age Prejudice Is Taxable
The Supreme Court ruled today that money received from a successful lawsuit or settlement under the Federal law that bars discrimination on the basis of age is taxable as income.
The 6-to-3 decision resolved, at least in the context of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, a fierce dispute among the lower Federal courts on the taxability of such awards.
While the Justices did not address an equally vigorous dispute over the tax treatment of punitive damage awards in negligence cases, there was language in the majority opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens to support the Internal Revenue Service's view that punitive damages are taxable as income to the recipient.


I.B.M. Deal Puts Network Software in Spotlight
The International Business Machines Corporation's acquisition of Lotus Development last week has cast a spotlight on Notes, the software program that by common perception defines collaborative computing.
But Notes faces a competitor that already has more than twice as many users: Groupwise from Novell Inc.
Most discussion of Notes competitors has focused on the Microsoft Corporation's Exchange, which is not even scheduled for release until late this year or early next.


Clinton's Budget Doesn't Matter
President Clinton's weak effort to get back in the budget ballgame does not alter one big political fact.
Whatever he has to say about the budget is of little consequence.
Its fate lies with the Republican Congress.
Not only will Congress draft a budget that reflects its own philosophy, it wields enormous leverage over the President and will likely get its way in the end.
Unless Congress approves appropriations, most discretionary programs will halt on Oct. 1, when the new fiscal year starts.
Only those Government functions essential to health and safety will be up and running.
It will be too distasteful for President Clinton to see welfare, road-building, small-business loans, environmental regulations and other programs grind to a tire-smoking halt.


Picking Up Sofas
FURNISH A FUTURE, a program of the Partnership for the Homeless, a nonprofit group that relocates homeless people from shelters to permanent homes, needs sofas -- and this month only will pick them up from Manhattan homes.


Out-of-Towners Offering Views on Police Problems
THE subject of the conference was police corruption and the host was the New York Police Department, so it was not unreasonable to expect a little Schadenfreude from the more than 200 out-of-towners who converged on the John Jay College of Criminal Justice yesterday.
New York City's Police Department has, after all, had a few problems with corruption lately.
But if there was any chortling behind the hands it was not in evidence on 10th Avenue and 58th Street in Manhattan yesterday.
If anything, the prevailing tone was the opposite, as anti-corruption officers from around the country left the naysaying to the locals, including a disarmingly candid Mayor and Police Commissioner.
The visitors -- a mostly white, male and graying assemblage of officers from 70 police departments and eight countries -- spoke of New York's Finest with a regard approaching awe.


Club Med Inc.(CMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Steve Silver, creator of the San Francisco musical revue "Beach Blanket Babylon," misstated the day he died.
It was Monday, not Tuesday.


Blount Inc.(BLT.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Officer Cleared in Beating
A Trenton police officer who struck a man several times did not violate the man's civil rights, a Federal jury decided yesterday in a case in which the evidence included a videotape made by an amateur photographer.
On Dec. 1, 1991, the officer, Earl Hill, was trying to arrest a teen-ager on suspicion of auto theft when Thomas Downing, the youth's stepfather, intervened.
Officer Hill was acquitted of criminal charges at a 1993 trial; he pleaded guilty to a departmental charge of "overreacting" as a condition of being reinstated.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Senate Approves Bill To Regulate the Internet  The Senate voted 84 to 16 for a bill that would impose a maximum fine of $100,000 and prison terms of as much as two years on individuals who transmit sexually explicit material over computer networks.
Advocates of regulation easily overwhelmed objections from a handful of lawmakers who said the measure would violate constitutional rights to free speech and threaten the growth of computer networks.  [ Page A1. ] Hoping to head off legislation that would censor material on the Internet, three software companies proposed a rating system and an electronic filter that could block access to sexually explicit content.  [ D6. ]


Rising Test Scores in City Schools
With so much bad news reported about New York City schools, from increased violence to crumbling buildings, it is a pleasure to note a positive academic achievement.
Reading and math scores for elementary and middle school students rose in every district in the city last year, the first such increase in six years.
It was a salutary reminder that New York City, for all its problems, runs one of the better urban school districts in the nation.
In math, 53.3 percent of the 388,316 third through eighth graders who took the California Achievement Test scored at or above grade level, a 3.4 percent improvement over last year.
In reading, 47.5 percent of 381,563 students scored at or above grade level on the Degree of Reading Power test, almost two percentage points ahead of last year.


Nicklaus Nearing End Of His Tourney String
Jack Nicklaus is about to play in his 39th consecutive United States Open, by far the most in a row, but his string may be nearing an end.
This is the second straight year that Nicklaus has had to rely on a special exemption from the United States Golf Association to play in the Open, and even he doesn't see it continuing too much longer.


Scientists Find Source of Comets On Outer Edges of Solar System
In yet another proof of the Hubble Space Telescope's powerful optics, astronomers have detected a reservoir of icy, comet-size objects on the fringes of the solar system just beyond the outermost planets.
They said this was the first direct evidence for the theorized Kuiper Belt, the source of all the comets streaking among the planets with short-period orbits of about 20 years or less.
"The solar system just got a lot more interesting," said Dr.
Anita L. Cochran, an astronomer at the University of Texas at Austin who is the leader of the discovery team.
"We now know where these short-period comets formed, and we now have a context for their role in the solar system's evolution."


NEW YORK CITY'S BUDGET: THE IMPACT  Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later; Social Services
The budgets for the city's social service agencies were cut by $190 million.
Foster care services, currently provided to about 46,000 children, will be reduced by $41 million.
This will force cuts in services for children placed in private homes and group care centers.
There will be less money available for the private agencies the city hires to serve these youngsters, and foster families will get no cost of living increases for providing care.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Garrison-Jackson Recovers to Win
Zina Garrison-Jackson survived a first-set scare from the Dutch qualifier Carolin Vis yesterday before recovering to advance to the third round of the $161,250 DFS Classic grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Vis used big serves to break Garrison-Jackson twice in the first set and lead, 4-0.
But the more experienced American came back to win by 7-6 (8-6), 6-1 despite four double faults in her first two service games.
Her next opponent will be Laura Golarsa of Italy, who defeated Mercedes Paz of Argentina, 6-4, 6-3, in yesterday's second round.
Gigi Fernandez, seeded second, defeated Merlanie Schnell, a qualifier from Austria, 7-5, 6-4, and the four-time champion Pam Shriver, seeded No. 14, struggled to win by 7-5, 3-6, 8-6 against Petra Kamstra, another qualifier from the Netherlands. (AP)
A VICTORY FOR SAMPRAS: Pete Sampras, back on his favorite surface, won his first match in a month yesterday when he beat his fellow American, Jonathan Stark, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, in the second round of the Queen's Club tournament in London.
Coming off a clay-court season in which he lost four times in his opening match, No. 1-seeded Sampras rediscovered his form on the fast Queen's grass for which his power game is best suited.
He allowed only 4 points against his serve in the first set and hit 9 aces over all to defeat the 66th-ranked Stark, who had 13 aces. (AP)


Money for New U.N. Force: Congress Is Key for Clinton
In a sharp rebuff to France and Britain, the United States will help pay for a proposed expansion of peacekeeping forces in Bosnia only if Congress agrees, President Clinton told President Jacques Chirac today.
The lukewarm support, on a day of diplomatic and political maneuvering about Bosnia, marred the first meeting between Mr.
Clinton and the newly elected Mr.
Chirac on his first official visit abroad.


Dogs Get Their Day, in Court
Though the German shepherd mauled the Maltese poodle, the shepherd was really not to blame, an appeals court said.
The reason?
Only people, not dogs, are "moral actors" when it comes to the law.
Ruling in a case from Bergen County, the court said yesterday that the human beings in question erred by letting the dogs in question out of their houses, unleashed, into yards that were not closed in.
It ruled that the dog owners should split the bills for the injured poodle.
SUSAN JO KELLER


U.S. Banks' Holdings of Derivatives Rose in First Quarter
The derivatives holdings of American banks soared in the first quarter of the year, while the industry continued to profit from the potentially volatile contracts and manage the risks effectively, Federal bank regulators said today.
But the regulators pointed to some problems at smaller banks that bought structured notes, a type of derivative that pays interest according to often complicated schedules.
A dozen small banks across the country have realized and unrealized losses on structured notes equal to at least a quarter of their capital, said Douglas E. Harris, the senior deputy comptroller for capital markets.


A Candlelight Vigil Is Latest Round in a Clash Over Tyson
When Mike Tyson made plans for his first visit to New York since his release from prison after a rape conviction, some prominent black New Yorkers decided to hold a public homecoming in Harlem.
There was talk of both a parade and a party, but the actual welcome will be more modest: a pair of press conferences on Tuesday.
Even that, however, has set off a storm of controversy among Harlem residents.
Some believe any event would amount to paying homage to a rapist; others think the former heavyweight champion, who served three years in prison, deserves a second chance.


Heart-Drug Results Halve Cor's Stock Value
Shares in Cor Therapeutics Inc. lost about half their value today after the company's flagship heart-attack drug delivered disappointing results in late-stage clinical trials.
Cor's drug, Integrelin, was tested on more than 4,000 patients at 82 centers, and was intended to reduce the number of death, along with heart attacks and other events that require hospitalization within 30 days of an angioplasty procedure.
Although the trials reduced the number of such events for patients treated with Integrelin, the reductions were not considered statistically significant.
Angioplasty is the use of a balloon catheter to reopen clogged arteries.


International Briefs; S.A.S. Grounded Again
Flights in Scandinavia were paralyzed yesterday for the third day after pilots working for Scandinavian Airlines System went on strike over pay.
An S.A.S. spokeswoman said 800 flights were canceled and 40,000 to 50,000 passengers were affected yesterday. (Reuters)


Coroner Says Time of Death Is Imprecise
The Los Angeles County Coroner said today that his office was unable to determine the exact time that Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed, and that the time of their deaths might never be known.
The coroner, Dr.
Lakshmanan Sathyavagiswaran, spent much of the day at O. J. Simpson's trial still on direct examination, detailing minutiae of autopsy analysis like liver temperatures and the extent of rigor mortis in the corpses.
But after nearly eight days of his testimony, the prosecution's best witness for pinpointing the time of death is still only a dog that wandered around Mrs.
Simpson's neighborhood, barking forlornly, until it led neighbors to her front gate and her body.
The dog, an Akita, belonged to Mrs.
Simpson.


The Star-Spangled Banner


On Town Councils, Voices of Experience
WE were just about to put a no-parking zone near the school," said John F. Petitt, the Mayor of Westhampton Beach, L.I. "Then Mark Raynor spoke up." Mr. Raynor, a member of the Village Board of Trustees, pointed out that parents who picked up children would have to park on a heavily traveled street nearby. "So we put off the vote," Mayor Petitt continued. "The thing is, he has kids at that school and he knows.
The rest of us are a little past that."
Mr.
Raynor is 40.
The Mayor and the three other trustees range from 67 to 76.
In that regard, Westhampton Beach, an oceanside town of 1,500 full-time residents, is riding a wave.
All across the nation, particularly in small and medium-size towns, more and more older people are being elected to town councils.


International Briefs; Engine Maker Gets Chief
The unprofitable German engine maker Kloeckner-Humboldt-Deutz A.G. picked Anton Schneider, a former executive of shipbuilder Bremer Vulkan Verbund A.G., to replace Werner Kirschgaesser as chief executive.
The company's board announced the change four months after KHD was bailed out by creditor banks and a month after it said it would lose money for two more years. (Bloomberg Business News)


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc.(FSM,A) reports earnings for 13 wks to Apr 29


The Pop Life
'Pocahontas' Pop
On the way to Central Park last week, where many of those responsible for Disney's latest animated film, "Pocahontas," were gathered under a tent set up for its premiere, the publicity agents for Alan Menken, who composed the music for "Pocahontas," warned reporters not to mention the phrase "kids' music" around him.
But one did.


Grace Decides To Spin Off A Health Unit
Choosing what it regarded as the best option for investors, W. R. Grace &amp; Company said yesterday it would spin off its subsidiary, National Medical Care Inc., to Grace shareholders in a tax-free transaction.
The decision to spin off the nation's leading supplier of kidney-dialysis products and services, came after the Grace board of directors had considered and rejected two other options.
One was a merger proposal for the subsidiary from Vivra Inc., a rival dialysis company; the other was a $3.5 billion bid for the company from Constantine L. Hampers, a Grace executive vice president and co-founder of National Medical Care who was passed over last month for the post of Grace chairman.


A Room Aglow
WE wanted a showroom that wasn't the cookie-cutter office of white walls and glass doors," said Joe Wong, a co-owner, with Roland Peralta, of Kazu Apparel, a clothing manufacturer. They got it.
Their 6,500-square-foot showroom, at 512 Seventh Avenue (37th Street), glows with the golden color of ash.
The cost: $600,000.


Strides Seen in New York Harbor Cleanup
New York Harbor is cleaner than it has been in years, according to the first comprehensive survey of conditions in the 300 square miles of waterways surrounding New York City.
In general, the improvements have resulted from the expansion and upgrading of sewage treatment plants in the region since the 1970's, the report said.
In addition, increased surveillance has sharply cut illegal discharges of liquid industrial waste into the harbor, the report said, and several hundred tons of floating debris are removed each year by a new fleet of garbage-skimming craft.


Seeking Satan, Bogeyman and Balm
THE ORIGIN OF SATAN  By Elaine Pagels  214 pages.
Random House. $23.
NAMING THE ANTICHRIST The History of An American Obsession.
By Robert Fuller  232 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25
The premise behind these two new books -- that Christians throughout history have often tried to associate their adversaries with Satan or his arch-conspirator, the Antichrist -- is neither new nor terribly startling.
Demonizing one's enemies, after all, is a time-honored and popular practice, as virtually every politician knows.
What makes "The Origin of Satan" and "Naming the Antichrist" so interesting, then, is not their central thesis, but how lucidly they explicate it.


I.R.S. Is Preparing to Audit N.R.A., Focusing on Deductions
The National Rifle Association is the target of a major audit by the Internal Revenue Service, which is expected to review whether the nonprofit organization has improperly deducted income from sales of health insurance and bank credit cards, according to current and former N.R.A. officials.
The audit, at a time when the group has been aggressively criticizing Federal law-enforcement agents, will also examine reports that the N.R.A. used tax-deductible donations to a charitable affiliates to make contributions to political candidates.


Settlers Fight Next Step in West Bank Transfer
The latest battlefield between Israeli settlers and the Government many of them despise is not much to look at, a craggy hillside dotted with 13 ramshackle buildings that were abandoned years ago.
With a great splash of publicity, which was one of their goals in the first place, hundreds of settlers took over those buildings this week, cleaning them, installing electricity and designating one concrete wreck a hall for religious studies.


Administration Proposes Federal Regulation of Health Insurance
The Clinton Administration today proposed Federal regulation of private health insurance to make coverage more available and affordable.
But it refused to give any details about the other, more contentious half of the health care policy that President Clinton outlined on Tuesday.
Under that policy, the Government would sharply restrict Medicare payments to doctors, hospitals and nursing homes.


INSIDE
Group of 7: United by Woes?
As the Group of Seven industrial powers prepare to meet in Canada, they face a potential crisis: some of their economies may be headed downhill together.
Page D1.
New Modern Museum Head
The Museum of Modern Art has named Ronald S. Lauder its chairman, as Agnes Gund relinquishes the chairman's post to do the hands-on work of president.
Page C15.


Journal; The Longest Year
It's hard to believe that this weekend marks the first anniversary of the wild Bronco chase.
Doesn't it feel as if we ran to our sets for our first breathless glimpse of A. C. Cowlings at least three years ago?
Time doesn't fly when you're not having fun.
Though conventional wisdom now says that the O. J. Simpson case has no redeeming social or intellectual value as a landmark in jurisprudence or anything else, it has nonetheless hijacked our culture.
You don't have to follow the trial to be affected by it.
You can't escape no matter how hard you try.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the smuggling of illegal immigrants through Europe referred incorrectly in some editions to a Hungarian town where Afghan families were staying.
It is Kistarcsa, not Kirtarsca.


A Glum Unity: The Group of 7 Sees Downhill
Lurking just off the horizon at the economic summit meeting that opens in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Thursday is the kind of potential crisis that the Group of Seven was created two decades ago to keep from getting out of hand.
Some of the world's biggest economies, in an oddly synchronized fashion, may be headed downhill together.
Japan is caught in a vicious deflationary spiral, its economy shrinking and its banks threatened by losses so enormous that they could shake markets around the world.
The United States is struggling to keep a soft landing from becoming a hard one, and Canada is being sucked down in its wake.


Simpson Jury Members -- Bored, Maybe; Undisciplined, Surely; Downsized Dozen
To the Editor:
"Why a Jury Can Be 12, Even 6, but Not 5" (Week in Review, June 11) has a paragraph on the mystical significance of the number 12.
More mystical is your inclusion of "baker's dozen" in this context.
Has downsizing turned to word usage?
Maybe things are just more expensive in New York.
But in Chicago one occasionally finds a bagel baker who will give you 13 when you buy a dozen.
And Random House and the Oxford English Dictionary still say a baker's dozen means 13.
ALBERT B. GLASER  Chicago, June 12, 1995


When Will Japan Concede Its Wartime Past?
To the Editor:
"Japan and Its Past" (editorial, June 8) spoke the minds of people of many nations, especially of those from the Asian countries that suffered most from Japan's deadly invasions and brutalities.


With Eye on Sarajevo, Government Bolsters Its Forces
Across the rolling hills around this dusty town, the Bosnian Army has massed the largest troop assembly of its three-year war, including elite units, and the talk is of impending attack.
"Enough is enough," said one soldier sent here from Zepce, about 60 miles to the north.
"We're going to open up Sarajevo, Allah the Almighty willing."


What Kind of Hawk?
Newt Gingrich's foray into New Hampshire gave Americans another reason to contemplate the possibility that he will be President someday.
Though he has stated that he will not run in 1996, the Speaker of the House is nothing if not unpredictable -- and, in any case, there is always 2000.
While we have abundant information on Mr.
Gingrich's views about domestic affairs, we know next to nothing about his thoughts on foreign policy.
What we do know is not very reassuring.


Simpson Jury Members -- Bored, Maybe; Undisciplined, Surely
To the Editor:
Re Patricia Meyer Spacks' "Simpson Jury's Right to Be Needy" (Op-Ed, June 9): Next thing we know, boredom will be elevated to an official -osis, and then a legal defense; "dying of boredom" will cease to be hyperbole.
The lack of a wholly suitable Greek or Latin root will hopefully slow this process.


CHRONICLE
Yesterday's London newspapers were full of the news that PRINCE WILLIAM, who turns 13 next week, has been admitted to Eton College, the boarding school that has educated British leaders for 555 years.
He will be the first prospective heir to the throne to attend Eton.
Prince Willam's education is one issue on which his separated parents are said to be in complete agreement.
The Daily Mail reported yesterday that both the Prince and Princess of Wales very much wanted William go to Eton but that they wanted him to be admitted on his own academic merits.
Last week Prince William took the entrance exam.
The newspaper said he "comfortably secured the 65 percent pass mark."


Two-Tier Wall St.
"All animals are created equal, but some animals are more equal than others." -- George Orwell, "Animal Farm"  A young bond analyst moved to CS First Boston last year, lured by the promise of a $100,000 salary and a guaranteed cash bonus to match.
But at the end of the year when he stepped up to collect the bonus, the firm gave him two choices: forgo it, or take a percentage of it as severance and hit the road.


Equine Virus Is a Problem In Atlanta
Piroplasmosis, a disease carried by ticks, could create problems for those hoping to compete in the equestrian events at the 1996 Summer Olympics, an Atlanta Organizing Committee official said today at the 104th International Olympic Committee session here.
Horses with piroplasmosis are prohibited from entering the state of Georgia.
But according to an informal survey recently conducted by the International Equestrian Federation, several European nations have horses in their Olympic-candidate pool that are carriers of the disease.


Halifax Journal; On a Paved Parking Lot, They Put Up a Paradise
First they paved the gravel parking lot, down along the Halifax waterfront.
But the result was judged insufficiently pleasing for the important visitors scheduled to gather in the squat, green-tinted glass building overlooking it.
So last weekend workers hastily covered the lot with sod, potted trees, flowering shrubs and pansies, geraniums and chrysanthemums in blue, red and yellow -- the colors of the official logo for the annual summit meeting of the Group of Seven major industrial nations, which begins here on Thursday.


Seafood on Stanley Cup Menu
Hockey fans are placing their bets for the Stanley Cup championship.
Backing the New Jersey Devils -- of course -- is Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who does not think much of the octopus-on-ice ritual so beloved by fans of the Detroit Red Wings.
If the Devils lose, she will provide an Italian-style octopus dish, courtesy of La Gondola Restaurant in the Chambersburg section of Trenton.
She will also throw in a basket of tomatoes, peaches, corn and other New Jersey goodies.


Hoboken Mayor Is Accused of Assault at Poll
Elections in this intensely political city tend to be knock-down, drag-out affairs.
But no one in town can remember an occasion when the mayor and his sons assaulted the spouse of a candidate in the middle of a crowded polling place.
Mayor Anthony Russo, however, stands accused of doing just that.
Francis Przygoda, whose wife, Augusta, ran against the Mayor's cousin in a City Council race on Tuesday, said today that Mr.
Russo slammed into him to stop him from photographing him, and that Mr.
Russo's sons spun him to the ground in an effort to pry away his disposable camera.
Mr.
Russo then stamped on the camera, Mr.
Przygoda said.


3 Charged in Killings Over Cocaine Dealing
For the third time in a year, the Manhattan District Attorney has dismantled a violent gang of young cocaine dealers who plied their murderous trade on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
This time, the gang of 22 men and women called itself Natural Born Killers, an apparent reference to last year's Warner Brothers movie about serial killers.
Of the 22 people indicted yesterday, 17 were taken into custody in morning raids.
Two indictments charged them with three homicides, conspiracy, drug dealing and gun running in what investigators said was a thriving $70,000-a-week crack-cocaine business near two schools in Manhattan Valley.


Bosnia Troops Mass And Talk of Attack
Northwest of Sarajevo, the Bosnian Army massed the largest troop concentration of the three-year war, and the talk was of breaking the Serbian siege of the capital.


NEW YORK CITY'S BUDGET: THE IMPACT  Critics Maintain Budget's One-Time Savings Could Bring More Pain Later; Transit
The new city budget could endanger free subway and bus passes for schoolchildren, and it means that users of city-supported private express buses will pay sharply higher fares.
The new city budget permits private express bus lines, which carry 300,000 people a day, to raise their rush-hour fares from $4, to $5.
It also eliminates the subsidy that lowered the price of discount ticket booklets to $3.50 per trip.
The changes will allow the city to decrease its support for the buses by $3 million.


METRO DIGEST
NEW TACTIC TO MONITOR OFFICERS Trying to halt a spate of scandals in the New York City Police Department, the Mayor and Police Commissioner announced new anticorruption measures whose cornerstone is a sweeping overhaul in the way suspect officers are monitored and investigated.  [ Page A1. ] The subject of the conference at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice was police corruption, and the host was the New York Police Department.  [ Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick, B4. ]


Officer in Killing: Back to Work
Officer Ronald Cohen, the housing police officer who shot and killed a 16-year-old Paterson youth four months ago, igniting almost a week of unrest, will return to work on Monday.
Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr. said yesterday that the 25-year-old officer, who has been on paid administrative leave, would be assigned to the radio room or other communications duties until he completed an intensive training course on firearms use and another on reviewing critical incidents.


U.S. Blacks Battle Nigeria Over Rights Issue
In past years, the Government of Nigeria and many prominent African-American leaders were more likely to be on the same side of international issues: debt-relief for sub-Saharan countries, ending white minority rule in southern Africa, ousting the military dictatorship in Haiti.
But these days, the two are engaged in a war of words and symbolic protests in an increasingly bitter dispute over human rights in Nigeria.


Rendezvous in Halifax
Every year the leaders of the seven major industrial countries gather for a summit meeting, whether needed or not, and issue a communique long on vague promises and short on concrete commitments.
This year's meeting, which begins today in Halifax, Nova Scotia, may prove a modest exception.
A draft of the final statement includes some proposals that deserve support.
The first would enhance the role of the International Monetary Fund in monitoring and responding to economic problems that develop in member countries.
The need for more engagement was shown when the fund, along with the United States, bailed out Mexico and prevented financial turbulence from spreading through Latin America.


Yeltsin Allows Critic in Army To Quit Post
President Boris N. Yeltsin today accepted the resignation of one of the Russian Army's most popular and outspoken commanders, creating a powerful potential challenger for the 1996 presidential elections.
The commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Aleksandr M. Lebed, is a veteran of the Soviet campaign in Afghanistan and has been a withering critic of the Russian military action in Chechnya.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in Business Day on Monday about the Clinton Administration's decision not to issue regulations to protect workers from repetitive strain injury described the Administration's position incompletely in some editions.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration said that its ergonomics team would not be dismantled, despite setbacks, which the article described.
The agency also said its effort to issue ergonomic rules would continue despite the setbacks.


Prefabricated Circuitous Routes
SOME people try to reinvent the mousetrap.
Ace Architects, of Oakland, Calif., has reinvented the circular staircase.
A circular staircase is often mistakenly called a spiral staircase.
In fact, a spiral staircase has a pole going up the middle, while a circular staircase is open and airy in the middle.


Crown Books Corp.(CRWN,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 29


In New Lyrics, Jackson Uses Slurs
One of the most anticipated and heavily promoted albums in years, Michael Jackson's "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I," includes a song with lyrics that can be interpreted as pointedly critical of Jews.
Although Mr.
Jackson has over the last decade built a reputation as a performer whose music consistently focuses on childhood, fantasy, love and brotherhood, his new double album, which is to be released by Sony Music on Tuesday, is profane, obscure, angry and filled with rage.


House Votes $628 Million More for Pentagon's Missile Defense System
Invoking the threat of potential missile attacks from rogue nations, the House today added $628 million to the Clinton Administration's plan to defend against missiles that could strike the United States or its troops overseas.
Most of the increase, to $3.5 billion from $2.9 billion, was devoted to developing and putting into the field a system to protect the continental United States from long-range missile attacks.
The House directed the Administration to deploy the antimissile system "at the earliest practical date."


Market Place; New Tactics In Takeovers: Rich Bids and Quick Closes
Time was that takeover fights could drag on interminably, racking up mind-numbing lists of white knights, counter bids and court rulings.
No more.
Recently "strategic" corporate buyers have been able to come in with hostile but rich bids and turn their unwilling targets around in as little as a week.
Witness the Lotus Development Corporation's capitulation on Sunday to I.B.M.'s sweetened bid of more than $3.5 billion, only six days after having become the target of the unwanted advances of the blue-chip suitor.
Or there was the Clark Equipment Company's acceptance of the Ingersoll-Rand Company's sweetened offer of $1.46 billion in April, 12 days after having derided the Ingersoll-Rand bid as an outrageous invasion.


Owners' Labor Trial Put Off
Once again, the trial of baseball's club owners on unfair labor practice charges was postponed yesterday.
The new date for the proceeding before an administrative law judge of the National Labor Relations Board is July 24, but all three parties hope the matter is settled by then.
"Whenever you can get the parties to resolve their disputes, it's always more effective and serves the objectives of the statute," Judge Edwin Bennett said yesterday in announcing the postponement.
"Voluntary adjustments are always the goal."


No Smoke, No Fire
To The Home Section:
In a photograph with the article "So Where Is That Lava Lamp Now?" (April 6), a woman is shown dropping a garment into a barrel labeled "Freedom." The caption reads "Protesters burn bras, 1968."


Pearl Jam Bows To Ticketmaster
Pearl Jam's battle with Ticketmaster has ended for the moment.
Because Ticketmaster has exclusive agreements with nearly all the stadium-size performing spaces on the East Coast, the band announced yesterday that it would allow Ticketmaster to sell tickets for part of its 1995 tour.
Last year, the band canceled a summer tour because Ticketmaster would not agree to lower its service charge to $2; the company's usual charges are $3.50 to $7.50 for each concert ticket.
Because dates have not been set for Ticketmaster's part of the Pearl Jam tour, the new service fees have not been determined.


Francis Levien, 90, Industrialist Known For Conglomerates
Francis S. Levien, a New York lawyer-industrialist who specialized in the creation of corporate conglomerates, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
A resident of Palm Beach, Fla., he was 90 and had lived in Manhattan and Stamford, Conn.
Mr.
Levien (pronounced leh-vee-EN) struck it rich in the late 1930's, when he and a partner won a Delaware case that resulted in the forming of what is now Pepsico.


2 Companies Are Identified As Discount Chain Bidders
Venture Stores Inc. and Apollo Advisers L.P. are potential bidders for control of the Hills Stores Company, people involved in the battle over the regional discount store chain said yesterday.
Those people said Venture, which operates 113 discount stores in the Midwest, has been in contact with Dickstein Partners Inc., an investment firm that holds 13.2 percent of Hills' shares and has begun a proxy fight for control of the company's board.


911 Blamed By Medics For Delaying Ambulance
An ambulance was delayed more than half an hour Tuesday morning as a 63-year-old Brooklyn woman lay unconscious outside her apartment building because a 911 operator did not communicate critical information to dispatchers, Emergency Medical Service union officials charged yesterday.
The woman, Ellen Nordstrom, of 4015 Seventh Avenue in the Sunset Park section, was pronounced dead on arrival at Maimonides Medical Center on Tuesday.


Sports of The Times; Will It Finally Be a European Open?
THIS is the United States Open and this is Shinnecock Hills out here in the fashionable Hamptons, but with the wet and the wind puddling their rain suits, the golfers resemble those in the British Open at St.
Andrews or Turnberry or Royal St.
George's.
"This U.S. Open," Nick Faldo was saying, "is more British than the British Open."


Tentative Accord to Keep Jets in Winnipeg
A group of local businessmen agreed yesterday to pay $32 million to buy out the Winnipeg Jets' majority owner, BARRY SHENKAROW, and his partners in a deal aimed at assuring the team will stay in the city.
The sale to Spirit of Manitoba Inc., hinges on a $10 million deposit being made by tomorrow and other conditions being fulfilled by mid-August.
These conditions include league approval, raising an additional $20 million for an endowment fund to cover any future Jets losses and a Revenue Canada ruling on the status of contributions to that fund.


Bagpipes and Bailouts as Leaders Gather
Leaders of seven major industrial democracies sat down today to their self-appointed task of overhauling the world's financial institutions to better handle crises like the crash of the Mexican peso that shook world financial markets early this year.
To the skirl of Scottish bagpipes and the flag waving of hundreds of cheering onlookers, the leaders arrived in this center of Canada's Atlantic provinces, and after ceremonies under a sunny sky went into a working dinner to discuss financial matters.


Japan Takes A Softer Tone In Auto Battle
Japan's Prime Minister struck an unexpectedly compromising tone today in talks with President Clinton about American demands to widen access to the Japanese automotive market.
But the Administration's top economic officials reacted warily, saying they would not know until negotiations began next week in Geneva whether a last-minute deal might be possible.
In an hourlong meeting here, before the summit talks began among top leaders of the seven largest industrial democracies, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama repeatedly told Mr.
Clinton that he hoped to resolve the issue in the next two weeks, according to American and Japanese officials who sat in on the meeting.


No Headline
"I think you come to a  particular time where you know that you can't do any more." RAMON C. CORTINES, on his decision to quit as Schools Chancellor.  [ A1:6. ]
"Unhappily, the gap between us could not be bridged." PAT RILEY, on his decision to quit as Knicks coach.  [ B7:5. ]


James Oscar Lee, 85, Educator And Worker on Race Relations
Dr.
James Oscar Lee, an educator who became a leading figure in the National Council of Churches and the National Conference of Christians and Jews, died on Sunday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
A longtime resident of Brooklyn, he was 85 and had lived in a Gaithersburg retirement community, Asbury Methodist Village, for the past 11 years.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Reliving Volunteer Work in the South
In the spring of 1964, Robert Ostrow was the epitome of an establishment lawyer.
Living in Scarsdale, N.Y., practicing tax law, never having had a black classmate in 15 years of graduate school, Mr.
Ostrow could not have lived a life more removed from the turbulent civil rights struggle being waged in the Deep South.
"I was not involved in any social movement," Mr.
Ostrow said in a recent interview.
"I didn't know there were problems. I was completely isolated."


If Tim McVeigh Is Indeed a Pariah, That Will Suit His Lawyer Just Fine
That's Stephen (never Steve) Jones, by all accounts -- even the few that are printable -- a man with a penchant for control and a propensity for detail who has spent a 30-year legal career defending society's pariahs.
And while those qualities have not made him the most widely loved resident of this wind-scrubbed town, friends and detractors agree that they have certainly made him a rigorous and effective advocate.
Enid's best-known citizen is, they say, the perfect lawyer to represent Timothy J. McVeigh, the principal defendant in the Oklahoma City bombing case.
"There's no doubt in my mind that Stephen Jones views this to be a horrible crime," said Tony M. Graham, a former Federal prosecutor who often vied with Mr.
Jones before entering private practice.
"That he can go ahead and represent a person accused of that is the mark of a very professional lawyer."


Items Dear to Council Ease Budget Approval
On their way to approving New York City's new $31.1 billion budget near dawn yesterday morning, the City Council sat patiently through hours of committee meetings and weighty discussions about finance, debt and bond ratings.
As the hours dragged by, many Council members grew bleary-eyed.
Some nodded off.
But suddenly, heads snapped up and attention sharpened decidedly when, about 1 A.M., Speaker Peter F. Vallone's staff at last distributed to each Council member a list of so-called Council initiatives, a package of pork-barrel projects, New York City style.
Together they cost about $9 million.


Term in Airline Parts Fraud
A Saddle River man who was convicted of selling unauthorized airplane gaskets was sentenced to 37 months in Federal prison yesterday.
Dominic Rvocco was convicted last November of 17 counts of mail fraud and one count of consipiracy.
Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney, said evidence was introduced at the trial that the gaskets, made at two companies in Mahwah, could create an in-flight hazard, but no accidents have been reported.


James Oscar Lee, 85, Educator And Worker on Race Relations
Dr.
James Oscar Lee, an educator who became a leading figure in the National Council of Churches and the National Conference of Christians and Jews, died on Sunday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
A longtime resident of Brooklyn, he was 85 and had lived in a Gaithersburg retirement community, Asbury Methodist Village, for the past 11 years.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Lawmakers Agree on Peddling Zones
State lawmakers agreed yesterday to restore some preferential treatment to disabled veterans selling wares on city streets but continued to ban them from midtown Manhattan, where businesses strongly opposed their return.
The compromise apparently appeased all sides in a dispute that stretches back to an 1894 state statute allowing disabled veterans to peddle wherever they wanted to.
In 1991, complaints peaked from the city and merchants, who said peddlers had converted prime retail areas, especially Fifth Avenue, into flea markets.
The Legislature, in response, passed a law giving the city authority to decide who could peddle where, including veterans.


Bosnia's Elite Force: Fed, Fit, Muslim
The Bosnian Army's toughest commandos have turned a schoolhouse here into an incongruously plush, carpeted headquarters replete with fresh meat and vegetables, satellite television in the mess and an ivy-covered gazebo.
Before they step inside, they remove their shoes in the Muslim fashion.
The Black Swans -- most of them refugees, some the only survivors of families obliterated by Serbian "ethnic cleansing" -- began as a few dozen men who had been driven from their hometown, Bijeljina, in the first battle of the war.


S.E.C. Accuses an Analyst and His Father of Insider Trading on Merger Plan
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday charged a Salomon Brothers analyst and his father with trading on inside information ahead of the announcement of a proposed merger between the Bell Atlantic Corporation and the cable giants Tele-Communications Inc. and the Liberty Media Corporation.
Frederick A. Moran, president of Moran Asset Management and Moran &amp; Associates, a money management firm and securities brokerage firm, respectively, was accused of buying hundreds of thousands of shares of Tele-Communications and Liberty Media in the two days before the announcement, based on a tip from his son, Frederick W. Moran, a telecommunications analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Salomon was representing Bell Atlantic.
The proposed merger of the communications companies fell through in early 1994.


Diner's Journal
Italian Chic
The people at the next table are discussing real estate.
Just beyond them are a couple with a bored-looking 6-year-old; they order grilled vegetables, two plates of spaghetti all'arrabbiata and plain spaghetti for the little girl.
Next to them are two blonde women, both investment bankers, both eating veal chops seared with rosemary.
And while we can't see the quartet behind us, we can hear them: deeply involved in food, they order Gaja chardonnay to drink with their fried calamari.
Everything about Lumi will seem familiar to people used to dining on the Upper East Side.
Upstairs, the small town house, with its high ceilings, chandeliers and fireplaces, has the tony feel of a restaurant like Parioli Romanissimo.
Downstairs is brighter and more modern, with a lively bar just inside the door.


Whether Friend or Foe, Most Think Clinton Is Playing Politics on the Budget
The Democratic anger and the Republican olive branch over President Clinton's conversion to the balanced-budget faith proceed from a shared disbelief.
Almost no one on Capitol Hill thinks the President is convinced of the economic or fiscal need for a balanced budget.
Almost everyone thinks he suddenly produced a plan to balance the budget in 10 years because he thought it was in his own political interest.


Lloyd Webber Wins Prize
The composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber and the architect Renzo Piano are among the winners of the 1995 Praemium Imperiale awards for lifetime achievement in the arts.
The winners were announced yesterday in London by Shigeaki Hazama, the chairman of the Praemium Imperiale executive committee of the Japan Art Association, which confers the awards.
Sir Edward Heath, the former British Prime Minister, was the host at the ceremony.
The other winners are the artists Matta, Christo and Jeanne-Claude, and the Kabuki performer Nakamura Utaemon 6th.
Each is to receive about $175,000 and a commemorative medal to be presented in the fall in Tokyo by the royal family.


Comedy for a Rights Film Festival
Constantin Costa-Gavras's film "The Minor Apocalypse" isn't the kind of taut, message-laden political thriller that is usually associated with the director of "Z" and "Missing." The movie, which opens the Sixth Annual Human Rights Watch International Film Festival this evening at the Walter Reade Theater, is a comedy satirizing the fall of Communism, aging 1960's radicals, capitalist opportunism and the omnivorous media.
Very loosely, it could be described as a European hybrid of "The Big Chill," "Being There" and "Network."
The main character, Stan (Jiri Menzel), is a Polish emigre writer who has moved to Paris, where a sojourn with his ex-wife and her television-producer husband has stretched into a two-year stay.
The former Communist writer finds himself unemployed, a useless anachronism.
One evening, while trying to fix a ceiling light bulb in his room, he accidentally sets a fire.
His hosts, rushing to the scene, misinterpret his deed as a failed suicide attempt.
To save him, they decide to find a publisher for his mediocre writings.


It's All in the Timing
As Marla Runyan crouched in the starting blocks at the national track and field championships, she could not see the 10 hurdles placed ahead of her like cards in a Rolodex file.
She has a hole in the center of her vision, and she must rely on trust and timing: eight steps to the first hurdle, three steps between the other nine.
Three steps, jump.
Three steps, jump.
"It's like closing your eyes and running, or wearing a blindfold," said Rahn Sheffield, who coaches Runyan.
"It's all rhythm. You've got to be brave and have faith."


Funds for a Riverfront Hotel
Plans for a 250-room hotel along the Hudson River in Jersey City received a boost yesterday.
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat, announced that the Department of Housing and Urban Development has awarded Hudson County a $8.3 million loan and a $1 million grant for the project.


Word of a Resignation Causes Stir, Not Rumble
The reaction on the street (and under it) to the departure of Pat Riley varied in theme and intensity yesterday, though it seemed a little less than seismic.
"Quit? He did?" said a surprised Officer Walter Miller of the Midtown South Precinct.
"I'm sorry to hear that. He was very good for the team."


Corrections
A brief article last Friday about the purchase of office space in Manhattan for the Governor and other state agencies misstated the size of the space and the address.
The state bought seven floors as an office condominium unit; it did not buy the whole building.
The address is 633 Third Avenue, not 663.


Riley Quits, Citing Differences With Management
In a move that was shocking despite rumors that it might happen, Pat Riley announced his resignation yesterday after four years as head coach of the Knicks.
Riley left with one year remaining on his contract and with a five-year, $15 million contract extension offer from the Knicks on the table.
Through a statement issued by his public relations firm, Riley said that his resignation had "absolutely nothing to do with money," but that philosophical differences with management, and management's refusal to give him more control over basketball matters, had led to his decision.


Ford Planning Moderate Rise In '96 Prices
The Ford Motor Company said today that it planned moderate price increases, averaging 2.9 percent, for its 1996 model cars and trucks, due this fall.
Ford also priced the new model of its best-selling Taurus sedan, which the company plans to begin assembling on Monday.
In a bow to the rapid softening in the auto market this spring, Ford said it would raise the price of the most popular Taurus version, equipped with power windows, power locks and other features, by 2.5 percent, to $19,390.


An Unfortunate Resignation
The resignation of Ramon Cortines marks a sad day for New York City.
Mr.
Cortines, the city's sixth Schools Chancellor in 11 years, brought educational vitality and stability to a troubled school system.
But he found intolerable his continuing clashes with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, particularly over budget and school safety issues.
In a sense, Mr.
Cortines was a victim of the kind of rough mayoral politics that had tainted his selection.
He was chosen on a 4-to-3 vote, in a split that pitted supporters of Mr.
Giuliani against those of former Mayor David Dinkins.
But Mr.
Cortines made it clear he was beholden to no one.
His stubborn independence quickly came into conflict with Mr.
Giuliani's desire for a stronger role in school affairs.
The two men clashed on many issues, and Mr.
Giuliani often overreached the proper limits of mayoral power.
But Mr.
Cortines too often and for too long resisted the Mayor's sensible demand that he cut his bloated bureaucracy.


Price Makes Himself Right at Home at Shinnecock and in Lead
As advertised, it was a British-style United States Open that got under way today at Shinnecock Hills.
The course got firmer, the breezes came up, the greens got faster and Nick Price took command with a round of 66.
The only thing missing was some haggis, the Swilcan Burn and maybe a couple of bagpipers as the last groups staggered off the course in the gloaming.
But the tumultuous opening round had everything else.
It had Price, the reigning British Open champion, back on form, bogeying just one hole and shooting his best opening round in a United States Open.


M.S.L. Tansi, 48, Congo Novelist Known for Bitter Colonial Satire
Marcel Sony Labou Tansi, a novelist considered by many to be Central Africa's greatest writer, died on Wednesday in Foufoundou, a remote village in the Congo countryside where he had gone for treatment of AIDS.
He was 48.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, including pneumonia, The Associated Press reported, quoting Eugene Banguissa, the former Mayor of Brazzaville, the capital.
Mr.
Tansi's wife, Pierrette, a nurse, had died four days earlier, also from AIDS complications, the A.P. added.


Art in Review
Pierre Bonnard
Wildenstein  19 East 64th Street  Manhattan  Through June 30
No artist paints quite like Bonnard did, with his lapidary ease and delicacy, fantastic sense of color and ability to suggest silence.
That he continued to paint in the 1940's more or less in the style he did at the turn of the century, only better, makes him something of an odd man out for art historians who prize change and invention.
To the artist's credit, he remained his own man.


New Challenges for the Caped Crusader
And "Batman Forever" is a viable installment in the "Batman" series, though Joel Schumacher's flashy direction is messier and less interestingly macabre than Tim Burton's darkly ingenious films in this genre.
Mr.
Schumacher favors vertiginous angles that turn into overkill during his film's awkward action sequences, but he's better when it comes to displaying the contents of Batman's closet.
Pandering more directly to a teen-age audience than either "Batman" or "Batman Returns" did, this third film also dwells on sophomoric wisecracks.
Like this: "You trying to get under my cape?"


Great Expectations Take Thrill Out of Winning
If Nick Price, the first-round leader, goes on to win the United States Open, he is certain to get more of something he has been trying to escape: attention.
After shooting a four-under-par 66 today, Price acknowledged that he became worn down this spring by the constant expectations that he would win.
Of course, Price created those expectations with a dazzling run that included 16 tournament victories between August 1992 and this year's Masters.
In that time, he won almost $7 million.


When Charge Is Racism in Immigration Reform
To the Editor:
In "Native-Born Displaced" (letter, June 7), commenting on immigration policy, Peter Brimelow complains about critics "blindly dismissing any reform effort as 'racist.' " Not true.
We don't dismiss any reform effort as racist.
But consider Mr.
Brimelow's particular approach to this problem, as set forth in his new book, "Alien Nation."


Art in Review
Elena Climent
Mary-Anne Martin Fine Art  23 East 73rd Street  Manhattan  Through June 24
Whether or not they depict altars, the careful orderings of plants, everyday objects and photographs in the charming, vibrantly colored still lifes of the Mexican painter Elena Climent are like little shrines.
Everything in them reads as a kind of offering and is part of an elliptical narrative, at once personal and self-effacing, that touches lovingly on life, art and Mexican culture both high and low.


Art in Review
Igor Mitoraj
Marisa Del Re Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 30
A monumental marble face confronts you at the door, with sightless eyes and chiseled lips "whose frown and sneer of cold command, tell that the sculptor well those passions read . . ." The only clue that this is not a fragment from some Ptolemaic effigy is the square hole cut into the right cheek.
An impossibly well-muscled torso twists its hips in the contraposto of the Poly- kleitan canon, but it's topped by a realistic mouth and chin, and its phallus is too large and too realistic for an actual classical sculpture.  (The Greeks believed that small was beautiful.) "Ikaria," a slender adolescent girl, extends one wing, with a second miniature torso inside it; a barely tasted pomegranate rests at her feet, condemning her to flightlessness for half the year.


Spaniards Stunned by Military Eavesdropping
The disclosure that Spain's military secret service intercepted and recorded hundreds of mobile phone conversations of business exeuctives, politicians and even King Juan Carlos during the 1980's and early 1990's has stunned Spaniards and is causing alarm within the governing Socialist Party.
The disclosure has not only embarrassed the scandal-plagued Government and renewed opposition calls for the resignation of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez; it has also raised the specter of an elite corps of military officers operating independently of either judicial or parliamentary control, gathering confidential information that could be used against individuals.


Royals' Gubicza Limits Athletics to Only One Hit
Royals 7, Athletics 0
Mark Gubicza pitched a one-hitter, allowing only a fourth-inning single to Mark McGwire, and led the Kansas City Royals over the host Oakland Athletics, 7-0, yesterday.
Gubciza (4-5) struck out five and walked one in his fourth career shutout.
It was the fewest hits he allowed in a complete game in his career.
McGwire's single, a drive to left, came with one out in the fourth.


A Leg Up on Ladder, but Still Far From Top
Bonny Arquiro, a Filipino-American, weighs 105 pounds, the last 5 of them muscle that she says she acquired on the job.
Ms.
Arquiro works alone, underground in manholes splicing cables for US West Inc., a regional telephone company formed in the breakup of AT&amp;T in 1984.
To lift a manhole cover, she slips a rod under the edge, crouches and with a heave dislodges the cover, tumbling back on her rump.
Then she grips the cover and works it off.
"It's all leverage," she says.


Cortines Allies Stunned, But Hardly Surprised
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines may have submitted his resignation with no regrets, but it provoked shock, worry and sadness among those who saw him as an accessible and tireless leader committed to the most basic aspect of his job: education.
The parents, educators and administrators who worked with him were stunned by the news, but not surprised given the rancor that existed between Mr.
Cortines and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
At the same time, some wondered if anyone could succeed given the built-in tensions between a mayor and a schools chancellor who found themselves at odds over one-fourth of the city budget.


After Weeks of Delay, Gov. Wilson Finally Makes It Official: He's Seeking Presidency
After weeks of delaying his declaration of candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California said today that indeed, he was running.
At his campaign headquarters in Sacramento, Mr.
Wilson and his aides unfurled a "Pete Wilson for President" banner over another one saying "Pete Wilson for President Exploratory Committee."


CORTINES SAYS HE'S QUITTING AFTER BATTLES WITH MAYOR OVER CONTROL OF SCHOOLS
After months of constant criticism by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he was resigning and would leave office by Oct. 15, if not sooner.
Mr.
Cortines, who has run the nation's largest school system since September 1993, notified the president of the Board of Education in a two-sentence note that he wrote on Sunday, the day after the Mayor announced the formation of a commission to investigate the school system's handling of safety and violence.
That was the latest in a series of increasingly personal attacks by the Mayor that have covered everything from school finances to the janitors that clean the schools.


Devils Plan to Trap Cup In the Neutral Zone
The Devils will employ the same strategy against the Detroit Red Wings that they used to earn their first trip to the Stanley Cup finals.
"For us to succeed, we have to play the way that got us here," their captain, Scott Stevens, said today after practice at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"We have to play New Jersey style of hockey."


Market Place; In search of global diversity? France may offer new promise.
INVESTORS in the United States who seek global diversity might do well to consider France, now that the uncertainty surrounding the recent Presidential election there has passed.
Unlike emerging markets like Mexico, which can carry sizable risks, an industrialized country like France offers investors the promise of a stable economy with stable growth.


METRO DIGEST
SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR PLANS TO LEAVE
After months of constant criticism by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he was resigning and would leave office by Oct. 15, or sooner if his successor was found.
He notified the president of the Board of Education of his decision on Sunday, the day after the Mayor announced the formation of a commission to investigate the school system's handling of safety.  [ Page A1. ]


Sports of The Times Tuning In to Sounds Of a Silent Game
GOLFERS swing in silence, walk in silence, raise their arms or droop their shoulders in silence.
At the United States Open at Shinnecock Hills, it's so quiet you can hear a putt drop.
So quiet you can hear blimps humming above.
So quiet the occasional whistle of a Long Island Rail Road train howls across the British-type links like a metallic Hound of the Baskervilles.
There's a hush all over the golf world, but the sound of voices occasionally breaks that silence.
You seldom hear the golfers' voices, but the gallery voices rise or fall like a heavenly choir.


Stony Brook Student Held in Obscene Letters
A 26-year-old graduate student has been charged with mailing scores of anti-Semitic, anti-Japanese and obscene letters to professors and students at the State University of New York at Stony Brook over six years, the Suffolk County police said today.
The student, Jason Kuo, a naturalized American citizen of Chinese descent, who lives in student housing, was charged with aggravated harassment after a document expert matched his handwriting with the handwriting in the letters.


Omagh Journal; At the Rainbow's End, Gold and a Donnybrook
Ten years ago, farmers here started noticing men traipsing unannounced through their fields, digging holes and hammering at rocks in the bogs and pastures that cover the area's rolling hills.
All kinds of rumors spread, including one that the Government had found uranium and that the whole region was radioactive.
One day a few years later a man appeared at Bertie and Gladys Kerr's farmhouse door.
He wanted to take soil samples on their property, maybe do a little digging.
Mr.
Kerr asked why.
Gold, the man said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Senate Votes to Drop Communication Rules
The Senate overwhelmingly approved a bill that would sweep away decades of regulation for telephones, cable television and broadcasting, replacing such oversight with open competition.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS fattens the ranks of its top management in an effort to build momentum.
IF "Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS: The Next Generation" turned up on a network prime-time schedule, there's little doubt the Nielsen ratings would be visible only under a microscope.
But for the agency and its clients, the appointment of what is likely to be a next generation of leadership is being watched more intensely.
Lowe, the North American unit of the Lowe Group, is promoting two executives to new senior positions with management responsibilities, the next step in a reorganization that began in December.
They are Bruce Kelley, 46, and Paul Hammersley, 33, who are becoming general managers of Lowe in New York.


A Boardwalk Anniversary
The city's world-famous Board walk is 125 years old sort of.
A ceremony was held yesterday to mark the occasion, but actually, the Boardwalk that was dedicated in 1870 was replaced twice with temporary structures before final construction in 1890.
In a brief ceremony and cake-cutting, Mayor James Whelan called the Boardwalk "the signature of Atlantic City." TERRY PRISTIN


Woods's Long Drives Draw Raves
He shot a round of 74, four over par at the rugged Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, not bad for an amateur in his first United States Open.
Tiger Woods blamed his putting, and he did putt poorly, but he displayed enough other shots today to awe his playing partners and thrill a gallery that increased hole by hole.
Woods hit drives that soared past those of Ernie Els and Nick Price, often by 50 yards or more.
He hit irons from the fairway where they hit woods.
He crushed a 4-iron 25 feet past the hole from 205 yards away on the ridiculously hard 12th hole, a par 4 of 472 yards that was playing into a stiff wind.
He was the No. 1 driver today in the field of 156 players, averaging 300 yards on the two holes (fifth and sixth) used as barometers.


Two Teams That Challenge Tradition
By far the most common use of photography is to make pictures of people, whether as formal portraits, ID photos or simple family snapshots.
But images of people are also among photography's most paradoxical products: with its profusion of detail, a photograph can seem to offer not only a record of physical features, but a glimpse of the person behind the face.
This curious contradiction is the implicit subject of two current exhibitions, both of which challenge traditional ideas of photographic portraiture and the insights into personalities that such images can suggest.
At Metro Pictures, Allan McCollum and Laurie Simmons throw into question the process by which viewers interpret portraits; at the Shainman Gallery, Anthony Aziz and Sammy Cucher, a San Francisco duo who refer to themselves by their last names, pose a blunter challenge by obliterating sitters' facial features.


Riley Couldn't Solve A Coach's Quandary
The idea of Pat Riley, simultaneously oily and intense whether he was screaming at Knicks to score or cooing at us on TV to buy cars and contact lenses, was always worse than the man in person, who was appealing in a slightly distracted and distant way.
It was easy to imagine him wishing he was somewhere else, jogging on a beach, perhaps hunkered in his office, coming up with new X's and O's or with titles -- "The Disease of Me," "Thunderbolts," "Core Cracking" -- for the management sermons that were simultaneously gin clear and psychobaloney.
It must be cheap at the price to hear him at a $25,000 corporate pep talk explain this: "A person's greatest fear is the fear of extinction, but the worst thing is extinction and insignificance." Huh?
Do we hear the George Allen/Richard Nixon war cry, "Only winners are truly alive"?


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about services on the World Wide Web of the Internet set up to mark the Group of Seven summit meeting in Halifax, Nova Scotia, misstated two electronic addresses in some editions.
The official site sponsored by the Canadian Government is: http://www.cfn.cs.dal.ca/Current/ HalifaxSummitG7/index.html


Young Love Just Between Friends
As its blithe title suggests, "The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love" is a coming-of-age comedy, a polished movie that resembles a lesbian version of "Risky Business." One of the heroines is Randy Dean (Laurel Holloman), who looks boyish and is the subject of pointed gossip by other girls at her high school.
"Did you hear about her family?" one of them asks.
"They're, like, all lesbians there!" They are.
The film loads its premise even more, with every possible racial, sexual and economic conflict.
Randy lives in a working-class neighborhood with her lesbian aunt, Rebecca, and an extended family that includes Rebecca's current girlfriend and a former girlfriend training to be a boxer.
Randy's best friend, Frank (Nelson Rodriguez), is a gay Latino.
And soon Randy falls for Evie (Nicole Parker), a beautiful and wealthy black student who drives her Range Rover into the gas station where Randy works part time and also has trysts with a Barbie-looking married woman.
Randy and Evie meet again in the ladies' room at school when Evie is weeping over a breakup with her boyfriend.


Federal Officials See Hazard For Some People in Tap Water
Reflecting widespread uneasiness over the risks of contaminated drinking water, Federal health and environmental authorities suggested today that people with the AIDS virus or other conditions that lower their immunity to diseases may want to drink only boiled, filtered or bottled water.
The cautiously worded guidance, issued by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, came after months of studying how to protect vulnerable groups from cryptosporidium, an infectious parasite that frequently contaminates public water supplies.


Black Muslims Accused of Flogging 4 Boys at Dallas Mall
The owner of a mall that has become a rare beacon of black commerce here says that he hired the Nation of Islam to provide security because blacks can handle their own problems better than the police.
But the police say the security guards went way too far on Monday, using belts and bamboo canes to flog four boys, stripped naked, whom they suspected of stealing a cash register from a bric-a-brac store.
Today the police looked for more suspects besides the four Nation of Islam security guards they have already arrested on charges of aggravated kidnapping.


Algeria in Secret Talks With Militants, Dividing Rebels Further
New secret talks between the Algerian Government and the political leadership of the country's militant Islamic opposition began this week, causing an already divided Islamic movement to splinter further.
Senior Algerian officials said the talks in Algiers between representatives of President Liamine Zeroual and two jailed Islamic militant political leaders, Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj, had advanced to a point where Mr.
Madani, who led the now-banned Islamic Salvation Front, has recorded a cassette denouncing the use of violence against civilians.
It does not specifically mention Islamic groups as being responsible for violence.


Chechen Rebels Said to Kill Hostages at Russian Hospital
A day after scores of Chechen rebel gunmen swept through a southern Russian town, shooting civilians and taking hundreds of hostages, the gang reportedly executed five captives tonight, forcing a startled Russia to confront the prospect of terrorism on its own soil.
The commando attack in Budyonnovsk, a small provincial city about 70 miles north of the Chechen border, brought to reality the violent consequences many had feared from Russia's brutal military action in Chechnya.
Chechen leaders, all but defeated in their bitter fight for independence, have frequently vowed to carry the war beyound the Chechen borders.
Nobody knew how easy it could be.


Board Eliminates Summer Session For Students in Primary Grades
In the first budget cut to affect a broad swath of both children and their parents, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has eliminated summer school for students in kindergarten to third grade, canceling classes for 30,000 young children.
Mr.
Cortines, with the Board of Education's support, dropped the $16 million summer remedial program to avoid having to cut kindergarten to a half day and stagger school openings in the fall, board officials said.
He knew that he was killing a successful academic program, leaving parents in a bind to find alternative summer activities at the last minute, his spokesman, John H. Beckman, said yesterday.
But he had no choice, Mr.
Beckman said.


Inquiry Links Subway Crash To Signals
Transit Authority officials have concluded that the signal lights on the Williamsburg Bridge were too close together to prevent a Manhattan-bound subway train from crashing into another train last week, and they acknowledge that signal spacing poses a similar risk elsewhere in the system.
The officials said they had largely ruled out mechanical failure in the emergency braking system on one train -- the focus of much speculation among investigators in the first days after the crash.
Instead, because of tests conducted Saturday on the stretch of track where a Manhattan-bound J train rammed into the back of a stopped M train, the inquiry has shifted.
The focus is now the stopping ability of the J train and the spans between the signals, which are supposed to keep trains a safe distance apart.


Protecting Shore for the Economy
The New Jersey sea coast had 14 million overnight visitors in 1993, and they spent an estimated $10.3 billion and generated more than 171,000 jobs in 1993, according to a report by the Coast Alliance.
The environmental group also said that the state's commercial fishing fleet caught $96 million worth of seafood, and recreational anglers were responsible for an additional $649 million in business.
"Protecting the coast is just not a squishy nice thing to do for the environment," said Beth Millemann, executive director for Coast Alliance.
"It's an economic necessity."


East Europe Fears A Renascent Russia
To the Editor:
Arthur Schlesinger Jr., in "New Isolationists Weaken America" (Op-Ed, June 11), makes light of the "curious mania to expand NATO" found in newly independent and fully liberated countries of Eastern Europe, on grounds that the army of the new Russia cannot be a menace to Eastern Europe since it "cannot even beat Chechnya."


U.S. Factory Output Falls in 3d Straight Decline
American industry cut production in May for the third consecutive month, the longest stretch of falling output since the final stages of the recession that ended in early 1991, the Federal Reserve said today.
At the same time, the operating rate of the nation's factories, mines and utilities -- a widely followed gauge of inflation risk with a close correlation to short-term interest rates -- retreated for the fourth consecutive month, to a pace now below that of May 1994.


Teaching Quality Justifies Nassau Community Faculty Salaries; Skewed Pay Scale
To the Editor:
It seems odd that you choose to put an article on your June 12 front page that some college professors in Nassau County, Long Island, make more than $100,000.
In view of the fact that Michael Ovitz, Hollywood's top deal maker, just turned down a job with a $250 million salary, some 2,500 times more, and that new lawyers fresh out of law schools earn close to $100,000 from major New York firms, the real question may be why other professors don't earn more than they do.


Tax Cut Passes Assembly Panel
With the help of some Democratic legislators, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed income tax cut sailed through the Assembly budget committee yesterday.
New Jersey income taxes have already been slashed by 15 percent since Governor Whitman took office; the pending measure would complete her campaign pledge to give most state residents a 30 percent tax cut.


James Oscar Lee, 85, Educator And Worker on Race Relations
Dr.
James Oscar Lee, an educator who became a leading figure in the National Council of Churches and the National Conference of Christians and Jews, died on Sunday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
A longtime resident of Brooklyn, he was 85 and had lived in a Gaithersburg retirement community, Asbury Methodist Village, for the past 11 years.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Pataki Again Submits Laws to Regulate Managed Health Care Industry
For the second day in a row, Gov.
George E. Pataki has proposed legislation that would impose new regulations on New York's growing managed-health-care industry.
The bill introduced today would require health maintenance organizations to provide prospective members with detailed information about limitations on coverage.
The bill that Mr.
Pataki proposed on Wednesday would require health maintenance organizations to offer standard coverage plans to people who have limited selections of managed-care plans available to them.


Giuliani Wins a Battle, But Has Yet to Win War
For months, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani conducted a campaign of public ridicule against Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines that was extraordinary, even by the bruising standards of New York politics.
When Mr.
Cortines finally had enough and resigned yesterday, the Mayor clearly achieved a personal victory by ridding himself of a political nemesis.
And dismissing the objections of many public officials who were dismayed by the ferocity of his invective, he lost no time in trying to take advantage of Mr.
Cortines's departure.


On My Mind; Reviewing Civilian Conduct
New York City has a special board to review civilian complaints against the police.
One more thing is needed: a special board to review police complaints against civilians.
Let police officers come to this board, and tell it how members of the citizenry often not only revile and humiliate them, but prevent them from carrying out their job of making the streets safe.
Let them tell how the lives of police and civilians are endangered not only by thugs who start trouble but by crowds that refuse to get out of the way, turning a disturbance into a riot.


Prices Decline as Traders See Less Chance of Rate Cut
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday after comments by the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan S. Blinder, that many traders saw as falling short of guaranteeing a cut in interest rates soon.
Mr.
Blinder, speaking before the Minnesota Meeting, a group of business and civic leaders, said that retail prices were increasing too quickly and that the Fed must push annual inflation down to less than 3 percent.
"The inflation-fighting effort of the Federal Reserve cannot be ended at 3 percent," he said.


Senators Question 5 Paramilitary Leaders
With the activities and far-right views of paramilitary groups a growing concern for many law-enforcement agencies around the country, a Senate subcommittee today heard from five leaders of the self-styled "militias" who maintained that they were nothing more than ordinary people who loved the Constitution, feared Government abuse and owned guns only to protect themselves.
But during their 90-minute appearance before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology and Government Information, in which the exchanges sometimes grew testy, the witnesses also provided glimpses of the kind of views that contribute to perceptions of their being outside the political mainstream.


A Court Test for Simpson


Cold, Wind, Danger Are 1-2-3 on Track
The USA-Mobil national track and field championships turned cold, windy, rainy, dangerous and finally, just plain bizarre today.
First, Jackie Joyner-Kersee won her sixth national heptathlon championship with 6,375 points, her most pedestrian performance since she won a silver medal at the 1984 Summer Olympics.
A struggling Joyner-Kersee, suffering a hamstring injury, a tender Achilles' tendon and asthma, nearly collapsed from weakness after four events on Wednesday.
Today, after the long jump and a mediocre javelin throw, she strained through the 800 meters, tugging irritatingly at an allergy mask covering her face.


Miller's Job Is to Talk a Good Game
Ninety seconds before NBC's Dick Enberg and Johnny Miller went on the air for ESPN yesterday with the United States Open, Miller turned to Enberg, a veteran of many sports but a rookie on golf.
"Man of many partners," Miller said, "you're not monogamous."


Coded Hate in a Yearbook Evokes Anger
Jackie Harris arrived at Greenwich High School this morning still fuming about the discovery of a coded message of racial hatred in the school yearbook on Wednesday.
So she and 10 other black students decided to take action.
They left the section of the student center where blacks generally gather and walked across the room to the area favored by whites, where they sat on a bench.


Trying on Bloody Gloves, Simpson Finds Them Tight
The bloody gloves that have become part of the folklore of the O. J. Simpson trial dramatically became its focus today as Mr.
Simpson struggled, and finally succeeded, in pulling them on in front of the jurors.
"Too tight, too tight," the defendant muttered, grimacing as he wrestled with the gloves only a few feet from the jury box.
But after a few moments in which they appeared too small for his hands, already clad in latex medical-style gloves in order to keep the evidence pristine, he squeezed the leather ones on.


Cavaliers Acquire Miner From Heat
The Cleveland Cavaliers yesterday acquired Miami guard HAROLD MINER, who twice won the National Basketball Association slam dunk title but never won a permanent spot in the Heat's lineup.
Cleveland also obtained Miami's second-round selection (39th over all) in the coming N.B.A. draft for the Cavaliers' second-round pick (46th over all) and future considerations. (AP)


Making It Easier to Uncover Nuclear Arms
The International Atomic Energy Agency adopted tougher safeguards today that are intended to help its inspectors ferret out clandestine nuclear arms programs.
At the agency's headquarters in Vienna, its board of governors approved an initial set of measures that will allow its inspectors in countries suspected of developing nuclear weapons to gain broader access to suspected nuclear sites, to mount inspections with little or no notice and to sample soil, vegetation, water and air for traces of radioactivity.


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in September.


INSIDE
Welfare Bill Delayed
Deep discord among Senate Republicans have forced them to delay debate on a welfare bill.
Page A19.
Japan Hints at Compromise
Japan's leader, talking with President Clinton, sounded unexpectedly compromising on trade.
Page D1.
Signals Blamed in Crash
Signal lights spaced too closely were cited in last week's subway crash on the Williamsburg Bridge.
Page B1.
Wilson Announces Bid
After weeks of delays, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California said he was seeking the Republican Presidential nomination.
Page A16.


Art in Review
Leonard Baskin
Midtown Payson Galleries  745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street)  Through June 23
Best known as a draftsman in the tradition of Ben Shahn, Leonard Baskin, now in his 70's, has in recent years begun a second career, as a maker of public sculpture.
This exhibition combines Mr.
Baskin's bronze maquettes for the Ann Arbor Holocaust Memorial in Michigan and a series of large gouaches depicting women from the Old Testament and Greek tragedies.


Branford Marsalis Opens the 10th Summerstage
Branford Marsalis's determinedly eclectic band Buckshot LeFonque was an appropriate headliner for the first concert of Summerstage's 10th season.
On Thursday night, the free outdoor series paid tribute to its own urban eclecticism.
The four-part concert touched on all of the series' offerings except opera: American music, from Buckshot LeFonque; world music, from Egypt's Ali Hassan Kuban and the Nubian Band; dance, from the English company R.J.C.
Dance Theater, and a spoken-word performance by Jessica Hagedorn accompanied by Vernon Reid on guitar.
Mr.
Marsalis, who formerly led the "Tonight" show band, made no secret of his eclectic ambitions for Buckshot LeFonque.
Introducing "No Pain, No Gain," he said he had wanted to "combine a lot of different elements of American music in one song"; it used a hip-hop rhythm track, hard-rock guitar, jazzy horns and a rapper.


Art in Review
Zeke Berman
Julie Saul Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through June 30
An automotive theme runs through Zeke Berman's latest photographs, with tires, hubcaps and a radiator grill featured in his illusionistic setups.
In one image, buckled seat belts are tangled with strings that crisscross the image like scribbled pencil lines.


The Top Pizzas In New York: Bred and Baked By Tradition
MANY words have been used to explain New York pizza, but one word stands out: tradition.
Respect for tradition is why New York pizzerias go to such lengths to link themselves to the great pizzerias of the past.
Tradition explains why Andrew Bellucci called the pizzeria he opened in SoHo last year Lombardi's, after the restaurant opened on Spring Street in 1905 by Gennaro Lombardi, an Italian immigrant who is credited with introducing pizza to New York City.
Tradition explains why Mr.
Bellucci was able to get the founder's grandson and namesake, Gennaro Lombardi, to advise him in the new venture.


Steinbrenner Continues His Pursuit of Strawberry
The field manager, Buck Showalter, claimed he did not know if a new player would join the team soon.
The general manager, Gene Michael, was scouting minor league players in Richmond.
But the owner, George Steinbrenner, was working diligently tonight in an effort to make Darryl Strawberry a Yankee.
Possibly by Friday.
Despite Steinbrenner's coyness Wednesday in saying the Yankees were not close to an agreement with the former Mets outfielder, there were indications that a contract was imminent.
Strawberry's agent said a deal might be reached late tonight.
An official with another major league team said Strawberry would sign Friday.
And a person familiar with the Yankee negotiations said Strawberry's agent was speaking with Steinbrenner tonight and trying to conclude a deal.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Hurdlers End Jackson's Unbeaten Streak
Colin Jackson's unbeaten streak in the 110-meter hurdles was snapped yesterday at an outdoor meet in Nuremberg, Germany.
Florian Schwarthoff, who was timed in 13.19 seconds, and his fellow German Mike Fenner, 13.41, both beat Jackson's time of 13.43.
It was the first outdoor sprint hurdles defeat for Jackson since the Berlin meet in August 1993, a span of 31 races.
Jackson the world-record holder and the world and Olympic champion, said he was affected by a slight summer cold and by the news of the death of the mother of his good friend Linford Christie of England.
Christie, the world and Olympic 100-meter champion, pulled out of the meet and flew home when he heard the news. (AP)


How to Fix Air Traffic Control
The Federal Aviation Administration insists there was no single cause for three recent blackouts in the radar that is used to direct air traffic above and around New York City.
It concedes, however, that its air traffic control operations are afflicted by a chronic case of aging equipment and inadequate staffing.
Whether the three radar breakdowns posed a safety risk is not clear.
But there is no doubt they imposed costly delays on airlines and passengers.
With air travel in the United States expected to increase by more than 50 percent in the next 10 years, there is no room for further delay in bringing the control system up to speed.


Dresdner Bank Bids $1.5 Billion For Kleinwort
The Kleinwort Benson Group, the largest of a fast-dwindling corps of independently owned British investment banks, said today that it was negotiating to be acquired by Dresdner Bank A.G. of Germany for about $:960 million, or $1.5 billion.
Kleinwort Benson, which is strong in both corporate finance and fund management but has never grown large enough to reach the industry's top tier, said the Dresdner Bank's proposal was for a cash deal for around the British company's current market price.
People familiar with the discussions said that Kleinwort Benson's management appeared enthusiastic about the proposal and that it was likely to proceed, barring a higher offer from another bidder.


Anne Ratner, 90, Patron of Musicians
Anne Ratner, a music patron who kept alive the idea of the music salon, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 90.
Ms.
Ratner put on concerts by first-rate artists in the living room of her Riverside Drive apartment.
Among those who appeared, often more than once, were the Emerson and Juilliard Quartets, the singers Arleen Auger and Cecilia Bartoli and the pianists Richard Goode, Jeffrey Kahane and Andras Schiff.
Appearance at these evenings became somewhat of a status symbol among musicians, and they often served as showcases for emerging talents.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 2001 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes, which are callable in six months, are priced at 99.75 to yield 7.05 percent and carry an interest rate of 7 percent.


Orsulak Helps Mets Finally Find Clutch
The odds weren't exactly with the Mets when they came to bat in the ninth inning last night at Shea Stadium.
Not only were they trailing by three runs, they were 0-19 when they trailed after eight innings.
But they overcame those odds, their inconsistent hitting and a bad call by an umpire to get the kind of victory that can turn a long homestand, if not a season, around.
Joe Orsulak's one-out single up the middle in the bottom of the 10th inning scored pinch-runner Tim Bogar from second with the winning run to give the Mets a 5-4 victory over the Florida Marlins.
The Mets sent the game into the 10th by scoring three dramatic runs on four hits in the ninth, including a run-scoring double by Orsulak, to salvage a game that appeared to be a defeat.


A Hatful of Waterfront Views


Phi Slamma Jamma Waited 12 Years for Title
Clyde Drexler, whose idea of a mixed drink is bottled water with lemon, sneaked a sip of champagne.
His prohibition over -- on drinking, on championships -- he delivered a toast to his fraternity brother.
"Twelve years later, huh," he told Hakeem Olajuwon.
They were the men who, in 1983, made Jim Valvano famous, but Phi Slamma Jamma had a new fraternity house this season (the Summit), and the Houston Rockets had a happy return.


Offering $195K, Nice House, No Respect. Interested?
NOW what?
With the announced resignation of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani got what he wanted.
Part of it, anyway.
The Chancellor whom the Mayor couldn't tolerate is giving up.


Plan to Build Incinerator Faces Delay
The Giuliani administration plans to postpone construction of the Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator for an additional three years and is reconsidering whether to build the plant at all, according to a draft of the city's new solid-waste management plan.
The incinerator, on the drawing boards for 10 years and considered a central element in New York City's plans to reduce dependence on the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island, has drawn passionate opposition from Brooklyn communities and faced a series of court challenges.


Product Liability Bill Hurts Women
To the Editor:
Re "The Law on Their Side" (Op-Ed, June 12): Contrary to the claims made by Maggie Gallagher, the product liability bill passed by the Republican Senate would diminish consumer protections against unsafe products and, in the case of women, give rise to arbitrary and discriminating disparities in punitive damage awards.


Student Accused of Stealing a Copy of a Test
A Nassau Community College student who was apparently in a hurry to get started on an exam has been charged with breaking into a professor's office on Wednesday and stealing a copy of the test, authorities said today.
"The irony is that it was a take-home exam," Prof.
Veronica Wilde said.
"I was going to distribute it today in class and everyone would have had until Monday to complete it."


Rightists Play Immigrant Card in French Town
Dreux, 45 miles west of Paris, is the typical small French town of the 1990's: a downtown of two- or three-story shuttered brick-and-stucco buildings with a picturesque 16th-century belltower, surrounded by sterile, modern housing projects that are home for most of the 37,000 residents.
Forty years ago, Dreux was a quaint and almost entirely French town, but it has been transformed by decolonization and rapid economic change that also brought rising crime, high unemployment and racial unrest.
Policies of conservative and Socialist governments alike have failed to solve the problems, and the political backlash has been building up for a long time.


Falcons Sign Blair Thomas, a Former Jet
The former Jets running back BLAIR THOMAS reached a contract agreement Wednesday with the Atlanta Falcons.
Thomas will sign for one year at a base salary of $178,000 plus incentives, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported.
The Falcons will be Thomas's fourth team in 15 months.
He signed with the New England Patriots as a free agent in March 1994, was waived during the season, then joined Dallas as EMMITT SMITH's backup. (AP)


SENATE APPROVES FAR-REACHING BILL ON MEDIA INDUSTRY
After making scores of deals with the nation's biggest communications companies, the Senate overwhelmingly approved a bill today that would sweep away decades of regulation for telephones, cable television and broadcasting.
The vote, 81 to 18, eliminates the biggest remaining uncertainty behind efforts to rewrite the nation's communications laws and replace traditional regulations with open competition.
The bill is broadly similar to a measure recently approved by the House Commerce Committee; that measure is considered likely to pass the full House later this summer.


Venus Williams Named to Fed Cup Squad
The tennis prodigy VENUS WILLIAMS was named to the United States Fed Cup squad by the team captain, BILLIE JEAN KING, yesterday.
Williams, who turns 15 tomorrow, is the 14th player in a talent pool from which King will choose her four-player team for the World Group semifinals against France July 22-23 in Wilmington, N.C.
Williams, who started playing at age 4 and has long been widely touted as a future star of women's tennis, turned professional last October. (Reuters)


Security Council Approves Additional Troops for Bosnia
In an unusual overnight session, the Security Council passed a resolution early today adding a European rapid-reaction force to the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia.
The new force, intended to strengthen the existing United Nations presence, could add up to 12,500 British, French and Dutch troops to the 22,500 peacekeepers already there.


Sounds Around Town
Black Cowboy
Herb Jeffries, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, near Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Herb Jeffries sang with Duke Ellington and had a hit in 1940 with "Flamingo." He had a parallel career as the Bronze Buckaroo, starring in all-black cowboy movies that are notable less for what's in them than that they exist at all.
Miracle of miracles, Mr.
Jeffries, 83, has a new record, called "The Bronze Buckaroo (Rides Again)" (Warner Brothers), and a gig at New York's finest club, and has maintained his profoundly deep voice.
Sets are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Sunday and Monday; the cover is $15 and the minimum $10.
PETER WATROUS Loud and Ululating
Diamanda Galas, Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055.
Diamanda Galas is one of the greatest screechers of all time, loud and ululating.
She howls about modern life, including plagues and more, and even sings standards.
And she's very funny, an avant-gardist in full control of her faculties.
Its often Gothic and big and theatrical, and always noisy.
There are shows on Saturday and Sunday at 9 P.M., with a $15 cover charge.
P.
W.
Young Saxophonist
Steve Wilson, Smalls, 183 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 929-7565.
Among musicians, Steve Wilson, an alto saxophonist, is considered one of the best of the young jazz improvisers.
Every time he plays, he has seemingly improved, making brevity and melody his esthetic.
He'll be sharing the front line with another talked-about musician, the profoundly laid-back tenor saxophonist Mark Turner.
They will be backed by a rhythm section that includes the pianist Mercedes Rossy, the bassist Dwayne Burno and the drummer Billy Drummond.
The sets tonight and tomorrow night are between 10 P.M. and 2 A.M.; the cover is $10.
On Sunday Mr.
Wilson will perform at Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Sets that night are at 10, 12 and 2; the cover is $12 and the minimum $8.
P.
W.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend "THE WHO'S TOMMY," St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The musical with book by Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff, and music and lyrics by Mr.
Townshend.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8.
Tickets: $20 to $67.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Art in Review
David C. Scher
Pierogi 2000  167 North Ninth Street  Greenpoint, Brooklyn  Through Monday
More than a few of the small drawings in this affecting show suggest glorified doodles.
Cartoonlike figures are depicted in a shaky, apparently unsophisticated style, isolated on otherwise blank pages.


The Many Styles And Inspirations Of Romare Bearden
"Even though you go through terrible experiences, you come out feeling good. That's what the blues say and that's what I believe -- life will prevail." The words are Romare Bearden's.
And life and experience radiate at the Brooklyn Museum from "A Graphic Odyssey: Romare Bearden as Printmaker," a traveling exhibition of more than 100 works dating from 1945 to a few years before the artist's death in 1987.
The biographical outline in the show's catalogue is an exhilaratingly varied compendium of people, places and accomplishments, but one tense with contradictions.
Bearden was a painter, collagist and printmaker who had met Braque and Brancusi in Paris; he was also a city social worker in Harlem for almost 30 years.
He envisioned his work in an international modernist context, but his enduring images are of American black life.


Surprised or Not, Players Express Respect for Riley
One player past.
One player present.
Each with insightful views on the end of the Pat Riley era.
Doc Rivers was on his way to a Connecticut golf course to play a round with John Starks, Herb Williams and Monty Williams when he heard the news.


Lincoln J. Ragsdale, 69, a Pilot Who Broke Many Color Barriers
Lincoln J. Ragsdale, who was trained as one of the pioneering black American fighter pilots of World War II and who later became a civil rights leader and entrepreneur in Phoenix and the Southeast, died on June 9 at his home in Paradise Valley, a suburb of Phoenix.
He was 69.
The cause was colon cancer, said his son, Lincoln J. Ragsdale Jr.


A Game Nod to Passion That Has Lost Its Edge
There is poetic justice in the fact that Charles Aznavour, who wrote so many despairing songs about the passing of youth when he was young, now exemplifies septuagenarian vigor and optimism.
The French singer and songwriter, who opened a five-night engagement at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, turned 71 last month.
In his agility and spirit, he appears ageless.
"Everything you see here is mine," he remarked, touching his face at his opening-night show.
He admitted that he did have a hair transplant from "a seed gardener," however, and pretended to toss back graying locks that were much too short to ripple significantly.


House Votes Big Increase In Military Budget for '96
For the first time in more than a decade, the House has approved a military budget bill that authorizes sharp increases in spending beyond the Pentagon's request.
By a vote of 300 to 126, the House today authorized $267.3 billion for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1, enabling the Defense Department to buy more jet fighters, bombers, transport ships and missile defenses than Defense Secretary William J. Perry says he needs.


Young Pitcher Not Yankees' Answer
The Yankees' experiment with young starting pitchers is failing, and they are floating at the bottom of the American League East because of it.
Brian Boehringer did not change the perception that the twentysomething pitchers who are starting three out of every five games might ruin, not rally, the Yankees.
Boehringer's first major league start was not a memorable experience.
The Tigers shoved him into his first major league shower by the fifth inning of their 9-2 victory at Tiger Stadium.
A right-hander with a powerful fastball and a sneaky smile, Boehringer is flaky.
Manager Buck Showalter described him as different.


White House Inhospitality
Those uniformed Secret Service guards who donned rubber gloves to greet a delegation of gay elected officials shamed their service and embarrassed the White House they are supposed to protect.
The guards presumably thought they were protecting themselves against the AIDS virus should any of the visitors be infected.
But their actions revealed either a deplorable ignorance of how AIDS is spread, or a malicious determination to denigrate a group of respected officials who had been invited to the White House as a peace overture to the gay and lesbian communities.
The incident occurred on Tuesday as some 40 gay leaders arrived for a daylong conference with senior Administration officials, including Cabinet members and Vice President Al Gore.
Several guards put on rubber gloves before inspecting the guests' bags and briefcases.
One guard reportedly explained that they were using the gloves "for protection."


CHRONICLE
JEAN-MARIE CARDINAL LUSTIGER, the Archbishop of Paris, was elected to the Academie Francaise yesterday, Agence France-Presse reported.
His seat in the academy, the elite literary panel that acts as a guardian of the French language, was formerly occupied by his close friend Albert Cardinal Decourtray, the Archbishop of Lyons, who died in September.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest yesterday, referring to a front-page article about a move in the Senate to impose severe penalties on people who distribute sexually explicit material over computer networks, misstated the day's Senate development.
As the article stated, the Senate approved an amendment to a telecommunications bill on Wednesday; it did not approve the bill that day.


I.O.C. Keeps Age Limit
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, and other members of the committee belong to a very privileged club.
And at least for now, that club will continue to have an age limit.
The I.O.C. flinched on the brink of significant and controversial change today, failing by the narrow margin of two votes to pass a charter amendment that would have abolished the existing age limit of 75 in favor of life membership.


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about corporate villages at the United States Open misstated the fee paid by the United States Golf Association to the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club in 1986.
It was $450,000 to $500,000 -- not $45,000 to $50,000.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Suspended California outfielder Tony Phillips for three games for instigating a bench-clearing incident on June 8 at Boston.





Sounds Around Town
Big Soul
Solomon Burke with the Uptown Horns, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, (212) 360-2777, and Tramp's, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
With over 300 pounds of pure soul, Solomon Burke merges physical and spiritual love into rousing, rapturous shows.
A licensed undertaker, an ordained minister and one of the most important soul singers of the 1960's, Mr.
Burke is best known for "Down in the Valley," "The Price" and "Everybody Needs Somebody to Love." He will be backed by the Uptown Horns, who not only support singing greats but also write passionate soul songs.
The Central Park show, at 3 P.M. tomorrow, is free; the Tramps concert, at 8:30 and 11:30 tomorrow night, is $20.
NEIL STRAUSS Powdered-Wig Set
Upper Crust, Brownie's, 169 Avenue A, at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 420-8392.
Upper Crust, with former members of the Boston rock band the Flies, is a rarity in rock-and-roll: a joke band whose joke doesn't get stale by the end of a performance.
Its members dress in powdered wigs and floppy sleeves befitting 18th-century aristocracy, sing songs titled "Let Them Eat Rock" and "Friend of a Friend of the Working Class," and spin hilarious stories between numbers from the point of view of effete British snob superstars.
And what does the music sound like?
It's simple, catchy, fun and always slightly reminiscent of something else, whether it be AC/DC or the Kinks.
The concert is tonight at 11 P.M.; admission is $6.
N.
S.


'J. P. Morgan' and Some Heavy Site-Specificity
Undoubtedly, the New York Stock Exchange has seen money move at many speeds and in many ways.
But has it ever had the chance to witness a chorus line of paper dollars pulsing carnally to a disco beat?
The seductive powers of filthy lucre have been given very literal-minded life in an anti-materialist musical spectacle that is taking place six nights a week (through July 16) on the steps of the Federal Hall National Memorial on Wall Street, a dime's throw from the Exchange.


Republican Squabble Delays Welfare Debate
Deep ideological disagreements among Senate Republicans have forced them to delay floor debate on a welfare bill so party leaders can seek a compromise.
The disagreements involve a wide range of issues: formulas for distributing Federal money, work requirements for welfare recipients, proposals to discourage unmarried women from having babies, and the balance of power between the Federal Government and the states.


Ham on the Lam? Police Put Them in Pen
Like dog bites man, police versus swine is an old story in New York City -- except when the pigs have four feet, the gunplay involves tranquilizer darts and the capture ends not with a trip to jail but with a jaunt to the animal shelter.
In a night of mystery that turned the familiar urban jungle into a landscape of the hog wild, pigs bedeviled the police in Queens and Staten Island into the early hours yesterday.


Emotions High, House Takes Up Abortion
The House took up the issue of abortion today, opening an emotional committee debate over a bill that would make doctors liable to criminal and civil charges for performing a certain kind of abortion in the latter stages of pregnancy.
And in a floor vote, representatives approved legislation that would overturn an executive order allowing abortions at military hospitals overseas.
Opponents of both measures said they were the first steps toward an attempt by the Republican-controlled Congress -- prodded by Christian conservatives and other politically powerful groups -- to outlaw all abortions.


Speaking Up on Traffic Noise
Representative Marge Roukema, Republican of Ridgewood, yesterday urged Governor Whitman to speed up the state's response to traffic noise along Route 287 in Bergen, Passaic and Morris counties.
The State Department of Transportation plans to spend six more months studying noise along the 12-mile stretch between Montville and the New York State line at Mahwah.
But Ms.
Roukema said the "time for study has passed."


Appeals Court Allows Challenge on School Financing System
New York State's highest court today opened a broad new avenue for attacks on the state's method of financing public education, ruling that a New York City citizens' group can challenge the system as inadequate and racially discriminatory.
In a complex 5-to-1 decision, the Court of Appeals said a suit challenging the financing system can proceed in lower courts, and laid out an unusually detailed blueprint to help the trial court determine whether the current system is unconstitutional.


The Spoken Word
BLOOMSDAY ON BROADWAY XIV, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
Annual marathon of events devoted to James Joyce's "Ulysses," including readings from the work; songs from the novel sung by James Flannery, a tenor; poems set to music by Joyce and memoirs and biographical anecdotes involving Joyce and his family.
Among the performers are Mia Dillon, Barbara Feldon, Malachy McCourt, Marian Seldes, John Shea, K. T. Sullivan and Fritz Weaver.
A live radio broadcast of the show can be heard on WNYC-AM (820).
Today, 7 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Tickets: $12; $8 for students and Symphony Space members.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
BLOOMSDAY BREAKFAST, Rivverun Cafe, 176 Franklin Street, TriBeCa.
Readings from James Joyce's "Ulysses," with musical accompaniment and a full Irish breakfast.
Today at 8:30 A.M.
Admission: $25.
Information: (212) 874-7900.


Stocks Close Higher Again, With Nasdaq Above 900
Blue-chip stocks advanced again yesterday, if only slightly, with the Dow Jones industrial average inching briefly past 4,500 before settling at 4,496.27, up 5.19 points, still another record.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 0.65 point yesterday to 537.12.


Restaurants
Even if you were blindfolded and driven in circles before being led into Lenox Room, you would instantly know where you were.
Long before your eyes were opened, the mingled aroma of roses, caviar, Chardonnay and Gio would suggest the Upper East Side.
A single line of dialogue would confirm it: "My broker says. . . . ," "On the Beauty Express to the Hamptons. . . . " "Last winter in Palm Beach. . . . " Yes, this is the part of town where the sidewalks are rarely crowded and the streets are always clean.
Lenox Room was intended as a moderate restaurant.
When Charles Palmer, the owner of Aureole and Alva, and Tony Fortuna, who has managed some of the classiest restaurants in town (most recently, Monkey Bar), announced that they were joining forces, they said their creation would be casual.
Perhaps this crowd does eat sweetbreads, foie gras and lobster on informal occasions.
Never mind.
Those who consider this to be food for celebration will find that the kitchen does not let them down.


Teaching Quality Justifies Nassau Community Faculty Salaries
To the Editor:
Your June 12 news article about the high salaries of faculty members at Nassau Community College on Long Island has a great deal to say about salaries but neglects a critical context in which they should be considered: the quality of teaching and learning.


Senate Bill Escalates Computer-Smut Debate
The Senate's wholehearted endorsement of a measure to impose severe penalties on those who distribute sexually explicit material over computer networks is regarded as the real beginning of a national debate on how to regulate the new medium of cyberspace.
The Senate measure, approved by an 84-to-16 vote on Wednesday, is sweeping.
It covers everything from child pornography to profanity.
Legal scholars and free-speech groups say it may be unconstitutional.


CHRONICLE
For a first-time author, ELAINE BENSON has done enviably well in the celebrities who have contributed to her book.
The author KURT VONNEGUT has written the introduction, and the fashion designer ARNOLD SCAASI the foreword, to "Unmentionables: A Brief History of Underwear," which is to be published next year by Simon &amp; Schuster.
Ms.
Benson, who opened the art gallery that bears her name in Bridgehampton, L.I., 32 years ago, is a fixture on the Hamptons social scene, and Mr.
Vonnegut and Mr.
Scaasi are friends of hers.


Accounts
*
Internet Services Co., Vienna, Va., a division of America Online, to Miller/Kadanoff Direct, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle marketing strategy and branding.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million for the rest of 1995.


A Bond Issue Urged for U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has asked the Group of Seven leaders meeting in Halifax, Nova Scotia, to consider a novel solution for the perennial shortage of money in the United Nations' coffers.
The Secretary General, in a letter to the summit leaders, proposed that nations in arrears on payments issue bonds to the United Nations.
These bonds would be used to repay countries which are owed money for supplying, for example, peacekeeping troops or equipment to the organization.
The bonds would be redeemable after a fixed period.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali suggested five years.


How to Achieve Blue-Ribbon Political Reform
To the Editor:
Re "New Hampshire Handshake" (editorial, June 13): You are correct to recognize the potential in a blue-ribbon political reform commission, as endorsed by President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich, to break the deadlock on obtaining meaningful political reform.


Haytaian Elected G.O.P. Chief
In a show of strength for Governor Whitman, Chuck Haytaian, the Assembly Speaker, was elected Republican State Chairman last night.
Earlier this week, Virginia N. Littell, who has headed the party since 1992, said she would not fight to keep her position, saying it was obvious that the Governor wanted her to resign.
Mr.
Haytaian said his second most important goal, after getting Republicans elected, is to bring more blacks and people of Hispanic background into the party.


Parker Apologizes and Settles Lawsuit
RICHIE PARKER, the high school basketball star whose scholarship was withdrawn by Seton Hall University after he pleaded guilty to a charge of sexual assault against a Manhattan Center classmate, has settled a civil lawsuit filed by the classmate and has offered the girl his first public apology.
"I spoke with my former schoolmate and told her that I am sorry for any hurt I caused her and her family," Parker said in a statement issued by his attorney, MICHAEL C. MILLER.
"I told her that I know that she has suffered in a way that may take time to heal. She accepted my apology and my offer to make this apology public."
The classmate's attorney, MICHAEL S. FELDMAN, confirmed she had accepted Parker's apology, which was made in a phone call on Wednesday.
If Parker, 18, plays professional basketball, he agreed to share a portion of his earnings with her.
Parker may play next year at George Washington University.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: For Adman, Laughing Matters; Humor in His Campaigns Is Taken Seriously, at Last
A lot of marketers say humor has no place in advertising because it seldom makes the cash register ring.
But the adman who more than any other has staked his reputation on the power of laughter is beginning to win converts.
Cliff Freeman, the chairman and executive creative director of the Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners agency in New York, has produced some of the funniest, most honored advertising ever to amuse consumers.


Why Stop With the A.A.R.P.?
Senator Alan Simpson is holding hearings to investigate the American Association of Retired Persons.
The Wyoming Republican accuses the organization of abusing its tax-exempt status, wrongly claiming discounted postal rates, bilking its members on its health insurance and financial service plans and generally running the organization for the benefit of its employees rather than for its members.
Mr.
Simpson may have a point.
Last year the A.A.R.P. paid about $135 million in back taxes in a settlement with the Internal Revenue Service, details of which are not available to the public.
The A.A.R.P.'s lobbying efforts, at least in some instances, seem geared primarily to advancing its business interests.
One example Mr.
Simpson gives is its effort to pass legislation that would have created advantages for suppliers of mail-order pharmaceuticals, while running its own mail-order pharmaceutical business.
Mr.
Simpson contends that the organization supports its activities mainly through such commercial enterprises rather than members' dues.


Fallon Awarded Ameritech Account
The long-distance services unit of the Ameritech Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings have not been determined.
Ameritech is planning to begin offering long-distance telephone service early in 1996, to compete with AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint, if it receives Federal approval.


Fred Rosenstiel, 83, Devoted His Life to Planting Flowers
Fred Rosenstiel, who spent his life planting gardens to brighten the lives of his fellow New Yorkers, and to alleviate an abiding sadness in his heart, died on Tuesday at the Western Queens Community Hospital in Astoria.
He was 83 and lived recently in Astoria.
In a city where corps of volunteer gardeners seem to spring up like wildflowers, Mr.
Rosenstiel was a volunteer gardener with a difference, a man so driven that for four decades he did little else.


Home Video
Sony Wonder's "Pocahontas" may not rate the crowd of 100,000 that attended the premiere of the Disney version in Central Park last weekend, but the 48-minute animated film is of significance to a company that is rapidly becoming a major presence in children's video and television entertainment.
"When we began a couple of years ago, we went out and got our tent poles," said Becky Mancuso, the senior vice president for creative affairs of Sony Wonder, the children's video arm of Sony.
Propping up the company's tent are the video licensing rights to children's programming on the Nickelodeon cable channel; Nick Jr., Nickelodeon's morning programs for pre-schoolers; "Puzzle Place," the PBS show, and, most recently, "Sesame Street."


Art in Review
'The View From Within'  'Japanese-American Art From the Internment Camps, 1942-1945'
The Queens Museum  New York City Building  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  Through July 16
This compelling and quietly moving exhibition focuses on the art produced by Japanese-American internees during World War II.
Between 1942 and 1945, the United States Government interned more than 110,000 people of Japanese descent in camps in six Western states.
Interned artists were quick to organize studios, schools and exhibitions in many of the camps, furnishing a means for hundreds of internees to relieve boredom and lift their spirits.
Materials were scarce, so artists sometimes used potato sacks as canvases, butter knives as carving tools, even coal dust as pigment.
Time, however, was abundant, and a great deal of art was produced, much of it good.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  RIMMA GERLOVINA AND VALERIY GERLOVIN, Steinbaum Krauss Gallery, 132 Greene Street, near Prince Street, in SoHo (through tomorrow).
Witty color photographs by a husband-and-wife team in which elaborate verbal and visual puns are drawn on Ms.
Gerlovina's pallid face or sketched out with her long braids (Charles Hagen).


St. Peter's Dismisses Fiore as Its Coach
St.
Peter's College fired Coach TED FIORE yesterday "in the best interests of the institution and the men's basketball program," the athletic director, BILL STEIN, said.
Fiore was in the last year of his contract and apparently wanted to stay.
Stein said the Jersey City college would begin a search for a new coach immediately.
The announcement came three weeks after Fiore decided to stay at St.
Peter's after being wooed by Florida Atlantic University.


A Tale of Fate And Magic, Told Back to Front
HOVERING like mythical birds high over "Chronicle of a Death Foretold," the new musical adaptation of the Gabriel Garcia Marquez novel, are the Nobel laureate's thoughts relating to fate, mystery, magic and redemption.
The thoughts can still be heard, though dimly, as if from a distance that removes much of their original sardonic humor.
Graciela Daniele, who conceived, directed and choreographed "Chronicle of a Death Foretold," has created a frequently stunning show that is less a conventional musical adaptation than a performance piece inspired by Mr.
Garcia Marquez.
The Lincoln Center Theater production, which opened last night at the Plymouth on Broadway, communicates more through dance than music or song.


Riley Quits as Coach of Knicks
After four riveting seasons, one near miss at a championship and still with the best winning percentage in National Basketball Association history, Pat Riley resigned yesterday as coach of the Knicks.
He left with a season remaining on a five-year contract, saying in a statement that the Knicks refused to give him the kind of control over basketball matters that he needed to remain.
But Dave Checketts, president of Madison Square Garden, offered a different view, saying Riley was demanding part ownership of the team as well as complete autonomy in personnel decisions.


Bowe's Fitness Depends on Perspective
RIDDICK BOWE might have looked fit at 243 pounds when he weighed in yesterday for Saturday night's World Boxing Organization heavyweight defense against JORGE LUIS GONZALEZ.
But Gonzalez's manager, LUIS DeCUBAS, claimed, "He's done," when he heard the weight announced.
Gonzalez, who at 6 feet 7 inches is 2 inches taller, came in at 237 pounds.
Bowe's handlers, of course, contend their fighter is in the best shape of his career.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AVALON PROPERTIES INC., New Canaan, Conn., a real-estate investment trust, said it had ended talks to acquire a majority of the Midwest apartment portfolio of Trammell Crow Residential.
BANKERS LIFE HOLDING CORP., Chicago, said an investment group that includes companies linked to Samuel Heyman had acquired a 9.7 percent stake in its corporation.
The investors paid a total of $106.4 million to acquire 5.13 million shares.


Abroad at Home; Nothing But Shame
The Western alliance, the greatest military and political force on earth, has cringed to a gang of nationalist terrorists.
That is the meaning of recent events in Bosnia.
When the Bosnian Serbs took United Nations soldiers hostage, the West vowed to be strong.
There would be no negotiations with the kidnappers.
A new road, protected by a determined new force from NATO countries, would be built to get food through to Sarajevo.
Serbian blockades of relief convoys would not be tolerated.


The Mentally Ill Debate What to Call Themselves; F.B.I., Seeking Sensitive Language, Finds Anger and Suspicion but Little Consensus
It seemed like a simple request.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation, responsible for collecting data about hate crimes involving race, ethnicity, religion and sexual orientation, was recently given a new category to track: physical and mental disability.
So it turned to the National Stigma Clearinghouse in New York to find sensitive, neutral terminology it could use in training manuals and reports to describe people who are mentally ill.


Clinton Creates Group to Improve Campaign Against AIDS
President Clinton created a new council yesterday, headed by a gay doctor from Los Angeles, to advise him on how the Government might improve AIDS prevention, treatment and research.
But the most urgent item on the Administration's AIDS agenda, for the moment, was recovering from an incident on Tuesday in which a delegation of gay and lesbian elected officials was met at the White House by uniformed Secret Service officers wearing rubber gloves.


Saints Reward Everett With Extension
JIM EVERETT, the castoff quarterback who revitalized his career and the New Orleans Saints offense last season, signed a four-year contract extension yesterday.
"I thought about free agency for awhile," the 32-year-old former Rams quarterback said.
"I tried to think what that would be like, but it kind of came down to what I was looking for and I felt at home in New Orleans." (AP)


Derby Now $1 Million Race
Churchill Downs raised the purse for the Kentucky Derby yesterday to $1 million guaranteed, and also raised the fees for nominating and starting a horse in an apparent move to make it more expensive for inferior horses to crowd the field.
The purse for the Derby has been pegged at $500,000-added, although it has grown as high as $920,000, depending on how many horses were entered.
In the future, the board of directors of the track voted, even first place could be worth as much as $1 million.


Caremark to Pay $161 Million in Accord
Caremark International Inc. said tonight that it had agreed to pay $161 million to settle state and Federal allegations that it made illegal payments to doctors to win new business.
The settlement is one of the largest ever paid by a home health care company but at the low end of the estimates many Wall Street analysts had made and far lower than expected by heavy short-sellers of the company's stock.
It also specifies that none of Caremark's violations will disqualify it from winning further Medicare, Medicaid or other Government health care business.


Gateway 2000 Backs Sony/Philips Disk Format
The personal computer maker Gateway 2000 Inc. said yesterday that it would endorse a new computer-disk standard backed by Philips Electronics N.V. and the Sony Corporation.
The new disks would look like today's music CD or CD-ROM disks but store far more information or entertainment programming.
The Sony/Philips standard has been battling for position in the consumer-electronics industry against a new format promoted by Time Warner Inc. and the Toshiba Corporation, the Japanese electronics and computer maker.
The Toshiba/Time Warner disk has been embraced by Hollywood and by makers of video players, but the computer industry has been more tentative so far.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
5.99
4.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.43
4.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.38
4.43
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.17
6.14
7.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.61
6.57
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.55
8.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.13
6.10
6.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CHECHEN WAR HITS RUSSIAN SOIL  A day after Chechen gunmen swept through a southern Russian town shooting civilians and taking hundreds of hostages, the rebels reportedly executed five people.
A1  FIGHTING RAGES OUTSIDE SARAJEVO  Bosnian troops pounded rebel Serb positions as the Government signaled that a battle to lift the siege of Sarajevo is near.
A1


Allegations of Corruption Against Police Rise 28%
Allegations of corruption filed against New York City police officers rose 28 percent last year, according to a report by the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau.
The report, which was released yesterday, found that the 34th Precinct in Washington Heights ranked first in the number of allegations, while two scandal-ridden precincts, the 30th in Harlem and the 48th in the Bronx, ranked second and sixth.


Two Accuse Dealer In Comics Fraud
A Queens couple who had hoped to finance their son's education with their $92,000 collection of rare comic books said today that they had been defrauded by one of the best-known comic book dealers on Long Island.
"He was once one of my husband's best friends," said Linda Stanziola, whose son, Keith, is 2.
"He attended my son's christening and ate dinner with us and was considered a friend by everyone he ripped off."


Better Mail Delivery?
To the Editor:
Presumably the Postmaster General placed a congratulatory letter in your paper because he knew that if he mailed it to his employees, many wouldn't receive it (advertisement, June 14).
New York, he says, now has 83 percent on-time delivery.
I can only conclude that the other 17 percent of the mail arrives late or not at all.


Plans for Electronics Superstore
The company that owns Radio Shack announced plans yesterday to open a 185,000-square-foot electronics store in the spring.
The Incredible Universe store is expected to create 200 construction jobs and 350 full-time and part-time jobs and generate up to $3 million in sales tax revenue, Tandy Corporation officials said.
Customers will pay only 3 percent sales tax because Elizabeth is a so-called urban enterprise zone.


When Charge Is Racism in Immigration Reform; Out, Wretched Refuse!
To the Editor:
Re "No More 'Wretched Refuse' " (Op-Ed, June 7): Stephen Jay Gould renders a public service by reporting the deliberate omission of a line from Emma Lazarus's historic poem, reproduced on a plaque at Kennedy International Airport, but his explanation is naive.
To strike out those powerful words -- "The wretched refuse of your teeming shore" -- is hardly a mere "puerility" or "silly censoring."


'Give Me Your Answer, Do.' And She Did.


In Jackson-Presley Romp, Echoes of Two Mergers
About 45 minutes into her Wednesday night encounter with Michael Jackson and his wife, Lisa Marie Presley, Diane Sawyer said, "I didn't spend my life as a journalist to ask this sort of question." And, by Murrow!, she didn't ask it.
Instead, several surrogates, presumably fans, appeared on screen and inquired in fairly frank language whether Mr.
Jackson and Ms.
Presley really "do the thing."
"Yes! Yes! Yes!" affirmed Ms.
Presley.
No separate houses, she said.
No separate beds.
Just "normal, I know it's hard to believe, people."


Lintas Executive To Step Down
Frank DeVito, a vice chairman of Lintas Worldwide in New York and chairman of the worldwide creative council, said yesterday that he would resign from those positions, effective July 1, and leave the agency.


Phone Giants Applauding F.C.C. Rules
Local and long-distance telephone companies found some rare common ground yesterday, as both applauded a new Government campaign against the unauthorized switching of long-distance phone service.
The Federal Communications Commission issued rules on Wednesday that seek to curb this practice, which is known as "slamming." Among other things, the new rules forbid telephone companies from using promotional campaigns like prize giveaways or sweepstakes as a way to entice consumers to switch their long-distance carrier.


Seeking Windmills and Love
Susan Jaffe and Jose Manuel Carreno whipped the audience into a frenzy in the new American Ballet Theater production of "Don Quixote" on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
And that was not surprising, given the high level of technique and pizzazz that Ms.
Jaffe and Mr.
Carreno brought to their role debuts as the willful Kitri and her heedless boyfriend, Basil.
But ultimately it was in their quieter moments that the two were most affecting.
Ms.
Jaffe stood out for poetic phrasing and the big, clear shapes of her dancing in the second-act vision scene, in which Don Quixote dreams of ideal love.
Mr.
Carreno's almost throwaway turns embedded in otherwise narrative moments suggested there was more than adolescent hijinks to this youth.
But there was otherwise little humanity in their dancing.


Milder H.I.V. May Be Key to AIDS Vaccine
Infection with a relatively mild type of the AIDS virus seems to protect some people against infection with a more virulent type of the virus, according to a study of prostitutes in West Africa that is being reported in the journal Science today.
The more virulent virus is H.I.V.-1, responsible for the epidemic of AIDS in many areas of the world.
The milder virus is H.I.V.-2, which is common in West Africa but rare elsewhere, and takes much longer to produce disease.


Serbs Near Sarajevo Come Under Attack By Bosnian Forces
Bosnian troops north of Sarajevo pounded separatist Serb positions today as the Muslim-led Government sent multiple signals that a long-awaited battle to lift the siege of the Bosnian capital is at hand.
The true scope of the Bosnian offensive remained unclear.
But United Nations officials reported 1,600 detonations about 12 miles north of Sarajevo on high ground known as the Lipa feature overlooking a crucial road north from the Bosnian capital to Olovo and Tuzla.


In Trade Talks, a Duel of Statistics
Anyone who wonders why Washington and Tokyo can't reach an agreement on automobile trade should try to complete these three statement:
1.
The number of car models sold by American auto makers in Japan with the steering wheel on the right side, which is the custom in Japan, is


Panel Reverses Vote to Ban Cop-Killer Bullets
After extended vituperative debate, the House Judiciary Committee today reversed itself on a measure it approved Wednesday and decided against a ban on so-called cop-killer bullets.
The reversal preoccupied the committee, which had intended to vote on broader anti-terrorism legislation today but, because of the cop-killer-bullet amendment, did not get to 22 other amendments and so postponed final action on the bill until Friday.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
A House subcommittee has approved spending almost $65 million for shore preservation and other water projects in New Jersey.
The projects include $15.7 million for beach restoration from Sandy Hook to Barnegat Inlet Beach and $2.59 million to improve small-boat navigation in Cheesequake Creek in Middlesex County.


For Children
Several families were asked what they would be doing, or would like to do, on Father's Day this year.
Some families said they simply relied on spontaneous togetherness, while others turned out to be super-organized.
Here are four who were willing to give their ideas away: maybe you'll cross paths with them on Sunday.
Carl Michaelson and Family
From: Stapleton, S.I.  To: Museum of Natural History


Books Are for Reading? Oh, Don't Be So Silly
One day in November 1912, Picasso clipped several columns of newsprint from Le Journal and glued them into a still life of a bottle and wine glass on a cafe table.
Two universes collided: the space of representation, with its free play of lines and color, and the space of print, with its uniform rows of dark characters marching in lock step across the page.
Since 1912, countless artists have used collage to bring the real world into their pictures, subverting the unity of representational space.
Helmut Lohr, a German artist based in New York and Dusseldorf, uses collage, on the contrary, to disrupt the unity of the printed page.
Sometimes Mr.
Lohr slices books in half with a guillotine-style paper cutter; sometimes he cuts through them with a band saw; sometimes he rips them apart with his bare hands.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day on Wednesday about Donald J. Trump's re acquisition of the Regency Hotel in Atlantic City misstated the circumstances through which the Chemical Banking Corporation obtained it.
Mr.
Trump handed ownership of the Regency to Chemical in 1992 during debt negotiations; it was not lost in a bankruptcy reorganization.


Patriots, Rebels and Founding Fathers
The members of the civilian paramilitary groups who testified in Senate hearings yesterday have their history wrong.
While denying any connection with the Oklahoma City bombing, some compared themselves to the colonists who fought the Revolutionary War.
By carrying "Don't Tread on Me" flags and using the word "patriot," these self-styled militiamen have long tried to invoke the spirit of 1776.


Inside Art
A German Castle
Sotheby's officials in Germany are hard at work orchestrating what auction house officials say would be its longest auction ever.
If things go as planned, in October Sotheby's will hold a 16-day sale of art and objects from Neues Castle, a 105-room, 16th-century castle in Baden Baden.
The castle belongs to the Margrave Max von Baden, the 61-year-old nephew of the Duke of Edinburgh, first cousin of Prince Charles and grandson of Prince Max von Baden, the last chancellor of the imperial government.


CHRONICLE
Think of KAREN FINLEY, the performance artist, and what comes to mind is rage, confrontation and candor about matters political and sexual.
She can also be funny, and on Tuesday she will demonstrate her wit in a nightclub performance.
In a freewheeling show at Irving Plaza, 15th Street and Irving Place, she will range over a variety of topics, some serious, some not.
One target: MARTHA STEWART.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on May 23 about research on birth defects misstated the length of time the acne drug Accutane stays in the body.
The manufacturer says it should be eliminated about a week after a patient stops taking it; it does not stay in the body for months.


Sports of The Times; Right Move For Riley And Knicks
WHEN all the talk of power struggles and financial differences is exhausted, when Pat Riley's pithy statement and Dave Checketts's pointed rebuttal have been analyzed like so much testimony at the O. J. trial, we should recognize the difference between rocket science and simple math.
Riley's leaving the Knicks comes down to knowing that the Knicks' key players are all in their 30's and that their number of championships won under Riley appeared to be in a holding pattern at zero.
It was an exciting, illuminating and pontificating four-year run for Riley at Madison Square Garden, but he knew it was over five minutes after the basket turned away Patrick Ewing's layup on Sunday evening, May 21.
The Indiana Pacers went on to the Eastern Conference finals.
Riley went to a real estate broker in Greenwich, Conn., named David Ogilvy.
His house, I am told, was immediately put up for sale, with no multiple listing to avoid word getting out.


Some Splash and Some Just Sit


G.O.P. Seeks Foes' Donors Aggressively
As Republicans intensify the drive to cement their majority in Congress, lawmakers are putting the squeeze on potential donors with a raw aggressiveness unusual even by Washington standards.
Several lobbyists said they were stunned by the direct nature of a solicitation they received recently from Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority whip.
His letter was mailed to every political action committee that contributed to the losing re-election bid last year of Representative Mike Kreidler, a Washington Democrat.


Gift-Wrapping the Reichstag


Judge Asked To Halt Use Of an Office For Homeless
Requesting a civil contempt-of-court ruling against the Mayor, the Human Resources Administration and the Department of Homeless Services, the Legal Aid Society again asked a judge yesterday to compel New York City to stop housing homeless families with children in a Bronx welfare office.
Seeking an end to "this brutal practice," court papers filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan said that more than 3,300 families, including more than 1,000 with severe medical needs, had been housed overnight in the office between Jan. 1 and Wednesday.


Two Analysts Returning to CS First Boston
Two top-ranked analysts who left the CS First Boston Corporation for the rival Morgan Stanley &amp; Company on Tuesday have changed their minds in one of the quickest about-faces anyone on Wall Street can recall.
Gordon Hall, 36, a managing director who was the top oil service and equipment analyst in Institutional Investor's annual survey last year, and James Clark, 33, who ranked third in the same survey for his knowledge of the domestic oil business, have rejoined CS First Boston.


No Retrial for Convicted Killer
John E. List, the accountant who killed his mother, wife and three teen-age children in Westfield in 1971 and then disappeared to Denver under a new identity, will not get a new trial.
Mr.
List -- who admitted the murders in a letter left at the scene -- had sought to have his 1990 conviction overturned because his judgment was impaired by "post-traumatic stress disorder" from military service in World War II and Korea.


Frank Beube, 90, A Philanthropist And Periodontist
Frank E. Beube, a philanthropist and periodontist who conducted pioneering research into the bone and tissue that hold teeth in place, died on Wednesday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 90 and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
A professor emeritus of dentistry at Columbia University since 1984, he helped provide funds to expand research and support facilities at the School of Dental and Oral Surgery there.
In 1993, a conference room and library were dedicated to Dr.
Beube and his late wife, Edith, for their work at the school.


Business Digest
Two Life Insurers Considering a Merger  Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance and Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance are discussing a merger that would create one of the nation's largest life insurers.
Executives at the two companies, foreseeing significant cost savings, said they would start a six- to eight-week feasibility study to estimate the savings and decide whether to proceed with a merger.  [ Page 37. ] Plea Lifts Caremark Stock  The stock of Caremark rose $1.875, or 9 percent, to $21.875, after the company said Thursday night that it had agreed to plead guilty in the kickback inquiry involving its home health care business.
The company said it would pay $161 million to Federal and state governments.
That would force Caremark to take an after-tax charge of $110 million for the second quarter.  [ 35. ] And Next, Dial Chaos?
The first tangible effect of the Senate's overhaul of telecommunications law, experts say, will be chaos: new marketing deals, outrageous prices, bankruptcies, hostile takeovers and schemes to make a quick killing.
A partial analysis of claims filed with administrators of the settlement found that more than 70,000 women probably would be eligible to get money in the first wave of payments, far more than anyone had anticipated.  [ 7. ] Olympics to Salt Lake City  Salt Lake City joined Atlanta as an Olympic city, winning host rights for the 2002 Winter Olympics with a surprisingly overwhelming first-ballot victory over its rivals: Ostersund, Sweden; Sion, Switzerland, and Quebec.
Salt Lake City projected an operating budget of $798 million and said sponsorships, television rights and the sale of licensed products would help meet it.  [ 27. ] Hotel Chief Builds an Empire  Harry R. Silverman is the biggest hotel magnate in the nation, but few people know his name.
Maybe that's because he does not own his hotels.
But Mr.
Silverman, the chief of Hospitality Franchise Systems, has assembled an empire that controls about 4,200 mostly low- to mid-price hotels.  [ 35. ]


Ruling on State Pension Letters
The Whitman administration does not have to release correspondence from the Internal Revenue Service about the removal of $769 million from the state pension system, a judge ruled yesterday.
Democrats in the Legislature said they would now try to persuade the Republican majority to subpoena the correspondence, which they contend could have a huge impact on the state budget and the Governor's tax-cut proposal if it indicates the I.R.S. plans to make the state pay back the pension money.


When Senators Get Really Senatorial
This year's Congress loves to proclaim devotion to budget discipline and a more rational defense structure.
But how easily more than 200 members of Congress forgot their vows when they took time from legislating this week to parade their parochial interests before the commission on military base closings.
Take Senator Phil Gramm, a Presidential candidate who presents himself as a champion of Federal spending cuts but wants all the pork he can get for Texas.
Mr.
Gramm swore that "our love affair in Texas with our military bases didn't happen the day they went on the base closings list; Texans have always believed in a strong defense." To keep it strong, he pleaded with the commission not to close the Red River Army Depot, or any of three Air Force bases in the Lone Star state.


CHRONICLE
It seems Tupac Shakur cannot leave trouble behind him.
The rapper, serving 18 months to 4 1/2 years for sexually abusing a woman in a New York hotel room, has been confined to his cell at the Clinton State Prison in Dannemora, N.Y., 23 hours a day after a prison guard smelled marijuana near his cell and Mr.
Shakur subsequently failed a drug test, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


New Delhi Journal; 110 Plus Brings Discomfort, to the Nth Degree
In Nehru Camp, a shantytown on the eastern edge of this capital, the noon temperature one day last week had pushed above 115 degrees, making a still life of dusty lanes snaking between homes made of plastic sheeting, old truck tires and discarded chunks of wood and tin.
Wherever there was shade, whole families lay prone on charpoys, the bamboo-and-rattan cots that serve Indians as benches and beds.
The only movement was at the communal water tap.
As at every place where water flows on the burning plains of northern India at this time of the year, a crowd had gathered -- old men and small boys and mothers clutching infants.
While they waited with battered buckets and plastic containers, all kept their eyes intently on the tap, ready to chastise anyone judged to have drawn more than a fair share.


Fretter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Court Victory for Microsoft
A Federal appeals court reinstated an antitrust settlement between Microsoft and the Justice Department, disqualifying the judge who rejected it.
Page 33.


The First Computer
To the Editor:
Your June 7 obituary of the computer pioneer J. Presper Eckert notes his critical role as co-inventor of the 1945 Eniac, and states that Eniac is believed to be the first electronic digital computer.


Trooper Gets Early Release Over Evidence Tampering
After serving less than two months of a one-year sentence, a former New York State trooper convicted in an evidence-tampering scandal has been granted early release by a Delaware County panel.
The decision means that the former trooper, Patrick F. O'Hara, will leave jail six months before he would normally be eligible for parole.
The decisison was termed "a totally indefensible miscarriage of justice" by the special prosecutor in the case, Nelson E. Roth.


Sports of The Times; Next Coach Should Know How to Smile
DALY?
Brown?
Jackson?
Fratello?
Pitino?
I'd settle for any of them.
I just don't want to spend the next few years feeling that the future of American society is being decided out on the court by a bunch of jocks in shorts.
I'd like a few smiles, a few smirks, a few winks, a few laughs, a few yuks, a few saunters, a few struts, a few quips, a few chortles, a few guffaws to go with the dreadful burden of coaching basketball.
Lighten up.
Take a chill pill.
It's a game.


Michael Jackson Apologizes For Hurt Caused by Lyrics
Michael Jackson apologized yesterday for any "hurt" caused by the lyrics of a song on his new album "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I," and promised to include an apology on all copies of the album that have not yet been shipped to stores.
The song -- "They Don't Care About Us" -- includes the words "Jew me, sue me, everybody do me/ Kick me, kike me, don't you black or white me." The album is to be released by Sony Music on Tuesday.
In a letter to Rabbis Marvin Hier and Abraham Cooper, the dean and associate dean, respectively, of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, Mr.
Jackson said the explanation would read: "Unfortunately, my choice of words may have unintentionally hurt the very people I wanted to stand in solidarity with. I just want you all to know how strongly I am committed to tolerance, peace and love, and I apologize to anyone who might have been hurt." In a television interview on Wednesday night, Mr.
Jackson said that the song was a symbolic reference to victims of prejudice.


CHRONICLE
SHARON STONE has been appearing in Washington this week to talk about cancer, a subject she knows something about.
In a luncheon address yesterday at the National Press Club, Ms.
Stone said that she was told four years ago that she had lymphoma, a type of cancer.
"Very fortunately for me, with a lot of positive thinking and holistic healing, I ended up testing negative several months later," the actress said after her speech, which drew a standing-room-only crowd of more than 300 people and at least 10 television cameras.
She urged women to practice "wellness, fitness and a positive attitude."


Tolerating the Interviews, While Waiting for the Ice
The Devils had their first taste today of what it means to be in the Stanley Cup finals.
All the players joined Coach Jacques Lemaire at a news conference here after their first practice at Joe Louis Arena.
Lemaire sat on the dais with Scott Stevens and Martin Brodeur.
The other players were interviewed at designated tables.


Five Seniors Agree to Skip Graduation
Lawyers for the five Greenwich High School seniors suspended for slipping a message of racial hatred into the yearbook have begun negotiations with the Town Attorney to resolve the situation, but the students have agreed to forgo graduation exercises Tuesday night regardless of whether they are reinstated, Town Attorney John F. Meerbergen said today.
The lawyers for the students would not discuss the substance of the talks, but Mr.
Meerbergen said they were intended "to see if something can be worked out."


Angered Over Taiwan, China Recalls Its Ambassador in U.S.
China today recalled its Ambassador for consultations in Beijing, asserting that Washington changed its policy toward China when it allowed President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan to make a private visit to the United States last week.
The Ambassador, Li Daoyu, requested an urgent meeting at the State Department today to report his Government's decision.
The Ambassador informed Lynn Davis, an Under Secretary of State and the senior State Department official here today, that he had been instructed to return home to protest what he called a change in American policy toward China, a senior State Department official said.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Norman Thinks About Some Old Business
He has an affinity for this place, Greg Norman does.
Maybe it's the faint scent of the sea that wafts on the breeze off the Atlantic.
Maybe it's the links, to the past and to the course where he now stands, once again, on the precipice.
Eerily, almost mystically, nine years later, the man known as the Great White Shark leads the United States Open at Shinnecock Hills.
Again, just as he did after two rounds of the last Open played here in 1986, Norman has taken control and put himself in a position to complete the unfinished business he started here nearly a decade ago.


Clinton Plan Keeps Deficit, Study Shows
President Clinton's new budget plan would fall short of his stated goal of balancing the budget in 10 years, the Congressional Budget Office has concluded.
A study by the nonpartisan agency completed tonight found that under the Clinton proposals, the deficit would be about $200 billion every year for the next decade and would be $209 billion in 2005, slightly higher than it is this year, Congressional staff assistants said.


Behind Them, Kindergarten. Ahead. . .


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Polish Jews Ask Walesa to Disavow Priest
Several prominent Polish Jews appealed to President Lech Walesa today to disassociate himself from anti-Semitic remarks made last Sunday by a Roman Catholic priest while the President sat in the congregation.
Mr.
Walesa has declined to comment on a statement by the Rev.
Henryk Jankowski during a sermon that the "Star of David is implicated in the swastika as well as the hammer and sickle." The priest added: "Poles, bestir yourselves. We can no longer tolerate governments made up of people who have not declared whether they come from Moscow or from Israel."


School Board Member Avoids Jail
Vito DelleGrippo Jr., who resigned his post on the Point Pleasant Board of Education after pleading guilty to using bogus expense vouchers to steal $5,000, was spared a prison sentence by a Superior Court judge yesterday.
Instead, Mr.
DelleGrippo was ordered to repay the money and never again to hold any public office.


Fired Worker Returns With Gun
A worker who was fired from a Mercer County factory for drunkenness returned hours later with two guns and ammusition, the police said yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  RUSSIANS ATTACK CHECHENS
Russian forces stormed a hospital where secessionist Chechen fighters were holding 2,000 hostages.
The Chechens have threatened to blow up the hospital and kill everyone unless Russia withdraws its troops from Chechnya. 1  BOSNIAN ARMY PRESSES ATTACK
Fighting to end the Serbian siege of Sarajevo, Bosnian Army troops attacked on several fronts. 1  U.N.
RAISES TROOPS IN BOSNIA
The Security Council approved sending up to 12,500 more troops to Bosnia, but put off the question of how they would be paid for. 4  CHINA REGISTERS ANGER AT U.S.
China summoned its Ambassador back to Beijing for consultations, saying Washington had changed its policy toward China when it allowed Taiwan's President to make a private visit to the U.S. 5  OIL COMPANIES FACE BOYCOTT
Royal Dutch Shell and Exxon are caught in a fierce debate over a decision to dump an off-shore oil rig at sea 150 miles off Scotland. 3  New Delhi Journal: The worst heat wave in 50 years hits India. 2  National 7-10  CHAOS IN COMMUNICATIONS
The first effect of the Senate's overhaul of telecommunications law will be chaos for the industry and consumers.
But most experts say the changes will ultimately lead to lower prices and a rush to offer advanced services.  1  RAISING MONEY WITH VIGOR
Republican lawmakers, eager to maintain their Congressional majority, are going after campaign donations with unusual intensity.  1  SIMILARITIES IN WEAPONS
Some of the guns found at the home of a suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing are the same models as weapons stolen from a gun dealer in Arkansas last fall.  7  A CITY IN CELEBRATION
Salt Lake City, turned away four times before, was overjoyed to learn it had finally been chosen to host the Winter Olympics.  7  THOSE FAMOUS GLOVES
As the jurors in the O. J. Simpson case saw the defendant trying to squeeze on a pair of gloves, some legal observers saw a disaster for the prosecution.  7  SHAKY FOLLOW-UP TO A HANDSHAKE
President Clinton, following up on his handshake with Speaker Newt Gingrich in New Hampshire, proposed a plan to overhaul lobbying and campaign finances, but Mr.
Gingrich saw a gimmick.  9  MEASURING CLINTON'S BUDGET
The Congressional Budget Office says the President's plan for balancing the budget in 10 years would not do the job, and Republicans have picked up the theme.  8  THE UNFORGETTABLE SENATOR
Margaret Chase Smith, the revered United States Senator who died last month at 97, lives on in the memories of her friends, neighbors and constituents in Skowhegan, Me.  10  RESPONSIBILITY AND RHETORIC
Beliefs: Politicians' attacks on hate radio, followed soon after by attacks on Hollywood, raise questions about the relationship between mass media and moral responsibility.  10  BISHOPS TAKE ON MILITARY
Roman Catholic bishops criticized the Government for "excessive" arms exports and called for sparing the lives and limbs of civilians in developing countries by banning land mines.  10  Metro Digest 21  RIGHT TO CHOOSE CHANCELLOR
Mayor Giuliani insisted that he had the right of "approval" over the selection of a successor to Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who has announced his resignation. 1  OFFICIALS KNEW OF SUBWAY FLAWS
Walter E. Sindlinger, professor of higher education.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Military moves in Bosnia.
A fair farm bill.
Playing like a dream.
When senators get senatorial.
Letters  Russell Baker: Writing to himself.
Bob Herbert: It's never Father's Day.
David N. Dinkins: Who would want to be Chancellor?
Dick Teresi: The case for no helmets.
Jill Nelson: Not ready for redemption.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 17  Crossword 12


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.10
4.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.47
5.46
4.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.45
5.42
4.45
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.19
6.17
7.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.62
6.61
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.59
7.60
8.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.13
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Day After: Dismay at Loss of Someone Who Cares
Like soldiers dazed from one battle too many, teachers, parents and children arrived at schools yesterday angered and saddened over the loss of a chancellor many considered to be their leader and ally in educational reform.
"He's the first person in his position who has attended professional conferences," said Eileen Marzola, a teacher for more than a quarter century who now works at Public School 6 on the Upper East Side.
"I saw him last year at one on reading reform and he came on a Sunday to learn. I was impressed by his intellect and humanity. He didn't have to be there. But I felt he not only cared about children, he respected teachers as professionals."


Daly Is Coy, But Knicks Are About to Call
A day after Pat Riley's resignation, Chuck Daly remained an early favorite to become the Knicks' head coach.
Daly's answering machine was full yesterday, but none of those phone calls had come from the Knicks -- yet.
However, several people familiar with the situation said that Daly, former coach of the Detroit Pistons and the Nets, would be contacted soon by the Knicks.


Bridge Over a Chasm of Tension; Pelham Calls It Escape Route; a Racist View, Mt. Vernon Says
The Mayor of this Westchester village was listening to his police scanner one recent Sunday when it crackled with a bulletin.
Two youths broke into a Cadillac, then eluded a patrol car the same way other thieves have: by crossing a footbridge over the Hutchinson River Parkway and disappearing into the neighboring city of Mount Vernon.
For Mayor Joseph E. Durnin Jr., it was the last straw.
Two days later, he announced at a Village Board meeting that he would ask the state to tear down the bridge, which he and other residents have long seen as a getaway route from their tidy, almost all-white village into the sprawling streets of Mount Vernon, which is predominantly black.


William Charney, Microbiologist, 77
Dr.
William Charney, a retired microbiologist who helped develop and market pharmaceutical products at the Schering-Plough Research Institute, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 77.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, his family said.


John V. Atanasoff, 91, Dies; Early Computer Researcher
John Vincent Atanasoff, a physicist whose pioneering computer research in the 1930's was overshadowed by the successes of wartime computers, died on Thursday in Frederick, Md., where he lived.
He was 91.
The cause was a stroke, said Steve Jones, a spokesman for Iowa State University.


Rutgers Directorship Predated Tensions
To the Editor:
Your June 11 news article about the new multicultural student life recommendations at Rutgers University suggests that the appointment of a woman to head the Eagleton Institute of Politics could be seen as a response to the tensions on campus related to remarks made by Francis L. Lawrence, president of Rutgers.
The chronology of events makes it clear these two events are unrelated.


CKE Restaurants Inc.(CKR,N) reports earnings for 16 wks to May 22


CHRONICLE
If he's lucky, no one will ask him what type of underwear he prefers.
But NEWT GINGRICH will risk questions of that sort and some of the more political variety when he appears on a half-hour MTV news special, "Newt: Raw," on July 13.
TABITHA SOREN, an MTV news anchor, will moderate a discussion between Mr.
Gingrich and five or six people in their 20's, covering topics from the Republicans' political agenda to national service, education and the minimum wage.


Exel Ltd.(XL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


INSIDE
China Shows Anger at U.S.
China summoned its Ambassador back to Beijing for consultations, asserting that Washington changed its policy toward China when it allowed the President of Taiwan to make a private visit to the U.S.
Page 5.
Dow Closes Above 4,500
The stock market, lifted in part by the Senate's approval of a telecommunications overhaul, surged.
The Dow rose 14.52 points to close above 4,500 for the first time.
Page D1.
The Price of a Pair of Gloves
O.
J.
Simpson's efforts to pull on the famous bloody gloves may have severely undermined the prosecution's most vital evidence, some legal observers say.
Page 7.


Show Off New York At a World's Fair 2000
To the Editor:
Re "So Long at the Fair" (editorial, June 11), on New York City's plans to tear down part of the 1939 World's Fair:


FSI Intl.(FSII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a planned visit to Harlem by Mike Tyson, and a candlelight vigil protesting it, included one person erroneously among those planning to participate.
Organizers of the vigil said the filmmaker Spike Lee would be there, but he said he had no such plan.


Military Moves in Bosnia
The three-year-old Bosnian war is moving into a new and dangerous phase.
A strengthened Government army is taking the offensive around Sarajevo and the United Nations is dispatching up to 12,500 additional troops, most of whom will form a new, heavily armed rapid reaction force.
Even with this reinforcement, increased fighting between Government and Bosnian Serb forces could make the U.N.'s position militarily untenable.
For now, however, the U.N. troops are helping to contain the conflict and Congress would do well to pay America's fair share of the reinforcement costs.
The main assignment of the new U.N. force will be to protect the 22,500 peacekeepers already deployed in Bosnia, not to take back the artillery pieces that Serbian forces recently removed from U.N. custody around Sarajevo or enforce the Security Council mandate to safeguard civilian areas.
But even without exercising that mandate, the U.N. forces exert a stabilizing influence.


Ruling on State Pension Letters
The Whitman administration does not have to release correspondence from the Internal Revenue Service about the removal of $769 million from the state pension system, a judge ruled yesterday.
Democrats in the Legislature said they would now try to persuade the Republican majority to subpoena the correspondence, which they contend could have a huge impact on the state budget and the Governor's tax-cut proposal if it indicates the I.R.S. plans to make the state pay back the pension money.


No Retrial for Convicted Killer
John E. List, the accountant who killed his mother, wife and three teen-age children in Westfield in 1971 and then disappeared to Denver under a new identity, will not get a new trial.
Mr.
List -- who admitted the murders in a letter left at the scene -- had sought to have his 1990 conviction overturned because his judgment was impaired by "post-traumatic stress disorder" from military service in World War II and Korea.


Walter Sindlinger, 81, Educator Of Community College Leaders
Walter E. Sindlinger, professor emeritus of higher education at Teachers College of Columbia University and a leader in the postwar development and expansion of community colleges, died yesterday at Nyack (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 81 and lived in New City, N.Y.


Beliefs
Is there a moral responsibility that goes with the power to project words and images to large audiences?
After the Oklahoma City bombing in April, President Clinton said yes.
He suggested that radio talk-show hosts were morally accountable for the inflammatory messages they fed their audiences.
Liberals applauded, and so did some conservatives.


Moishe Sacks, 82; Rabbi Kept Alive South Bronx Temple
Moishe Sacks, who helped keep Orthodox Judaism alive in the South Bronx as rabbi of the Intervale Jewish Center, died on Monday at Weiler Hospital of Albert Einstein Medical School.
A resident of the Bronx, he was 82.
From the 1960's, until his health failed last December, Mr.
Sacks was the soul and staying power of the center, at 1024 Intervale Avenue in the Longwood section.
It is the only synagogue left where once there were many.


Romania's Name Reflects True Roman Origins
To the Editor:
Re "Romany No More" (letter, May 19): The Romanians are descendants of the Romans and Dacians and do speak a romance language similar to Italian, as attested by higher authorities than Bela Liptak.
Consequently, the correct spelling is "Romanians" (derivative from Rome), not "Rumanians" (British spelling) or "Roumanians" (French spelling).


Skowhegan Journal; Remembering a Senator They Called Their Own
At 8:10 this morning, Marion Knight, who is 93 years old, sat down at her piano in her house on Mechanic Street and played "Peg o' My Heart," the same song she had played at the wedding, 65 years ago, of her friend Margaret Chase Smith.
At Charrier's Family Restaurant, where several times a week Margaret Chase Smith dropped in and ordered the same $1.95 lunch -- grilled cheese on whole wheat bread, burned -- Brenda Charrier placed a red rose and a framed picture of Mrs.
Smith in a blue silk dress and pearls on her usual table.


As His Critics' Voices Rise, Greenspan Plans an Address
With criticism rising that the Federal Reserve has pushed the economy to the brink of recession, its chairman, Alan Greenspan, has scheduled an address in New York for Tuesday that may be his biggest effort of the year to make his thinking clear.
The speech before the Economic Club of New York will also be his first big attempt to counter the growing chorus of Wall Street analysts and academic economists who contend that while the central bank might have been right to start raising short-term interest rates last year, it was wrong to do so seven times.


9 Stolen Guns Are Called Similar to Those Found in Bombing Suspect's Home
At least nine of the weapons stolen from an Arkansas gun dealer in a robbery last fall appear similar to weapons seized in the search of the Kansas home of Terry L. Nichols, one of the two suspects in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal building, documents released in Federal court indicate.
Of 33 weapons listed as found in Mr.
Nichols's house on the F.B.I.'s Evidence Recovery Log, six rifles, two shotguns and a pistol appear to be the same models as stolen weapons on the Garland County Sheriff's office record of the robbery.


Mandela, in Healing Move, Backs Team
President NELSON MANDELA predicted yesterday that South Africa would defeat France in their Rugby World Cup semifinal today.
Mandela, the nation's first black president, has sought to improve race relations in post-apartheid South Africa by erasing the perception of rugby as a whites-only sport. (AP)


Caremark Surges on Report of Settlement
Caremark International Inc.'s agreement to plead guilty in a kickback inquiry, thus ending a criminal investigation that had hung over the company for nearly four years, drew an enthusiastic response yesterday from investors and many analysts.
Caremark announced on Thursday night that it had settled all criminal and civil liabilities it had faced for violations of Federal and state regulations.
The investigation centered on whether Caremark had paid kickbacks to doctors to draw patients into Caremark's home health care business.
Caremark agreed to pay $161 million to the Federal and state governments; the payment will cause Caremark to take an after-tax charge of $110 million for the second quarter.


Salt Lake City Journal; For Utahans, It Is Olympics Gold on the Fifth Bid
Four times in the past quarter-century, Salt Lake City stepped to the plate, took a swing, and missed.
Fortunately for Salt Lake City, though, this was not baseball; this was bidding for the Winter Olympics.
And today, in its fifth bid, this city framed by the mountains of the Wasatch Range, snow-peaked even as temperatures downtown hit the 70's, was named the host city of the 2002 Games.


Devils-Wings: Immovable Vs. Irresistible
Heading into the Stanley Cup finals against the Devils, Shawn Burr of the Detroit Red Wings is weary of hearing about New Jersey's "neutral-zone trap" and how it could frustrate the free-wheelers of Detroit's powerful offense.
He is urging people to shut their traps on the subject, although he puts it more politely than that.


Fired Worker Returns With Gun
A worker who was fired from a Mercer County factory for drunkenness returned hours later with two guns and ammusition, the police said yesterday.


Near-Unanimous Verdict: Blunder at Simpson Trial
After tugging and squeezing and grimacing, O. J. Simpson finally got his hands into the infamous bloodstained leather gloves.
But if the jury ultimately concludes after all that they did not fit him, the prosecutors may have decisively undermined what could have been their most powerful piece of incriminating evidence.
In hindsight, lawyers, legal scholars and other experts said today, the prosecutors' move on Thursday in getting Mr.
Simpson to squeeze into the gloves, which they say he wore in killing Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, was a horrible misstep, a blunder so grave and damaging that the state's case may never recover.


Injured Tabasco Cat Retired
Tabasco Cat, the horse who helped the trainer D. Wayne Lukas redeem his personal and racing fortunes by winning the Preakness and Belmont Stakes last year, was retired yesterday because of a tendon injury.
The 4-year-old son of Storm Cat, who earned $2.3 million in his career, was injured during a workout at Churchill Downs yesterday morning.
But he had not raced since last November, when he ran out of the money in the Hollywood Derby shortly after finishing second to Concern in the Breeders' Cup Classic, and his return to racing had been uncertain this year.


School Board Member Avoids Jail
Vito DelleGrippo Jr., who resigned his post on the Point Pleasant Board of Education after pleading guilty to using bogus expense vouchers to steal $5,000, was spared a prison sentence by a Superior Court judge yesterday.
Instead, Mr.
DelleGrippo was ordered to repay the money and never again to hold any public office.


Oil Companies Face Boycott Over Sinking of Rig
As tug boats pull a giant offshore oil rig across the North Sea to a watery grave 150 miles off Scotland, the rig's owners, Royal Dutch Shell and Exxon, have found themselves caught in a frenzied environmental debate across much of Europe, especially in Germany.
A Shell station near Hamburg was gutted early today when fire bombs were thrown through its windows early this morning.
And a station in Frankfurt was shot at early Wednesday morning.
Exxon's stations have not been a target because it is not generally known that its British subsidiary, Esso Exploration and Production U.K., is half owner of the rig.


RUSSIAN SOLDIERS STORM A HOSPITAL SEIZED BY REBELS
Russian troops opened an assault early this morning with tanks and heavy machine guns on the hospital in this southern Russian city where some 200 Chechen fighters have been holding up to 2,000 hostages since Wednesday.
At 9 A.M. (1 A.M. Eastern time), nearly four hours after the battle began, fighting continued floor to floor in the hospital, according to Russian officials and soldiers near the scene.
About 9:15 A.M. there was a lull, and Moscow radio said Chechen fighters had agreed to release woman and children and to continue negotiations, but there was no official reaction from the Russian side.


Bradlees Inc.(BLE,N) reports earnings for 16wks to May 20


Bridge
Two teams neared the end of play here tonight in the International Team Trials, to decide who will go to Beijing in October to represent the United States in world championship play.
With 80 of 128 deals over, the team headed by Jim Cayne of Manhattan led by 32 imps against Steve Zolotow of Las Vegas and his team.
The loser will play another match of 128 deals to determine a second team to play in Beijing.
Opposing that team will be the winners of a 64-deal match today between teams led by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J.


The Fat's In the Fire For Bowe, Gonzalez
With his weight and attitude always more of a question than his right-handed punch, Riddick Bowe has been almost serene in this week of sustained threats and name-calling against the man who embarrassed him in the ring many years ago, the fearsome Jorge Luis Gonzalez.
For both, the waiting will probably come to a crashing conclusion Saturday night.
Either Bowe, the former world heavyweight champion, or Gonzalez will hit the canvas one time too many, ending what has been a rivalry of hatred not seen since the early days of the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier wars.


Dutch Arrest Man in Theft At Columbia
When someone stole 22 rare manuscripts from Columbia University last year, experts speculated that the $1 million theft had to be an inside job.
But when the Dutch police arrested a suspect on June 7, they found a convicted forger from Yonkers with two fake passports and a fake Columbia University identification, Federal agents said yesterday.


The Case For No Helmets
It's time for the nation's oldest bike festival.
This weekend, 150,000 motorcycle enthusiasts have converged on Laconia, N.H., for the Laconia Motorcycle Rally.
Ah, the joys of motorcycling!
The throaty roar of your V-twin engine, the call of the open road, the wind in your hair . . . .
Wait.
Forget about that last part.
The riders en route to Laconia won't feel any wind in their hair.
They'll just feel the rush of air over their plastic helmets -- at least until they cross into New Hampshire, which doesn't require riders over 18 to wear them.


2 Sides of a Puerto Rican Coin; Corporate Tax Breaks Help and Hurt an Economy
To hear her tell it, the story of Yolanda Rivera is a heartening tale of private enterprise helping to break the cycle of poverty and dependence.
Unlike many unskilled Puerto Ricans, Ms.
Rivera has a full-time job at a company that pays a living wage -- $11 an hour, including benefits.
"What would I be doing without this job?" she declares.
"Nothing."
Ms.
Rivera, a 31-year-old divorced mother of five, works for Baxter International Inc., which employs 5,600 Puerto Ricans in making health care products.
Yet that is just the tip of the iceberg.
Hundreds of other big American manufacturers, lured to Puerto Rico by a set of much-disputed corporate tax incentives, employ nearly one-fifth of all workers on the island and generate more than half of its economic output.
The tax breaks, known as Section 936 for their obscure location in the Federal tax code, allow American corporations to escape Federal taxes on profits earned in Puerto Rico.


Security Council Approves Sending Reinforcements to Bosnia
In a hastily called session early this morning, the Security Council approved sending up to 12,500 more troops to aid the United Nations military force in Bosnia, but put off for now the issue of how they would be paid for.
Adopted on a 13-0 vote, with Russia and China abstaining, the resolution was needed to accommodate a new rapid-response force being assembled by Britain, France and the Netherlands to reinforce the peacekeeping troops in the field.


Recovering Mantle Rides Exercise Bicycle
MICKEY MANTLE rode his exercise bicycle for about 10 minutes yesterday and has been walking around the transplant floor at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas.
The 63-year-old Hall of Famer remained in serious but stable condition but continued to progress as doctors expected one week since he got a new liver, said the hospital spokeswoman, LISA WREN.
The former Yankees slugger, who has been hospitalized since May 28, underwent a liver transplant June 8. (AP)


From Communications Chaos, Order?
The first tangible effect of the Senate's sweeping overhaul of telecommunications law, experts say, will be chaos: mind-numbing new marketing deals, outrageous prices, bankruptcies, hostile takeovers and schemes to make a quick killing amid the confusion.
But in the end, most experts say, the results should be lower prices all around and a headlong rush to offer advanced communication services over fiber optic networks and satellites.


Woods Leaves With Sprained Wrist
The high, thick grass that is a trademark of Shinnecock Hills put a premature end to Tiger Woods's first United States Open.
The 19-year-old amateur withdrew after five holes today with a sprained left wrist that he injured swinging in the rough.
Woods, his wrist wrapped in tape, said he drove into the left rough on the third, tried to hit a wedge out and felt something tweak in the wrist.
"I kept trying to play on it," he said, "but it kept getting worse and weaker."


No Headline
"These are good people here, normal people, people who like to have a good time. But outside of Utah, I'm not sure everybody understands that." -- LORI WORKMAN, of Salt Lake City, host of the 2002 Winter Olympics.  [ 7:5. ]


Argentina Still Struggling To Escape a Devaluation
Six months after the currency crisis in Mexico sent its economy into a tailspin, Argentina is still struggling to balance its books and avoid a devaluation, despite a wide range of belt-tightening measures and emergency foreign loans.
The latest problem to beset this land of beef and tango is a decline in tax revenues that will make it difficult for Argentina to meet targets set by the International Monetary Fund as part of a financial rescue package the country received.


Examining Oyster Creek Incident
Operators of the Oyster Creek nuclear plant are trying to determine what caused a minor accident Thursday, when the lid of a used fuel assembly came off while the device was being moved.
No radiation was released, and the reactor is operating at full capacity, a spokesman said.


Fiore Still Puzzled by St. Peter's Firing
A day after he was unexpectedly fired as head basketball coach at St.
Peter's College, TED FIORE answered back with a statement released by his lawyers yesterday.
"I am baffled by the events of yesterday and I do not fully comprehend what happened, or the reasons for it," the statement read in part.
"I met with FATHER DEGNAN, the President of St. Peter's College, this morning to discuss the situation with him. Unfortunately, I was advised that the decision is final. I have done nothing to justify this action. The college has not given me any reason for their decision."


Marsh Wins Slow, but Close, 100 Meters
As he crossed the finish line after tonight's 100 meters, Mike Marsh joined every other spectator at the national track and field championships in mass uncertainty.
"I didn't have any idea that I had won," said Marsh, the 1992 Olympic champion at 200 meters.


Curbing Pigeons Demands Tough Tactics
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read that the New York City Department of Sanitation has begun Operation Stool Pigeon, a plan to curb pigeons in the Times Square area, but disappointed and amused at the department's tactics (news article, June 9).


METRO DIGEST
NEXT CHANCELLOR SEARCH MAY BE DIVISIVE Mayor Giuliani insisted that he had the right of "approval" in the selection of a successor to Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who announced his resignation on Thursday.
But Carol A. Gresser, chairman of the Board of Education, dismissed that idea.
The disagreement suggested that the selection process for a new chancellor may be a divisive one.  [ Page 1. ] Mrs.
Gresser, the person with the most power to pick the next chancellor, did not get a telephone call yesterday from City Hall, much less from Mayor Giuliani.  [ 24. ] Many teachers, parents and schoolchildren were angered and saddened over the loss of a Chancellor many considered to be their leader and ally in educational reform.  [ 24. ] Mr.
Cortines spoke guardedly with reporters, but to his associates, he appeared to be in high spirits.  [ 25. ] Mr.
But she was put on a form of probation on an assault charge.  [ 22. ]


Yanks' Demand for 2 Years Delaying a Strawberry Pact
The Darryl Strawberry watch continued in earnest tonight after George Steinbrenner added a wrinkle to the negotiations by seeking to add an option year to the one-year contract that has been discussed between the Yankees and the former Met outfielder.
A contract agreement had been expected by today, but a person familiar with the negotiations said Steinbrenner's push for the option year had delayed a possible signing.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Tiozzo Takes Decision over McCallum
Fabrice Tiozzo of France captured the World Boxing Council light heavyweight title yesterday by winning a unanimous 12-round decision over the champion Mike McCallum in Lyons, France.
Tiozzo (31-1) gained an early advantage and continued to press McCallum (48-3 with a draw) throughout the fight.
Judge Victor Cervantes of Mexico scored it 116-113, Lou Keane of Britain had it 116-112, and Tony Haa of the United States 115-112.
The 38-year-old McCallum, who had held the World Boxing Association superwelterweight and middleweight titles over the previous 11 years, landed enough blows to give the Frenchman a cut in the corner of his left eye.
The cut opened at times throughout the fight but was not enough to affect the outcome. (AP) GOLF  Carner Takes Lead and Shoots for Record
JoAnne Carner, at 56 bidding to become the oldest golfer to win a Ladies' Professional Golf Association or PGA event, birdied three holes in a row yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after the second round of the Rochester International.
"I've been in a slump forever -- it's nice to get out of it," said Carner, a Hall of Famer who has not won since 1985.
Matching her opening 68, Carner was at 136 and eight under par after two rounds.
Sherri Steinhauer chipped in from 80 feet for an eagle on the par-5 17th to move into second place, one stroke ahead of Helen Alfredsson and Barb Thomas at Locust Hill Country Club.
Sam Snead is the oldest to win a regular tour event, at 52 in 1965. (AP) TENNIS  Forget Stuns Ivanisevic at Queen's Club
Guy Forget withstood 17 aces to upset Goran Ivanisevic, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3), yesterday and advance to the semifinals of the Stella Artois tournament at Queen's Club in London.
Forget next faces second-seeded Boris Becker, who was a 6-4, 6-1 winner over Jason Stoltenberg.
Top-seeded Pete Sampras also looked impressive, beating Sandon Stolle, 6-2, 6-3, to earn a semifinal berth against Marc Goellner.
Forget, ranked No. 28 but hoping for a Wimbledon seeding after reaching the quarterfinals on his last three visits to the All England Club, hit winning returns at crucial moments against Ivanisevic.
He broke the third-seeded Croat in the first set, and two perfect returns gave him a 5-1 lead in the tie breaker. (AP) McNEIL STAYS ON ROLL: Top-seeded Lori McNeil stayed on course for her third consecutive title by winning in straight sets in Birmingham, England.
McNeil needed only 57 minutes to defeat No. 11 Laurence Courtois, 6-0, 6-3, in the quarterfinals. (AP)


Robert Powell, 45, Paraplegic Who Defied Medical Forecasts
Robert Powell, who defied all odds to beat illness as an infant, led an active life as a paraplegic and was vice president of the National Right to Life Committee, died on Wednesday at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston.
Mr.
Powell, a lifelong resident of Galveston, was 45.
The cause was kidney, liver and lung failure, said a spokeswoman for the National Right to Life Committee, the country's largest anti-abortion group.


Looming Larger Than a World War
Zalman King, the director, is an expert in soft porn, the kind that is merely a camera inch away from hard-core.
His feature films include "9 1/2 Weeks" and "Wild Orchid." On television, he has been churning out "Red Shoe Diaries" on Showtime for four seasons.
And now, also on Showtime, there's "Delta of Venus," a 1994 film that New Line Cinema apparently decided not to release theatrically.
Smart move.
Based on an Anais Nin novel, "Delta of Venus" takes place in 1940 in Paris. (Filming was done in Prague.) Visiting as an aspiring writer, young Elena (Audie England), falls in love with Lawrence (Costas Mandylor of "Picket Fences"), a writer she has been secretly watching every morning as he rows a racing scull on the Seine.
They meet.
He confesses, "I love whisky and women on bridges in the early morning fog." In no time at all, they are on a kitchen table panting, pinching and biting.


Salt Lake City Will Be Olympic Capital in 2002
The United States must no longer prepare to be the host of one Olympic Games.
It must prepare for two.
Salt Lake City joined Atlanta as an Olympic city today, winning the right to become the host for the 2002 Winter Olympics with a surprisingly overwhelming first-ballot victory over its competitors: Ostersund, Sweden; Sion, Switzerland, and Quebec.


Appeals Court Reinstates Microsoft Antitrust Settlement
In a victory for the Microsoft Corporation, a Federal appeals court reinstated the July 1994 antitrust settlement between the company and the Justice Department yesterday, ruling that a lower-court judge had overstepped his authority in rejecting it.
The three-judge panel disqualified Judge Stanley Sporkin, who had rejected the settlement in February and ordered the case reassigned to a different judge, to be picked at random.
It also ordered that the antitrust settlement be accepted in its current form.


Eagle-Picher Industries(EPIH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Clinton Proposes Overhaul but Gingrich Sees a 'Gimmick'
Following up on their handshake in New Hampshire last Sunday, President Clinton sent a detailed proposal to Speaker Newt Gingrich today for a bipartisan commission on lobbying and campaign finance changes, but Mr.
Gingrich complained later that the announcement was a "political gimmick."
The President's proposal called for the commission to make recommendations to Congress by Feb. 1 for an up-or-down vote, and the Speaker's camp was apparently annoyed that the White House had made the proposal public without warning the Georgia Republican.


'Odyssey' on Radio
To the Editor:
While your June 14 obituary of the Harvard classicist John H. Finley Jr. captures his devotion to what today would be called "elitist" values, it overlooks his use of a quintessentially democratic medium -- prime-time commercial radio.


After the Hoopla, a Return to Normalcy (Sort of)
Ballplayers were back on parts of the Great Lawn of Central Park yesterday, five days after it was transformed into a drive-in without cars for the premiere of the Walt Disney film "Pocahontas."
The lawn reopened yesterday afternoon, clear of the litter and other debris that had angered some park users earlier this week.
Two trucks sprinkled water.
Signs asked park users not to play soccer or volleyball on the bare stretches of the lawn but also promised that the first new shoots of grass would be visible by next weekend.


Sports of The Times; Bring Jack Back for a 40th Open
JACK NICKLAUS was about to shoot 81, matching his highest score in any of his 39 appearances in the United States Open, and everybody knew he would miss the 36-hole cut.
But as the Golden Bear trudged to the 18th green at Shinnecock Hills yesterday, it was as if he were walking under a waterfall of applause.
"It was very nice," he was saying now outside the scorer's tent.
"I feel very badly I didn't play better. You never know how many times you're going to be there. I may never do that again."


A Raw Voice In Songs Of Betrayal
In rock, pretty voices sound like fabrications; raw ones insist on what the cultural historian Ann Douglas, quoting Raymond Chandler, calls "terrible honesty." Marianne Faithfull's hoarse, corroded, indomitable ruin of a voice is made for songs about betrayal and ennui, about irrevocable choices and a desperate search for second chances.
On Tuesday night at the Bottom Line, songs from Ms.
Faithfull's new album, "A Secret Life" (Island) and her earlier ones coalesced into a chronicle of connections made and broken, every one leaving a scar.
Her voice sounded as natural as a tree shattered by lightning, though there was craft in the way it cracked at the bitterest moments, and in the calm she brought to warnings like one in "The Wedding": "When you leave me I will haunt you." Yet the drama in her songs has nothing to do with virtuosity; it is an almost voyeuristic glance into someone else's remembered pain.
True to diva tradition, Ms.
Faithfull uses her audience's knowledge of her own life, from her 1960's reign as Mick Jagger's consort to her slide into drug use.
She sang the Rolling Stones's "Ruby Tuesday," delivering the line "Yesterday don't matter if it's gone" in a voice full of bleak memories.


Nobody Helped Her Then, and Her Killer Wants Out Now
THE judge who tried the famous murder case back in 1964 has been dead for years, and so have the prosecutor and, of course, Kitty Genovese, the victim, who was killed that March night 31 years ago to be made posthumously famous by the indifference of 38 neighbors who heard her screams and never came to her aid.
But Winston Moseley, the man convicted of the slaying, is alive.
He is 60, and yesterday, a Federal court in Brooklyn took up his request, contained in meticulously penned letters from Green Haven prison, that his life sentence be set aside because his original lawyer not only knew Miss Genovese but represented her in a gambling conviction.


A Fair Farm Bill
The House should get behind a bipartisan farm bill proposed this week that would bring down food costs and the deficit by wiping out Federal farm price supports.
A less obvious, but important, virtue is that the bill could also save the food stamp and child nutrition programs.
The farm bill -- sponsored by Charles Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Richard Zimmer, Republican of New Jersey -- would phase out commodity support programs.
These set target prices for rice, cotton, wheat and several other crops.
If market prices fall below the targets, the Government pays farmers cash to make up the difference.
The bill would also eliminate subsidies to farmers who earn more than $100,000 in non-farm income.
The Schumer-Zimmer bill would save about $30 billion over seven years.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday about gains by some institutional investors in the Lotus Development Corporation and others as a result of the proposed $3.5 billion acquisition of Lotus by I.B.M. mislabeled the institutional investors' holdings.
Their Lotus shares and the value of those shares were in the millions, not billions.


Job Corps Will Gain From State Control
To the Editor:
"Save the Job Corps" (editorial, June 10) is based on misinformation, a 15-year-old research study and the self-serving rhetoric of those who want to save a billion-dollar Federal program that enriches a small group of private contractors but no longer adequately services the at-risk youth for whom it was intended.


Getting Green Acres on Ballot
A $310 million bond referendum to replenish and expand the state's nearly depleted Green Acres fund for buying land to preserve open space and historic sites will be on the ballot in November, predicted Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco, a Scotch Plains Republican.
He said yesterday that he would bring the bill to a vote before the summer recess.
The bill, supported by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and unanimously passed by the Assembly last month, drew some opposition from Robert Littell, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee and a Republican from Franklin.
Senator Littell had expressed worries about increasing state debt.
It would expand Green Acres' purview, allowing the purchase of private property in flood-prone areas on the shore and in the Passaic River plain.
State voters most recently supported Green Acres borrowing in 1992.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CYTOGEN CORP., Princeton, N.J., agreed to acquire Cellor Inc.
Newton, Mass., another biotechnology company, for $20 million in stock.
Cytogen will exchange six-tenths of a share for each of Cellcor's 5.5 million common shares outstanding.
PHYSICIANS HEALTH SERVICES INC., Trumbull, Conn., a health maintenance organization, said its board had rejected a plan to explore a sale of the company.
Physicians Health shares were down $2.25, to $28.75.
UNISYS CORP., McLean, Va., said it would supply computer products and services to the Coast Guard under a five-year contract valued at nearly $188 million WALGREEN CO., Deerfield, Ill., which owns and operates a chain of drugstores, said it would sell its Pre-Scribe computer software system to International Business Machine Corp.'s Integrated Systems Solutions Corp. subsidiary, for undisclosed terms.


Option Trades Push Stocks To New Levels
The stock market, lifted by technical factors and the Senate's approval of an overhaul of the telecommunications business, hit record levels yesterday, despite a third day of declining bond prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at more than 4,500 points for the first time, up 14.52 points at 4,510.79, to set the 38th record so far this year.


Hotel Franchise Company Looks to Century 21
Harry R. Silverman is the biggest hotel magnate in the nation, but nobody knows his name.
Maybe that's because he does not actually own any hotels.
Mr.
Silverman is no Conrad Hilton or J. Willard Marriott.
But in less than five years, he has quietly put together a hotel empire that exceeds anything they ever dreamed of.
As chairman and chief executive of Hospitality Franchise Systems, Mr.
Silverman owns the franchise operations that control 4,200 mostly low- to mid-price hotels that go under the Ramada, Howard Johnson, Super 8, Days Inn, Park Inn and Villager Lodge names.
Hospitality, in return for some nice fees, provides nationwide marketing services and centralized reservations systems to the chains.


Lower Bail in Death of Officer
Bail for a woman accused in the death of a Wildwood Crest police officer was reduced yesterday to $100,000, from $250,000.
But the suspect, Janet Hicks, a 35-year-old waitress with no criminal record, was unable to post it.


Long Island Remembers Vietnam


Slovak Publisher, Facing the West, Checks His Flanks
Immediately after the Communists fell in 1989, the publishing house created by the novelist Martin Simecka carried on smoothly enough.
The goal of the house, called Archa, was to reacquaint Slovaks with the European thinkers who had been banned for 50 years.
Simple, elegantly designed pocket editions on the meaning of freedom, human rights and conflict in modern societies by such writers as the philosopher Raymond Aron and the sociologist Karl Mannheim sold at the equivalent of a dollar each to an audience eager to learn about the West through means other than cable television.
But now Mr.
Simecka, a gregarious 37-year-old author with prizes from the United States, says Archa is in danger from both an increasingly anti-democratic and nationalistic Slovak Government and declining idealism abroad about Eastern Europe.


An Olympic Moment for Salt Lake City


Music the Old Way, With a New Version Of Purcell's 'Arthur'
In the mid-1970's, when the early-music world was shedding what Sir Neville Marriner described as its "black bread and sandals" image and inching toward the mainstream, Boston and New York seemed the likely centers of the movement in the United States.
Both cities had dozens of hard-working ensembles, and period-instrument players shuttled regularly between them.
New York still has some first-rate groups, but the scene has atrophied over the last decade, while Boston has taken early music to its heart.
Perhaps antiquarian forms are better suited to this city.
It has retained more of its 18th- and early 19th-century character than New York, and its tree-lined, comparatively placid downtown, where the eighth Boston Early Music Festival is being held this week, has the intimate theaters and salonlike concert rooms that serve the music best.


Who Would Want to Be Chancellor?
In his treatment of Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has brought the heckling of professional wrestling to the arena of municipal education.
Because of it, New York City's schoolchildren will pay a price.
Over the last many months, the Mayor has hounded Mr.
Cortines, calling him "childish" and "peevish" and "whining" and a "little victim" who should "grow up."


U.S. Bishops Attack Arms Trade and Spread of Land Mines
Acting with quick unanimity at a meeting otherwise devoted largely to lengthy discussions of proposed liturgical texts, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops called on the Government today to curb American involvement in the global arms trade and to spare the lives and limbs of civilians in developing countries by leading an international effort to ban land mines.
In a statement titled "Sowing Weapons of War," the National Conference of Catholic Bishops faulted the United States for "excessive" arms exports in the post-cold-war era and for gaining "a growing dominance of the world's arms market."


Not Ready for Redemption
After a coalition of women and civic leaders protested the celebration planned for the boxer Mike Tyson in Harlem on Tuesday, the Rev.
Al Sharpton asserted that we were not authentic voices in the black community.
Mr.
Sharpton, who is helping to plan the festivities, has also accused those who disagree with him of being elitists and dupes of the white media.
His assertions are divisive and destructive.
It is paradoxical that the same people who object to the stereotype of a monolithic black community are also the quickest to cast out dissidents from that monolith when it is convenient, particularly black women.
As my mother told me, you can't have it both ways.
Or as someone else put it so poetically, is you is, or is you ain't?


Louis Berry, Hotel Executive, 92
Louis Berry, a Michigan businessman and philanthropist, died on Wednesday at his home in West Bloomfield, a Detroit suburb.
He was 92.
Mr.
Berry was born in Liverpool, England, came to this country in 1922 and entered the hotel business in 1939 with the purchase of the Palmetto in Detroit.
He developed a chain that included properties in New York and Washington, and in 1962 headed a group of investors who bought the Fisher Building in Detroit.


Arrest in Papers Theft
A convicted forger from Yonkers with two fake passports and a fake Columbia University identification has been arrested in the Netherlands in the theft of rare manuscripts from Columbia, Federal agents said yesterday.


Yankees Turn Back The Clock To 1994
This was quality baseball.
There were the looks of excitement permeating Jacobs Field.
There were the feelings of exhilaration as the taut, errorless game between the Yankees and Indians inched deeper into the evening.
There were the thoughts that the drama unraveling in a splendid setting would continue for nine innings.
It did.
When New York's quality play slipped for one aggravating moment and catcher Jim Leyritz neglected to cover third base on a bunt play in the eighth inning, the Yankees nearly tossed Sterling Hitchcock's terrific pitching effort away.
It looked as if the Indians, who tied the game on Leyritz's blunder, would win again.


Astros Get Last Word In the 16th At Shea
The Houston Astros had planned on playing a three-game series with the Mets at Shea Stadium.
They just didn't plan on doing it all in one night.
In a game that lasted nearly five hours, Jeff Bagwell's bases-loaded single with two out in the 16th inning drove in two runs to give the Houston Astros a 7-5 victory over the Mets early this morning at Shea Stadium.


Observer; Writing To Himself
They say nobody reads anymore.
I don't know why.
It isn't as if there were anything better to do.
Look at people who are not reading.
What are they doing?
Washing the car. Shopping. Watching the Simpson trial. It brings you close to tears.


Half-Million Houston Fans Salute Rockets
Waving signs and banners, peering through skyscraper windows and hanging from parking decks, an estimated half-million Rockets fans jammed downtown Houston yesterday for a parade to honor their repeat National Basketball Association champions.
A broad stripe of red and gold -- the Rockets' colors -- was painted down the middle of the 22-block-long parade route as Houston players and coaches rode aboard city fire trucks.
"I'm having a ball," MARIO ELIE said from atop one of the trucks, wearing a red T-shirt proclaiming: "Two -- The Hard Way."


Examining Oyster Creek Incident
Operators of the Oyster Creek nuclear plant are trying to determine what caused a minor accident Thursday, when the lid of a used fuel assembly came off while the device was being moved.
No radiation was released, and the reactor is operating at full capacity, a spokesman said.


Power to Approve a Chancellor: Mayor Claims It; Board Says No
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani insisted yesterday that he had the right of approval over the selection of a successor to Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who announced his resignation on Thursday.
But Carol A. Gresser, president of the Board of Education, quickly dismissed that idea.


Bond Prices Try Recovery But Fall Short
Treasury prices ended lower yesterday, although they recovered somewhat in the afternoon after a top Federal Reserve official suggested that the economy was weaker than previously thought.
The comments by Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Fed, rekindled some hope that the Fed would cut short-term interest rates soon.
Market prices have seesawed as investors have tried to pin down the size and timing of such a move.


Shanahan Fired, Giving Keenan an Option
MIKE SHANAHAN was fired yesterday as chairman and chief executive officer of the St.
Louis Blues yesterday and replaced by longtime colleague JACK QUINN.
The change caught the Blues' coach and general manager, MIKE KEENAN, by surprise, said Keenan's agent, ROB CAMPBELL.
"Mike Shanahan and Jack Quinn are really the face of the Blues on a day-to-day basis," said Campbell.
"I think Mike would like to have some more information about what's going on."


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Reporter's Notebook; Halifax Is a Relaxed Venue for Economic Summit Meeting
There's water, but Venice it's not.
Nor is it Paris, Tokyo, London or any of the other world capitals that have been transformed overnight from their teeming selves into frozen security zones for past economic summit meetings.
Instead, despite the presence of red-jacketed Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the center of this old harbor town has a cozy carnival air.
When President Clinton met with Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan at Dalhousie University on Thursday, residents just across the street were mowing their lawns and washing their cars.


Executive Changes
CIBA-GEIGY CORP., Ardsley, N.Y., a subsidiary of Ciba-Geigy Ltd. of Switzerland, said Richard Barth would retire as president and chief executive, effective March 31, 1996; he will continue as chairman.
Douglas G. Watson, president of Ciba Pharmaceuticals, will succeed Mr.
Barth as president and chief executive, while James M. Callahan, senior vice president for marketing and a member of the Ciba Pharmaceuticals management committee, will succeed Mr.
Watson as president of that division.
DUFF &amp; PHELPS CAPITAL MARKETS, Chicago, named Douglas McConnell managing director of its corporate finance division.
MEDCO RESEARCH INC., Research Triangle Park, N.C., named Roger Blevins, its vice president for research and development, as chief operating officer.
SGI INTERNATIONAL INC., La Jolla, Calif., a developer of energy technologies, named Joseph Savoca president, co-chairman and chief executive.


Lower Bail in Death of Officer
Bail for a woman accused in the death of a Wildwood Crest police officer was reduced yesterday to $100,000, from $250,000.
But the suspect, Janet Hicks, a 35-year-old waitress with no criminal record, was unable to post it.


Women, 5 of Them, Traveling
An evening of new dance presented by Splinters and Shards/Matthew Nash Music and Dance at the Merce Cunningham Studio got off to a bemusing start on Wednesday with Mr.
Nash's introductory comment that he was "passionate about new choreography and passionate that there is none." Some impressive work has been performed at the Cunningham studio over the years.
And if none of the five dances on the program measured up to the highest level of those past endeavors, several came close.
The high point of the evening was Mr.
Nash's "Five Particular Women." The piece is set to a knockout score in which traditional Mongolian folk music and American torch songs from around 1950 are artfully and very wittily mixed.
Who could have imagined how smoothly a Mongolian cri de coeur could flow into "Spring Will Be a Little Late This Year"?


Mayor's Combative Style No Boon to His School Plans
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's repeated confrontations with Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines have undermined his own efforts in the Capitol to win expanded authority over New York City's schools, leading Democratic legislators said today.
Earlier this year, the Republican Mayor asked the Legislature to give him sweeping powers over spending by the city's schools, a measure he argued would increase accountability.
He has also promoted the idea of breaking the central Board of Education into five borough boards that would be overseen by a commissioner appointed by the Mayor.


Subway Officials Knew of Problems With Signals
Subway officials have known for at least two years that some subway trains cannot stop quickly enough in an emergency and that the antiquated signaling system did not always provide the margin of safety needed to prevent a crash.
But, officials said yesterday, it was not until the fatal subway crash last week on the Williamsburg Bridge that they learned how serious the problem could be.


Coy About His Future, Hopeful About Schools
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's chief of staff, Lynne Savage, arrived first at the Board of Education in Brooklyn yesterday, heaving open the headquarters' brass doors at 5:45 A.M., well before the first rays of sun streamed onto the pavement in front of 110 Livingston Avenue.
"It's going to be a day like any other," Ms.
Savage said, seeming to confide Mr.
Cortines's own preference for how his 13-hour day would go, his first after New York City learned of his decision to resign on Oct. 15.
"He's following his regular schedule. He has a whole series of meetings."


Albany Bill Hides a Job In Fine Print
A heavily camouflaged provision in a bill passed by the State Senate on Thursday night could pave the way for the Assembly minority leader, Clarence D. (Rapp) Rappleyea Jr., to take a high-paying position with the New York Power Authority.
The provision was buried so far down in the bill's tiny print that many Senators did not know they had voted on it until they were told so today by reporters.
Attached to the end of a bill on a different subject, the measure would allow the five-member board of the New York Power Authority to appoint one of its members as the authority's chief executive and set the executive's salary.


The Cardinals Don't Miss a Beat Under New Manager
Cardinals 6, Giants 5
Ray Lankford hit a two-run homer and stole home as St.
Louis made Manager Mike Jorgensen's debut a success last night with a 6-5 victory over visiting San Francisco.


Getting Green Acres on Ballot
A $310 million bond referendum to replenish and expand the state's nearly depleted Green Acres fund for buying land to preserve open space and historic sites will be on the ballot in November, predicted Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco, a Scotch Plains Republican.
He said yesterday that he would bring the bill to a vote before the summer recess.
The bill, supported by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and unanimously passed by the Assembly last month, drew some opposition from Robert Littell, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee and a Republican from Franklin.
Senator Littell had expressed worries about increasing state debt.
It would expand Green Acres' purview, allowing the purchase of private property in flood-prone areas on the shore and in the Passaic River plain.
State voters most recently supported Green Acres borrowing in 1992.


Bosnian Government Troops Push Ahead in Big Offensive
Fighting to break or ease the long Serbian encirclement of Sarajevo, Bosnian Government forces pushed forward on several fronts today and threatened a number of roads crucial to separatist Serbian forces.
The attack, which began in the early morning with a thundering wave of artillery and heavy machine-gun fire, involved thrusts outward from the city to the north and south.
At the same time, Government forces in Pazaric to the southwest and Visoko to the northwest pushed toward Sarajevo, whose encirclement by Serbian forces has lasted 38 months.


Russian Uranium Deal Lacks Safeguards
To the Editor:
Your June 12 front-page article on stalled efforts to buy bomb-grade fuel from Russia overlooks important flaws in the agreement.


The Group of Seven Calls for Measures to Avert Currency Crises
Leaders attending the 21st seven-power economic summit meeting called today for steps to avert future currency crises like last winter's Mexican disaster, saying such action was needed to preserve world prosperity.
In their official summit communique, the seven called on the International Monetary Fund to exercise sterner supervision over member countries' economic policies to insure that they avoid any action that could provoke speculative outflows of money.


Playing Like a Dream
He doesn't drink, smoke, spit at fans or talk trash.
He is devoutly religious and prays several times a day.
In addition he is the best in the game, quick as lightning, with more spins and turns than a whirling dervish.
Hakeem Olajuwon of the world-champion Houston Rockets, most valuable player of the National Basketball Association playoffs, is a joy to watch and to listen to, a man of quiet dignity in a world of blaring showboats.
Why then is he the most underexposed superstar in professional sports?


Two New England Insurers Holding Talks on a Merger
The Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company and the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, old competitors whose home offices are less than 30 miles apart, said yesterday that they were discussing a merger.
A deal would create one of the nation's 10 largest life insurance companies.
The discussions come at a time when many industry analysts expect many more combinations among insurance companies.
Savings from mergers can help companies build financial strength, and combinations of businesses can help smaller companies compete in areas where they were previously at a disadvantage.
Connecticut Mutual, for example, has only $4 billion of assets in its family of mutual funds and could benefit from a combination with Massachusetts Mutual, which owns the Oppenheimer Management Corporation, with $35 billion in its funds.


In America; It's Never Father's Day
Kendra Newkirk turned 17 on Thursday.
There was no father around to help her celebrate.
The first and last time she ever saw her father was two years ago on a busy street corner in downtown Brooklyn.
"Our house had burned down and he heard about it and he was going to help us out with some money," she said.
"So I went with my mother to the place where we were supposed to meet him. It was hard. He could have been any one of those men we saw walking on the street. I kept asking my mother, 'Is that him? Is that him?' "


A Showcase of Exuberance, With Changes in 'Quixote'
The weeklong run of "Don Quixote," which ends American Ballet Theater's season tonight at the Metropolitan Opera House, has been a showcase for exuberant dancing, and a new cast did more than well on Wednesday afternoon.
Amanda McKerrow and Jeremy Collins as Kitri and Basil, the ballet's lovers, blended characterization and virtuosity with notable flair.
Ms.
McKerrow took command from her first streaking leap and ended her exceptionally danced coda in Act I with a diagonal of especially smooth pirouettes.
She gave a complete performance, right down to her coquettish vivacity in the final pas de deux.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


At The Crossroad, Gresser Asserts Board's Rights
The person in all of New York City with the most power to pick the next schools chancellor did not get a telephone call yesterday from City Hall, much less from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
"This is going to sound shocking," Carol A. Gresser, the president of the New York City Board of Education, said in an interview.
"But he has never returned a phone call of mine. So it is hard to have a relationship with a person who doesn't return your phone calls."


It's Time to Regulate Children's Entertainment
To the Editor:
I would like to add an important but little known piece of information to your coverage and discussion of gangsta rap and other forms of violent entertainment following Senator Bob Dole's attack on Time Warner.


'Stalled' Cars Were to Destroy Tunnels, Tapes Indicate
Deep in the highway tunnels beneath the Hudson, the rush of cars and trucks would slow.
Bumper to bumper, lines would build, each behind a car with its hood raised in the universal sign of engine trouble.
Three minutes after the drivers of the intentionally disabled vehicles slipped away in other cars, timers would detonate the powerful bombs they left behind.
"The water will be going everywhere -- everything will be broken into smithereens, everything," said one of three men who discussed the plan, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, in a secretly recorded meeting in a Jersey City apartment two years ago.


Summer Rock Festivals In Finland and Sweden
Two of northern Europe's most popular summer rock festivals celebrate important birthdays this year.
Ruisrock in Finland will have its 25th anniversary and Hultsfred in Sweden will have its 10th.
Ruisrock, which takes place on a pretty island off the old Finnish city of Turku, will be held July 8 and 9.
About 50,000 people are expected to see such bands as Bon Jovi, Black Crowes, Simple Minds, and 22-Pistepirkko of Finland.


Americans' Love Affair With the Car Is Quickly Becoming a Group Scene
SOMETIMES it seems that the roads are more crowded with cars than ever, that almost everybody has a car and drives it alone, and that people spend more and more time in their cars.
According to an analysis of census data, all of that is true.
The report, the Federal Department of Transportation's Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey, gives evidence that mobility is ever increasing, although independent analyses suggest that a saturation point is at hand.
For one thing, mobility in many parts of the country is now limited not by whether a person has a car to drive, but by how many other people have cars they want to drive at the same time.
The survey counted 120.1 million personal-use vehicles in 1977, and 165.2 million in 1990.


Mary C. Szto, Urs M. Lauchli
Mary Christine Szto, a daughter of Dr.
Clarice Szto and the Rev.
Dr.
Paul Szto of Jamaica, Queens, was married there yesterday at Queens Christian Reformed Church to Urs Martin Lauchli, a son of Alice Lauchli and Peter Lauchli, both of Winterthur, Switzerland.
The bride's father, the pastor emeritus at Queens Christian Reformed, officiated.
Her brother-in-law, the Rev.
Bernard Bakker, also a Christian Reformed minister, took part in the ceremony.


Evelyn Sterne, James Garman
Evelyn Savidge Sterne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Lyon Sterne of New York, was married yesterday to James Curtis Garman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Garman of Portsmouth, R.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Stern, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in history from Duke University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in history.
Her father, a writer in New York, was formerly the editor for personal finance and consumer news at The New York Times.
Her mother, Geri Savidge Sterne, retired as the director of communications in New York for Ann Taylor, the retail chain.


Karen Supenia, Christopher Turner
Karen Anne Supenia, a daughter of Anne W. Supenia of Berwick, Me., was married yesterday to Christopher Gray Turner, a son of Judith and William H. Turner of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Katherine Anderson, an Episcopal deacon, officiated with Richard Lord, a notary public, at the Colony, a hotel in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Turner, 30, is a manager in the assurance department at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm in New York.
She is a graduate of the University of Southern Maine.
Her mother is a manager of Filene's department store in Newington, N.H.


School Chiefs See New Cuts Finally Hitting Classrooms
The budget approved by the City Council includes such large cuts to the Board of Education that after five years of belt-tightening, the reductions will for the first time broadly affect classrooms, students and teachers, according to district superintendents.
The $31.1 billion spending plan adopted by the Council on Thursday includes a reduction of nearly $500 million for the public school system.
To help absorb the cuts, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, in one of his last acts before his resignation was announced last week, told the 32 community school districts and the high schools that they would have to spend a total of $125 million less in the next fiscal year than they did this year.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Wouldn't Mother Have Been Proud?
One mark of a true politician is to have a sense of the moment, to be able to divine the melody and match it with perfect pitch.
But you didn't have to be a candidate for President to know last Sunday in Claremont, N.H., that the moment called for putting on your Sunday best and being civil.
Maybe it was the crowd that inspired President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich to behave themselves.
After all, the audience was made up of people old enough to be their parents, and it was easy to sit there and realize that maybe mother was right all along: You catch more flies with honey than with vinegar.


When It Was Thumbs Up on Hitchhiking
WHEN the British racing green MG pulled up by the side of the road just outside London, I more or less knew I was going to get into the car wherever it was going.
Like any self-respecting young Englishwoman of the early 60's, I didn't have it in me to turn down a ride in an MG.
The driver said he was going as far as Nottingham, which wasn't bad: about a third of the way to Edinburgh, where I was headed to meet some musician friends at the arts festival.
I settled into the worn leather seat -- sometimes I suspected they made them that way at the factory -- and off we zoomed.
He wasn't much older than I, and to judge from his accent and his casually expensive clothes, let alone the car, rather wealthy.
Three elegant brass initials -- T P B -- were fixed to the center of the dashboard.
I asked what they stood for.


Congress Arms Bosnia With Gas
AS the resurgent Bosnian Army stages dramatic assaults to break the siege of Sarajevo, the idea of arming Bosnia is the talk of Capitol Hill.
It sure sounds as if Congress is determined to force the Clinton Administration to quit the international arms embargo that bars open shipment of weapons to the Muslim-led Government.
"Appeasement of aggression in Bosnia resonates throughout the world," declared Representative Steny Hoyer, a Maryland Democrat earlier this month.
"Are we at last going to lift the unjust and illegal arms embargo on Bosnia?" Senate Majority leader Robert Dole asked on the Senate floor.


Painless Ways to Get More Mileage From a Savings Plan
KENNETH BOTTOMLEY, a pipe fitter at General Motors, didn't pay much attention to the overhaul of the company's 401(k) retirement plan this year.
Having put in 20 years at the company, he has long relied on his union pension to provide a comfortable life for him in retirement.
Still, when asked recently if he would like to talk with a financial planner who could offer him some personal advice for free, he jumped at the chance.
Frances Twiddy, a financial planner in St.
Clair Shores, Mich., reviewed his situation and dished out some praise.


Untidy Lives?
To the Editor:
It's still open season on gay people.
Valentine Cunningham's savage attack on Walter Pater in his review of Denis Donoghue's "Walter Pater: Lover of Strange Souls" (May 14) amounts to a homophobic diatribe.


John McCooey Jr., Mary O'Brien
Mary Ellen O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. O'Brien of Williston Park, L.I., was married yesterday to John H. McCooey Jr., the son of Mr.
McCooey of New York and Ann Skakel McCooey of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
George T. Deas performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
McCooey, 35, is an account executive at WNYW-TV in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is an operations director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the advertising agency, in New York.


Strawberry Talks Continue
George Steinbrenner is still working on a one-year contract with an option year for Darryl Strawberry that would probably pay him around $800,000 for the rest of 1995 and at least twice that much if the Yankees exercised their option in the second year, a person with knowledge of the negotiations said today.
The Yankees are the only team negotiating with Bill Goodstein, Strawberry's agent, and they will probably reach an agreement on Sunday.


Susannah Patton, Christopher Noble
Susannah Frances Patton, a daughter of Rosemary and Dr.
Robert G. Patton of San Francisco, is to be married there this evening to Christopher Norrell Noble, a son of Francoise and Norrell H. Noble of New York.
The Rev.
Joan Stephens Hull, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to perform the ceremony at Greens Restaurant.
The bride, 31, and bridegroom, 30, are reporters in New York.
She works for the Dow Jones News Service and he for Reuters.
She graduated cum laude from Carleton College.
He graduated from Columbia University, from which the couple also received master's degrees in journalism.


Plump the Pillows And Perk the Coffee
The New York Landmarks Conservancy wants to provide a loan.
The architect Peter Marino, whose projects include the new Barneys on Madison Avenue, and the interior designer Mark Hampton, who redesigned the Oval Office for George Bush in 1989, want to donate their services.
The philanthropist Sam Peabody and the television news anchor Carol Jenkins are planning a fund-raiser in September at the National Black Theater.
And Dorothy Pitman Hughes, a longtime Harlem resident and business owner, is hoping to harness all this support to open Harlem's first bed and breakfast by the end of this year.
"We would like for people to stop over in Harlem in finery," said Ms.
Hughes, 52, who owns an office supply store on 125th Street, "so they can feel the pulse of Harlem and how wonderful it is."
Ms.
Hughes plans to house the bed and breakfast in a historic, vacant brownstone she bought in 1985 on Fifth Avenue between 124th and 125th Streets.
She also hopes to get Federal empowerment zone money to buy an adjacent brownstone, a plan supported by Congressman Charles B. Rangel.
"With the empowerment zone, we intend to move more swiftly toward tourism," Mr.
Rangel said.
Ms.
Hughes says she has put about $200,000 into the brownstone but expects the venture to cost up to $2 million.
Karen Ansis, of the New York Landmarks Conservancy, said her organization was prepared to offer financial and technical aid.
"We're talking about a first mortgage of about $100,000," she said.
"Once the whole project is put together and we can look at it as a social lender, we would be very interested in trying to help fund it."
Ms.
Hughes hopes to interest a large hotel to invest in and help her run the establishment and train local residents in the hospitality business.
She can already taste the breakfast she plans to serve: salmon croquettes, buttermilk biscuits, smothered chicken, grits, marmalade and percolated coffee.
"Very Southern," she said.
"I'm from Georgia." R.P.


A CITY SCHOOL EXPERIMENT THAT WORKS
The educational advantage of small class size is hardly the novel revelation that the recent attention it's been getting implies ("A City School Experiment That Actually Works," by Sara Mosle, May 28).
I began teaching in the New York City public schools in 1950, and, early on, perceived that class size is the most crucial of parameters.


Affirmative Action Never Ended Racism; Gingrich on Wages
To the Editor:
In their joint meeting in Claremont, N.H., President Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich clarified their stands on the minimum wage (front page, June 12).


Burmese Blues
To the Editor: When my husband and I were planning a trip to Cambodia and Myanmar in March, we selected Diethelm Travel after reading in The New York Times that they were a tour operator with considerable experience in those countries.
Our travel agent booked our tours with them.
We prepaid a total of $6,298 for both tours and expected first-class, all-inclusive tours, professionally run.


A 5-Minute World of Difference
WHEN "SAFE" WAS shown at the Sundance Film Festival in January, many in the audience had serious problems with it.
The first half of this tale of suburban alienation seemed successful enough in poking fun at a California couple, Carol and Greg White (played by Julianne Moore and Xander Berkeley), and in depicting a mysterious environmental illness that interrupts Carol's vacuous rounds of shopping, lunching and picking up the dry cleaning.


Fears of 47 New Red Lights
Growing up on the gritty streets of the South Bronx, Juana Pena, 21, has seen her share of devastation and despair.
But in recent years, she has seen the neighborhood change for the better.
Construction of houses and renovation of vacant buildings have brought in families, new businesses and jobs.


Dad-Son Duos Run Up the Score
It's Father's Day, and running back Rashaan Salaam, tight end Tony Cline and safety Rodney Young have the opportunity to present their fathers -- all former National Football League players -- with a special gift, although it won't be ready for a while.
All the three rookies have to do is make the final roster of their teams and join other father-son duos that have played in the N.F.L.
If all three make their respective rosters, that would give the N.F.L. 94 father-son duos, according to statistics compiled by the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio.
That number compares favorably to baseball, where there have been 136 father-and-son combinations that played the sport through the 1994 season, according to the book "Total Baseball."


Ms. Sung and Mr. Schmidtberger
Margaret Sung, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. C. Sung of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Schmidtberger, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Schmidtberger of Jersey City.
The Rev.
Rees Doughty, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Ms.
Sung, 30, who is keeping her name, is an assistant vice president in the corporate and institutional client group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. degree from Cornell University.
Her father owns Eastern Overseas Inc. in Port Washington, a ship brokerage of which the bride's mother is the treasurer.


Bergman Conquers, Not Once but Twice
LITERATURE AND THEATER ARE IN DEADLY peril in this media-besotted age, we are constantly being told.
And sometimes, in the midst of a particularly smug and dreary book or a smug, costly but shoddy play, we feel like saying, "Fine, let them die."
Then Ingmar Bergman and the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden come to the Brooklyn Academy of Music for a scant eight days with their productions of Shakespeare's "Winter's Tale" and Yukio Mishima's "Madame de Sade," and we are ready to take up our weapons once more and fight to the death for theater's and literature's right to live and thrive, now and forever. 'The Winter's Tale'
Leontes, a jealous king, watches his queen, Hermione, a woman of great sensuous charm, talk to his friend Polyxenes, also a king.
Attraction flares up between them for a moment, then both pull back.
Nothing has really happened and nothing is going to happen.
But Leontes has sought this moment and he seizes on it; he is in thrall to his rage, and he will ruin every life within his reach -- his wife's, his friend's, his counselors', his children's -- to feed and sate it.
And nothing but magic, in the form of coincidence, happenstance, plot ruses and resurrections will make things right again.


Jessie Howland, John Cahill 3d
Jessie Ames Howland, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Llewellyn Howland 3d of Boston, was married yesterday to John Anthony Cahill 3d, a son of Mr.
Cahill Jr. of Marlboro, Mass., and the late Louise M. Cahill.
The Rev.
Joseph Alden Bassett performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony at the Annisquam (Mass.) Village Church.
Mrs.
Cahill, 25, graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is an antiquarian bookseller and a marine historian in Boston.
Her mother, Jessie W. Howland, is an editor and writer.


New England
To the Editor: I read with interest the article about traveling in western Massachusetts.
Apparently it was very widely read because we have had many telephone calls about it from friends and supporters of Historic Deerfield.


Sarah Knox, William Skelton
Sarah Frothingham Knox, a daughter of Mrs.
Lincoln Mason Knox of Adamsville, R.I., and the late Rev.
Dr.
Knox, was married yesterday to William Kane Skelton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bertram Skelton of Auburn, Me.
Msgr.
William F. Murphy performed the ceremony at the Acoaxet Chapel in Westport Harbor, Mass.
The bride, 27, will be in her second year at Dartmouth Medical School in the fall.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
Her father was an Episcopal priest in the dioceses of Milwaukee and Connecticut.
Her mother is an assistant professor of English at the University of Connecticut at Avery Point.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about Mexican Indians standing beneath a billboard, with an article about racism in Mexico, misstated the location of the scene.
It was Monterrey, not Mexico City.


Help in Choosing a Retirement Community
SO, the kids are grown, college is paid for, the house is too big, the winters are too cold and your thoughts turn to retirement in the sunny southland.
But where?
The choices are bewildering.
Friends who have already made the move extol the virtues of their various communities in Florida, Georgia and North Carolina.
But unless you visit them all, how can you be sure which is right for you?


Tidying Up Amid Spring's Faded Foliage
THE spring-flowering bulbs were magnificent this year.
Starting with the earliest snowdrops and snowflakes, through the crocus and glory of the snow, on to the daffodils and tulips, the show was as steady as it was spectacular.
Now that the bulb season is over, however, and the glory gone by is just memories, there remains a good deal of foliage.
And some of it, particularly that of the late tulips, is ugly.


Cuomo Tests His New Radio Talk Show
Shot down on his choice for theme music and uncharacteristically stifled -- if only briefly -- by a technical glitch, former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo hit the airwaves of upstate New York yesterday morning in an hour-long test of a radio talk show to be broadcast three hours each Saturday morning on 20 stations around the nation.
"Maybe you can tell me how to make the most of this extraordinary opportunity," Mr.
Cuomo said at the delayed outset of his program, broadcast yesterday only on station WGY-AM in Schenectady.


Faith in Education: A Church Prep School in Newark
There are many images associated with this city, but "prep school" is not one of them.
If anything, the thought of education in Newark brings to mind decrepit classrooms and low test scores.
The State Department of Education is so unhappy with the city's public schools that it is assuming control of them next year.
But even if Newark's schools become the best in New Jersey, the Rev.
William D. Watley wants to offer another option.


Moynihan Battles View He Gave Up On Welfare Fight
If ever there was a legislative moment made for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, it ought to be now, as Congress attempts a vast overhaul of 60 years of antipoverty policy.
By virtue of his position as ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, Mr.
Moynihan will officially lead his party on the floor of the Senate in the push for a Democratic vision of welfare for a new century.
He will bring more than three decades of serious scholarship on American poverty and dependency to what is expected to be a fiercely partisan fight.


The Endangered West
A sample of recent bulletins from the Old West: Montana rewrites some of the country's strongest water pollution laws as a favor to the mining industry.
Idaho lawmakers award potential polluters a major voice in setting clean water standards.
Utah's Governor rebuffs the stated wishes of Utah's citizens to set aside 5.7 million acres of state land as protected wilderness.
Washington State's Legislature passes the nation's most far-reaching "takings" law, weakening essential land-use controls.
Wyoming's Legislature authorizes a bounty on wolves -- recently re-introduced into Yellowstone National Park and protected under the Federal Endangered Species Act.
Clearly, the United States Congress is not the only place where laws protecting the environment are under siege.
Throughout the West, particularly in the Rocky Mountains, state legislators and governors, egged on by commercial interests and by small but noisy groups of property-rights advocates, are engaged in full-scale mutiny against Federal and state regulations meant to protect what is left of America's natural resources.


Calgary
Every July, during the 10-day Calgary Stampede, contemporary, high-rise Calgary pretends it's just an old-fashioned cowtown.
Bales of hay ring glossy skyscraper entrances, weathered barnwood boards camouflage bank interiors, and local residents replace dress-for-success suits with 10-gallon hats, cowboy boots and jeans.
Rope-twirling, guitar-strumming street entertainers stroll through downtown's concrete canyons, street corner stands dispense free pancake breakfasts and cowboy parlance becomes the lingua franca.


Corrections
A picture caption on May 14 in The Sophisticated Traveler, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about Harold Chriscoe, a banjo repairman, misstated the surname of the guitar player shown with him.
A reader's letter dated May 24, initially misdirected at The Times, points out that he is Tony Williamson, not Williams.


'Letters to Grammie' In Mt. Vernon Church
A STILL evolving series of monologues called "Letters to Grammie," acted by April Jeffries, who wrote it with Wendy Hill and is developing it under the direction of Tina Sattin, is to be performed one more time: next Sunday at 3 P.M. as a "free will offering," which means no set ticket price, just donations.
The place is the Chapel of Five Women, the arts center of Grace Baptist Church at 52 South Sixth Avenue here. (The phone number for reservations is 668-0814).


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD:
FOREST HILLS  Show Features All Turtles All of the Time  The 2,000-member New York Turtle and Tortoise Society will play host to its 21st annual turtle show at the Village Community School on Saturday.
There will be contests for the oldest, prettiest and biggest turtle, exhibits of turtles from around the world, discussions on turtle care and a sale of turtle artwork, books and T-shirts.
New York Turtle and Tortoise Society, Turtle Show; Village Community School, 272 West 10th Street at Washington Street; Saturday, June 24, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.; Admission: $22 for the first person, $2 for each additional guest; admission includes a yearly membership to the society; (212) 459-4803.
FLUSHING  Celebrating Bison In Corona Park
Plenty of people enjoy frolicking on the weekends in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Next weekend, they will be joined by Buster, Bruser, Howdie, Briont and Baby Ira -- all bison that will be part of the third annual Bison Bonanza at the park's Wildlife Center.
"The bison is the first animal the Wildlife Conservation Society saved from extinction," said Natalie Bzezensky, a society spokeswoman.
When the society was founded 100 years ago, there were only 1,000 bison left in the country.
Now there are approximately 100,000, Ms.
Bzezensky said.
The event will include relay races, story-telling, a country-western band, face-painting and mask-making.
The Wildlife Center, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 53-51 111th Street, Flushing, Queens; Saturday, June 24 and Sunday, June 25, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Admission: $2.50 for adults, 50 cents for children, free for children under 3; (718) 271-7761.
PARK SLOPE  A Dance Work That Tries To Heal the Environment
The Gowanus Arts Exchange will present a new dance performance titled "Greenhouse," a work about the environment, with performers ranging in age from 8 to 80.
"We want to get across what we think is threatening the enviroment and what people can do to change that," said Patricia McCarthy, the assistant director of the nonprofit group, which holds after-school programs in dance, writing, theater, drums and singing.
Gowanus Arts Exchange, 295 Douglass Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Park Slope; Friday, June 23 and Saturday, June 24, 8 P.M.; Sunday, June 25, 5 P.M.; tickets -- $10 and $6, children under 12, $5; (718) 596-5250.
ALSO AROUND TOWN THE CITY EXAMINED Hope Cooke, an urban historian, will lecture on "Getting Blood from Stone: Finding Social/Political Meaning in our Built Environs -- New York City as a Case Study"; sponsored by The New York Landmarks Conservancy; Tuesday, June 20, 7 P.M.; Church of the Holy Trinity, 316 East 88th Street, between First and Second Avenues; at 5:45 P.M. there will be a reception and tour of the church; free; (212) 995-5260.
LENS WORKS Photographs of the city by Harvey Horowitz, a native of the Lower East Side, all taken with a now-obsolete Kodak disk camera; Wednesday, June 21, to Aug. 30; Ottendorfer Branch of the New York Public Library, 135 Second Avenue, between St.
Mark's Place and Ninth Street; (212) 674-0947.
SOLSTICE SOUNDS Sunrise and sunset summer solstice concert by Paul Winter and Friends; Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue; Wednesday, June 21, sunrise concert at 4:30 A.M.; free but suggested contribution is $10; sunset concert, 7 P.M.; $20 for general admission, $35 for reserved seating; (212) 662-2133.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


IN SHORT: FICTION
SWAN BOATS AT FOUR  By George V. Higgins. John Macrae/Holt, $23.


Russian Troops, in Two Assaults, Fail to Oust Rebels
In another indication of Russian military ineptitude and lack of coordination, Russian troops failed twice today in separate assaults to take the hospital complex where Chechen fighters held as many as 2,000 hostages.
Russian officials said negotiations with the Chechen fighters had resumed once again as the main hospital building was burning.


Hospitals Step Up Treatment of Diabetes
EACH day, before she eats a meal, Lynn Goodman, 25, tests her blood glucose level, estimates the carbohydrate content of her food and sets her insulin pump to deliver a quick boost of insulin.
Then, about 30 minutes later, she starts to eat.
A few hours afterward, she pricks her finger to test her blood sugar again.
Ms.
Goodman, an Elmsford resident, has had Type I, or insulin-dependent, diabetes since she was 15.
She regularly attends a diabetes support group at Northern Westchester Hospital, where she was started on the insulin pump a year ago.


A Fortunate Confluence
Apparently Howard C. DeMartini, the new Suffolk Offtrack Betting president and chief executive, is taking the organization into new horizons with his hosting a Republican political fund raiser at the Hauppauge location  [ "Long Island Journal, G.O.P.? OTB? Wanna Bet?" May 14 ] .
The very idea that an institution devoted to the improvement of the breed could host an affair devoted to political fund raising opens up untold possibilities.
With its fine dining facilities that serve more than just meatballs and its televised racing, the parlor, according to Mr.
DeMartini, is ideal for parties of all persuasions.
He further states: "We are always looking for new bettors and new business, and we won't discriminate."


Neighbor Is Held in Killing
A 63-year-old Brooklyn woman was stabbed to death late Friday in the stairway of her apartment building moments after she went out to buy a newspaper in the lobby, the police said.
A neighbor has been charged in the killing.
The woman, Susan Adelstein, was stabbed once in the left side of her neck with a kitchen knife in the building at 1935 Shore Parkway in Coney Island.
Her face was also badly battered, the police said.


An Unholy Mess
TOBY'S LIE By Daniel Vilmure. 272 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


With 400 Meters Down, Johnson Is Halfway There
There is more than speed that separates Michael Johnson from other sprinters.
It is the way he runs, with his upper body rigidly at attention, as if he were going to salute.
Sometimes he even appears to lean slightly backward, like a thumb stuck out to hitchhike.
But make no mistake.
He appears to be as unbeatable as he is unorthodox.
He wants to be seen as the world's most versatile sprinter, with the speed to win at 200 meters and the endurance and to succeed at 400 meters.
And if Johnson's body appears to be hitchhiking, he is thumbing down the ride of his life.


Flowery Prose
To the Editor:
In her essay on the film version of "The Bridges of Madison County"  [ "The Joy of Renouncing Love for Life's Details," June 4 ] , Caryn James made an unfortunate choice in picking the first line of Robert James Waller's novel, "There are songs that come free from the blue-eyed grass," as an example of "jabberwocky prose."


Bike Path, Once Grand, Is Now Ignored
The centennial of the nation's first bicycle path, which stretches along Ocean Parkway from Prospect Park to Coney Island, was celebrated last week with a wedding on wheels.
Arthur Grae and the formerElaine Epstein exchanged vows on Thursday after peddling their tandem down the path near Beverly Road as a keyboard player played the Wedding March.
The bride wore black spandex shorts and a yellow top, with a white veil tucked neatly into her helmet.
"What better metaphor can there be for a marriage than a bicycle built for two?" asked the officiating judge, Joseph Levine.


Jennifer Bunn, James Howell 4th
Jennifer Markle Bunn, the daughter of Barbara V. M. Schuler of Riverside, Ill., and George R. Bunn Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Frederick Howell 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howell 3d of Mount Pleasant, Mich.
The Rev.
Sally Bryan, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony in the Siuslaw National Forest in Yachats, Ore.
Mrs.
Howell, 27, is the coordinator of a program in Benton County, Ore., for adults with developmental disabilities.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
She is a granddaughter of George Bunn, who is the chairman of the Bunn-O-Matic Corporation, the manufacturers of coffee makers in Springfield, Ill.


Susan Bandler, Joel Korn
Susan Ruth Bandler, the daughter of Gloria and Alan Bandler of New York, is to be married today to Joel Barry Korn, a son of Bernice and Murray Korn of Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon is to perform the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefilah in Bedford, N.Y.
Ms.
Bandler, 35, graduated from McGill University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She is the director of public education at the New Israel Fund in Washington.


Sports of The Times; The World Keeps Pounding on the U.S. Door
"BUILD a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door." Apparently, Ralph Waldo Emerson said it much more eloquently than that, but the point is made.
The same holds true for hotels, sporting venues, airports, highways, electronic gizmos and telephone systems.
The world's major sports events keep beating a path to this country's door.
Whether that is fair to the rest of the world is another question.


Ernest Havemann, 83, Journalist and Author
Ernest C. Havemann, a retired journalist and textbook writer, died Wednesday at a hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 83 years old.
The cause was pneumonia, his son, Joel, said.


A Lore of Their Own: Some Minor Classics
They aren't The Show, but the minor leagues have inspired a rich literature, fiction and otherwise.
Here are three samples: The Fabulous Ox
The minor leagues did not start out as what they are.
By a long series of actions and agreements, inducements and rewards, the minor leagues were reduced in tiny degrees from entirely independent sovereignties into vassal states, existing only to serve the needs of major league baseball. . . .


Signs in Wind of Morocco Drug Crop
Scientists sampling the air in southern Spain the other day came across a surprising event, a great stream of marijuana pollen coming off the Mediterranean waters, carried by a warm southern wind.
The pollen, though invisible to the naked eye, was measured along no less than a 250-mile stretch of the Spanish coast, from Estepona to Cartagena, and it reached more than 100 miles inland, beyond Cordoba.


Mean Streets
FIST STICK KNIFE GUN  A Personal History  of Violence in America.
By Geoffrey Canada. 179 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press.


Dissecting Domestic Carnage
GRANTED the name John Osborne stands for a life-changing -- many would say life-infusing -- force in British theater.
After the historic and hysterical "Look Back in Anger" (1956), a then-scathing assault on British tradition and manners, not to mention the genesis of the "angry young man" coinage, British plays were classified as pre- or post-Osborne.
Although it is steeped more in bile than in anger, "The Entertainer," produced two years later, was perceived secondarily as a play, after the primal force of Laurence Olivier's performance as Archie Rice, the last pitiable vestige of the English musical hall song-and-dance man.


Winning Game 1 on the Road Gives Devils a Tentacle Up
Certainly tonight's result came as a shock to the confident Red Wings fans, and maybe the players as well.
The locals have been celebrating here for weeks, long before their team even qualified for the Stanley Cup finals against the Devils.
They assumed the Wings would win their first championship in 40 years, and the party has been going full blast.
They still might win, but, if they do, they will have to come from behind to earn it.
They trail, 1-0, in the four-of-seven-game finals because the Devils gave them an impressive 2-1 beating tonight in the series opener at jam-packed Joe Louis Arena, which grew quieter as the night wore on.


Christian Desvallees, K. A. Weisman
Katherine Alexandra Weisman, the daughter of Ann McCarthy of New York and Peter Weisman of Washington, Conn., was married yesterday to Christian Roger Victor Desvallees, a son of Claude and Georgette Desvallees of Caen, France.
Judge Robert W. Ward of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated at the Penn Club in New York.
The Rev.
Peter Precourt, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 32, is the business news editor for Fairchild Publications in Paris.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a master's degree in international studies from the university's Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies in Washington.
Her father is an architect and real estate developer in New York and Spartanburg, S.C.
Her mother teaches drawing and illustration at the Parsons School of Design in New York.


Dana Wolfe, Scott Rocco
Sharon Dana Wolfe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Isidor M. Wolfe of Vancouver, Canada, is to be married today to Scott Louis Rocco, the son of Irene Morris Rocco of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Mordechai Feuerstein is to perform the ceremony at the Law Courts Great Hall in Vancouver.


Chamber Ensemble Continues Series
IT is harder to keep track of the Festival Chamber Music Society's "Little Summer Night Music" this year, since four recitals are spaced over nearly two months.
The artists are worth waiting for, though, and concert No. 2 at 8 P.M. next Saturday brings five of them to the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck: the violinists Laurie Smukler and Theodore Arm, the violist Ira Weller, the cellist Ruth Sommers, who is the artistic director, and the pianist Yuri Funahashi.
No more than three get to play at the same time, since the program lists Mozart's G major Duo for Violin and Viola, the Kodaly Serenade for Two Violins and Viola and the Tchaikovsky Piano Trio.
The Emelin box office number is 698-0098.


In a French Cave, Art Fit for a Connoisseur
EVEN LAST December, when the remarkable cave paintings in the south of France were first discovered, archeologists were overwhelmed by the extraordinary images.
But two weeks ago, when radiocarbon tests revealed that the images were more than 30,000 years old -- the oldest yet known -- the find also promised to send cultural historians back to the drawing board on primitive man.
The discovery, said Jean Clottes, leader of the group that explored the cave, known as the Chauvet cave, "upsets all our thinking about how style evolved."


Gadfly City Of Romania Still Goes Own Way
When the revolution erupted here in 1989 at the most western outpost of the most repressive Communist regime in Eastern Europe, it seemed natural.
Once a city of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, a blend of Romanians, Hungarians, Germans and Serbs and architecturally eclectic with Baroque portals and Eastern Orthodox spires, Timisoara always considered itself apart.
It still does.
"We're a Romanian city but outside Romania," said the Mayor, Viorel Oancea, a former local army officer who broke ranks in the violent days of December 1989 when the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu was overthrown.
That the crisply dressed, silver-haired Mr.
Oancea is still Mayor explains a lot about the independence of Timisoara from the rest of Romania's post-Communist sullenness.


FORENSIC ORNITHOLOGY: DNA Test For the Birds
In Britain, DNA testing has recently produced a solid conviction -- for selling wild peregrine falcons.
The birds, now popular pets, each go for about $1,300.
But only captive-bred falcons can be sold legally, and breeders are required to register their birds.
Jon Wetton at the University of Nottingham used DNA tests he developed to help catch Derek Canning, a dealer long suspected of selling wild birds.
Investigating Canning's business, police found 20 young birds, but no adults.
DNA tests were able to show that the 20 juveniles came from six different families, three more than the three pairs of birds Canning had registered.
He was sentenced to 18 months in jail.


Chess as a Battle and a Race Against Time
GIANTS fans may well quibble, but Maurice Ashley, 27, of Park Slope, Brooklyn, finds watching a speed chess match "better than watching football."
Perhaps that's not surprising.
Mr.
Ashley is an international chessmaster (one level below grandmaster), and starting Tuesday he will emcee the Intel World Chess Grand Prix, a four-day speed chess competition at the Tribeca Performing Arts Center.


Seeking Embrace, Yeltsin Is Rebuffed at Talks
The leaders of the seven major industrial nations issued a double-pronged warning today to President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, telling him that the "situation in Chechnya should not be resolved by military means" and indirectly condemning his Government's planned sale of nuclear reactors to Iran.
In remarks to reporters before he and President Clinton met for private talks, an obviously agitated Mr.
Yeltsin pronounced Chechnya "the center of world terrorism, of bribery and corruption and mafia."


Relics From the Gaslight Era With a Silver-Screen Luster
BY 1942, THE ROBBER-BARON style of furnishings was out of fashion in American decorating.
At an auction that year, chairs, tables and cabinets from the Mark Hopkins summer mansion near San Francisco -- some of the best and most decorative pieces by Herter Brothers of New York, the pre-eminent cabinetmakers of the period -- took in a mere total of $20,000, a tenth of what they had originally cost in the late 19th century.
But there was one market still hungry for the style: the silver screen.
And when 730 items from the mansion went on the block, the biggest buyers were from Hollywood.
Universal Studios spent more than $4,000 on scores of gaslight-era throne chairs and elaborately carved beds and desks.
Warner Brothers and Columbia Pictures also bought some exquisite pieces.


RESTAURANT: QUICK BITE/Maplewood; Blueberrry Pancakes, Fast and Friendly
"I'm so sad," my 5-year-old son said to me a few weeks ago as we were looking for a place to park in downtown Maplewood.
"Why?" I asked.


High Noon
It's hot.
It's humid.
It's hell.
But you in your impeccably tailored summer suit look swell.


Nomi Pearlman, Michael Burstein
Nomi S. Pearlman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Pearlman of Burlington, Mass., is to be married today in Boston to Michael A. Burstein, a son of Judge Eleanor C. Burstein of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Joel D. Burstein.
Rabbi Shlomo Hochberg is to officiate at the Boston Park Plaza Hotel and Towers.
The bride, 24, graduated cum laude from Boston University.
She is an editorial assistant at Information Gatekeeper Inc., a telecommunications publisher and consulting company in Boston.
Her father is a software engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother, Eleanor Pearlman, is retired from her private practice as a physical therapist in Burlington.


Shanghai Steams
City Ballet, Lincoln Center, June 12.


Carlene Gatting, Frederick Condon
Carlene Jean Gatting, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Gatting of Windsor, Conn., was married on Friday evening to Frederick Montabert Condon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlton J. Condon of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.


Bronx River Parkway On an Endangered List
A SUBURBAN parkway might seem far removed from a Hawaiian war memorial, a historic island along the coast of Georgia and an old wagon trail in Wyoming.
But the Bronx River Parkway, along with 10 other sites nationwide, has been named one of the 11 most endangered historic places in the United States by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Speaking at a meeting of the County Board of Legislators here last Monday, Frank E. Sanchis 3d, a vice president of the Washington-based trust, said plans that could lead to widening and straightening the 70-year-old parkway -- the first of its kind in the country and possibly the world -- threatened to destroy its bucolic character.


By Wheelchair
To the Editor: The article by Robert B. Semple Jr. (April 23) describing his tour of Daintree Forest and the Great Barrier Reef brought back some fond memories.
We spent a week in this part of Australia as part of our nine-week tour around the world with my wife in a wheelchair the entire time.
We began our tour of Daintree Forest in Port Douglas with Pacific Adventures.
We first took a one-hour boat trip up the Daintree River.
The wooden walk leading to the boat looked fearfully treacherous.
The crew assured us they had experience with wheelchair loading and so they did.


Looking for a DONOR to Call DAD
"LOTS OF 50'S FAMILIES had dirty secrets," says Suzanne Ariel, shrugging.
"Well, we had ours, too."
Ariel is 45, a legal assistant at a Los Angeles law firm.
Her red hair is flecked with gray and gravity has pulled down the corners of her mouth, giving her a determined look.
There are no family pictures on the walls of her apartment, no glimmers of the past -- she has even dropped Rubin, the surname she grew up with -- but Ariel has obliged me by digging out an old photo album.
She flips past a photograph of herself as a teen-ager, looking winsome in a bubble hairdo, and stops at a picture of her mother, Ruth.


Arts, Action, Cameras!
A fund-raiser for an arts academy, and awards for achievements and service to society.


Works From the Underground, Freed by Glasnost
NOT SINCE THE DEMISE OF mad King Ludwig has Bavaria seen a project of such magnificent and lunatic proportions as "Kraftemessen: Contending Forces." This project, in five locations across Munich through July 30, is the culmination of a three-year dialogue between the most important figures of the Moscow vanguard art world and the Munich-based conceptualist painter Haralampi G. Oroschakoff.
It includes more than 50 artists in three consecutive major exhibitions and a parallel program of secondary exhibitions, readings, performances, a symposium and a huge book.
There has been unrelenting high drama -- lost artists, ruined work, missing materials.
But Russian chaos gave way to German efficiency as the first three exhibitions opened to great acclaim earlier this month.


Mr. Bigelow, 18, Cool Cat, Poor Mouser
C.
O.
Bigelow Chemists exudes old-fashioned charm with its gilded gas-burning chandeliers, oak woodwork and handmade tiles.
But one of the landmark pharmacy's most venerable fixtures is gone.
Mr.
Bigelow, the store's resident cat for more than 15 years, died two weeks ago.
He was put to sleep at the age of 18 after developing a tumor.


Bookshelf
DAVID.
By Barbara Cohen.
Clarion. $15.95. (Ages 8 to 12) The thrilling biography of the boy who "became king of a very small country" 3,000 years ago is drawn mostly from the First and Second Books of Samuel.
It is well told and supported by a large bibliography.
WHEN SOLOMON WAS KING.
By Sheila MacGill-Callahan.
Illustrated by Stephen T. Johnson.
Dial. $15.99. (Ages 5 to 9) As a boy, King David's son, Solomon, goes hunting and saves the life of a wounded lioness.
Years later when he is the King, so this story goes, he grows greedy and hunts wantonly, and the same lioness saves his life.


The Huddled Masses Yearn to Breathe Free of Bureaucracy
Navigating the byways of government bureaucracy is seldom easy.
For new immigrants, who may have difficulty with the language, get lost in a labyrinth of voice mail or fear challenges to their residency status, it can be downright daunting.
So, to reach newcomers from the Caribbean, community and government organizations got together last weekend in Crown Heights, one of the city's largest Caribbean neighborhoods, to bring government to the people.
The result was Caribbean American Information Day at Medgar Evers College.


Q. &amp; A.
Making A 2-Family Conform  Q I purchased a 20-year-old house last year.
The certificate of occupancy shows the house as a two-family with an accessory unit and a storage area.
The storage area was converted by a former owner into a studio apartment with a bathroom, kitchen and separate entrance.
Therefore, there are four units and I'm taxed accordingly, even though the certificate of occupancy says it's a two-family.


INSIDE
Bosnian Offensive Slows
The Bosnian Government's ambitious offensive, aimed at easing the Serbian encirclement of Sarajevo, slowed after making some headway over the previous two days.
Page 8.
Devils Take the Opener
The New Jersey Devils beat the Detroit Red Wings, 2-1, in Game 1 of the Stanley Cup finals.
Section 8.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the game ended.
Looking Ahead at The Federal Budget
Politicians in Washington fear that the effort to pass a Federal budget will be a train wreck come fall.
A look at what lies ahead, page 22.


Help for Men Who Wreak Violence
A vital aspect of domestic abuse  [ "Police Receiving More Calls Reporting Domestic Violence," April 23 ]  is providing help for the men who are abusive.
While the violent man needs to learn alternatives to abuse, he is often unable to ask for help.
At the Family Service Association, we provide group-education workshops to help men learn to eliminate their abusive-violent behavior, understand their feelings and improve their ability to relate to women.
Men who use violence as a means of controlling the behavior of others can learn new techniques of interacting with the women in their lives.


Barbara B. Hauptman, Jonathan Falk
Barbara Barbat Hauptman, the executive director of the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater Foundation in New York, was married yesterday to Jonathan Slotin Falk, a senior consultant at National Economic Research Associates in New York.
Jack Gilpin, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Yale Club in New York.
Ms.
Hauptman, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Texas at Austin and received a master's degree in arts administration from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Ruth Patterson Barbat of Dallas and the late George Washington Barbat.
Her father was a salesman for Tussy/Dorothy Gray cosmetics in Houston.
Her mother, who is retired, was an independent employment counselor in Dallas.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Laura Ferone, Drake Darrin
Laura Ferone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ferone of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Drake Darrin, a son of Margaret Darrin of Florham Park, N.J., and the late David Darrin.
Msgr.
Hilery Franco performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine Church in Ossining, N.Y.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, dean of the Episcopal Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Darrin, 30, graduated from Villanova University.
She is the merchandising manager at Allure magazine in Manhattan.
Her father is a lawyer in Eastchester, N.Y.


Whitney Kellett, Anthony Cahill
Whitney Osborne Kellett, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Clothier Kellett of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Anthony Thomas Cahill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen W. Cahill of New York.
The Rev.
Timothy D. Dobbins performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Mrs.
Cahill, 29, graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.
She is the director of Merryhill Country School, a preschool in Davis, Calif.
Her father is a partner in Dechert, Price &amp; Rhoades, a law firm in Philadelphia.


How a Clergyman From Hartford Freed Huckleberry Finn
WITH the recent discovery of the first half of the original draft of "The Adventures of Huckle berry Finn" and the imminent publication in The New Yorker of the "missing" cave chapter, there has been considerable talk of how Mark Twain wrote his masterpiece.
Early versions and deleted chapters can, of course, cast revealing light on the mystery of how a classic came into being, especially when they show the author's aims and intentions at the time of composition.
In the case of "Huckleberry Finn," however, there is another book, the rarely read travelogue "A Tramp Abroad," that tells us at least as much about Twain and the way he worked, and perhaps even his intentions, as the lost manuscript.
Written and published in the years when he was blocked in his work on the novel that became the template for American literature, "A Tramp Abroad" is a book that, viewed from a certain angle, stands closer to "Huckleberry Finn" than any of his others.
As it happens, it's also a book with which I have a special, and even a familial, affinity.
For me, the character who has always excited the most interest in "A Tramp Abroad" was not Samuel L. Clemens's garrulous, curmudgeonly traveler, his nom de plume, Mark Twain.
Like most readers, I was certainly charmed by the world-famous American writer playing cat and mouse with his considerable fame and fortune and the by then venerable tradition of the journal of the European grand tour.
Who wouldn't be?
It was a tongue-in-cheek account written for those of his countrymen who had no intention of ever taking the tour themselves and who wished perhaps to feel virtuous about that decision, and its ideal audience was probably people who at bottom wanted someone knowledgeable to tell them that the journey wasn't really worth the not insignificant expense.
It's a nonfiction genre that Clemens had earlier both parodied and extended with his immensely popular "Innocents Abroad" and its younger, less affluent, unknown (but no less crankily opinionated) narrator.


Foreign Affairs; Too Much Of a Good Thing
Whenever you ask British officials about the Clinton Administration's decision to grant I.R.A. leader Gerry Adams a visa last year you get this pained expression and then some version of the question: "How would you Americans like it if we gave a reception at 10 Downing Street for Timothy McVeigh and a few of his pals?" The discussion usually descends from there into a venomous diatribe about how President Clinton, in his quest for Irish-American votes, fell prey to a Kennedy-clan conspiracy.
At that point, if you're smart, you'll mumble something about the weather in London being unusually rainy this year and shift the conversation to European Union agricultural policy.
Yes, the Brits were deeply upset with Mr.
Clinton's Northern Ireland diplomacy.
Yes, that diplomacy was motivated largely by a Clinton desire to gain favor with the 40 million Irish-American voters.
And yet, Mr.
Clinton's decision to give Mr.
Adams a visa in return for his commitment to a cease-fire may also have been the President's most original and successful foray into foreign affairs.
After all, it has helped engineer the longest truce in Northern Ireland in 25 years.


HER OWN PRIVATE TAILHOOK
As the father of a 14-year-old daughter, I am still fighting nausea over Saum's experience in the SERE program.
There is no excuse for such treatment.
STEPHEN R. SWAIN Stone Mountain, Ga.


Lisa Becker, Kenneth Lipner
Lisa Dale Becker, the daughter of Jerome and Sharon Becker of East Northport, L.I., is to be married today to Kenneth Eliot Lipner, the son of Marshall and Susan Lipner of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Myron Fenster is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 28, is a physical therapist at Northshore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She received bachelor's degrees from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and from New York University.


Susan A. Varrin, Alexander Deland
Susan Ann Varrin, a banking executive in New York, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Alexander Traill Deland, a lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph C. Williamson, the dean of religious life at Princeton University, performed the ceremony at the university chapel.
Mrs.
Deland, 35, is a vice president and the group operating officer in international private banking at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
She graduated from Princeton and received a master's degree in accounting from New York University.
She is a daughter of Robert D. Varrin Sr. and Flora K. Varrin of Princeton.
The bride's father retired as the associate provost for research at the University of Delaware in Newark, Del.


Preserve the Aquacade
To the Editor:
As a historian of both New York World's Fairs, I am bewildered by the proposal to demolish the 1939 Billy Rose Aquacade (editorial, June 11).
The 1939 fair represented a time of innocence for America and a prophecy for our future.
Keeping what structures remain is not only important to the history of New York City, but to America.
It is our cultural duty to preserve this historic pavilion.


Anne N. Jones, Robert A. Dawson
Anne Noel Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Ernest Jones Jr. of Montpelier, Va., was married yesterday to Robert Alexander Dawson, the son of Marion M. Dawson of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Robert J. Dawson.
The Rev.
James H. Ottley, the Anglican observer at the United Nations, officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Richmond.
The bride, 30, is an independent consultant on international economic development, in Richmond.
The couple graduated cum laude from Williams College, and she received a master's degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the president of the J. E. Jones Lumber Company in Montpelier.
Her mother is an artist.


Michael Jackson Is Angry, Understand?
MICHAEL JACKSON IS BACK, AND HE'S furious.
On his new double album, "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I," his rage keeps ripping through the sweet, uplifting facade he has clung to throughout his career.
He's not pretending to be normal any more.
In his new songs, he is paranoid and cagey, messianic and petty, vindictive and maudlin.
Comparing himself to John F. Kennedy and Jesus Christ, he's a megalomaniac who feels like a victim.
Yet he remains one of the most gifted musicians alive.
And somehow, with the strange synchronicity of pop culture's longtime survivors, his private distress may have put him back in touch with a public mood: there are a lot of aggrieved, belligerent people who feel just as victimized as he does.


Looking for Strength To Beat a Legend
Bill Bradley was a young basketball star from Missouri by way of Princeton and the New York Knicks when he first ran for the United States Senate from New Jersey on the Democratic ticket.
So naturally the Republicans figured he might be vulnerable to a charge of carpetbagging.
They hadn't reckoned with New Jersey's deep-seated hunger for national status.
When pollsters asked people what they thought of a jock who only moved here to go to college and run for the Senate, New Jersey said in effect, "Gee, this guy could have run anywhere, and he chose us!"
That was 17 years ago, and it will be 18 when Mr.
Bradley asks the voters for a fourth term next year.
The question now is, how much of that gratitude-inspiring star quality does Senator Bradley need to win, and how much does he have left?


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The Opera Festival of New Jersey presents Donizetti's "Elixir of Love," conducted by Louis Salemno and directed by Dejan Miladinovic.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18, $30 and $45.
The Lawrenceville School, Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.
BEACH FEST '95 A weekend festival of free music on the Boardwalk in Atlantic City with the New Rascals, the Drifters, Shirley Alston Reeves, and Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.
Today at 7 P.M.
Free. (609) 484-0920.
BLOOMINGDALE CORNET BAND A free summer concert in the park with the Bloomingdale Cornet Band, conducted by Bob Norman.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Sloan Park in Bloomingdale. (908) 838-6735.
CONGRESS HALL, CAPE MAY The American Boychoir.
Today at 8:30 P.M.
The St.
Lawrence String Quartet.
Wednesday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for the elderly and $6 for students.
Congress Hall, Beach Drive and Perry, Cape May. (800) 275-4278.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Hootie and the Blowfish with Dillon Fence.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50.
Ted Nugent and Bad Company with the Chris Duarte Group.
Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$35.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.
GIRALDA FARMS "A Salute to the Allies" is the theme of the 12th annual Giralda Concert featuring the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Next Sunday at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $8, or $3 for children under 12.
Route 124, Madison. (201) 377-6622.
KASSCHAU MEMORIAL SHELL Trattoria Fratelli, an Italian restaurant, sponsors "Opera in the Park," featuring highlights from "Rigoletto," "La Boheme" and "Carmen." Today at 7 P.M.
Free.
North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 447-9377.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM Sarah Partridge performs as part of the Montclair Art Museum's annual jazz concert.
Today at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $12. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
NEWARK MUSEUM The "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series kicks off with a "Jazz in Bloom" party with Houston Person on saxophone and Etta Jones, vocalist.
Thursday at 5 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
The Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERTS Preservation Hall Jazz Band.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
The Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY In the first annual Princeton Invitational Choir Festival, the American Boychoir and the Czech Philharmonic Children's Choir present the opening concert on Thursday at 8 P.M.
Free.
The Gala Final Concert will be held next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free.
Richardson Auditorium of Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 896-9330.
RUTGERS ART CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest begins with the Shanghai String Quartet, with Ruth Laredo, pianist, Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Music From Aston Magna, Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Marian McPartland, next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
RIDER UNIVERSITY Westminster Choir College presents its annual summer concert series.
Joy Bechtler, accompanied by Linda Hall, performs in "Great Women of Shakespeare." Monday at 6:30 P.M.
Williamson Hall.
The Florida Boychoir will appear on Tuesday at 6:30 P.M.
Todd Marsh, pianist, performs Beethoven's Sonata No. 17 in D minor.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
A concert of organ and recorders with Eugene Roan and John Burkhalter will be presented on Thursday at 6:30 P.M.
Free.
Bristol Chapel on the Westminster campus, Princeton. (609) 921-2663.
SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission presents Gordon James.
Wednesday at 6:30 P.M.
Hedden Park, Reservoir Avenue, Randolph.
Free.
The Hotel Excelsior Orchestra performs next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Silas Condict Park, Kinnelon Road, Kinnelon.
Free. (201) 326-7600.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER Jennie Avila and Amy Torchia will sing and play guitar and conga drums in a concert today at 7 P.M. in the last of the center's Sunday night series this season.
Tickets: $8.
Satchmo, a musical trio, presents a jazz concert.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
THEATER CAPE MAY WELCOME CENTER The Cape May Stage presents "Cape May on Fire," with Eric Hissom and John Alvarez.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 405 Lafayette Street, Cape May. (609) 884-1341.
EAST LYNNE COMPANY "The Woman Question" features Susan Glaspell's "Supressed Desires," Marie Jenney Howe's "Anti-Suffrage Monologue" and George Middleton's "Unknown Lady." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
The Meadowlands Center for the Arts, Rutherford.
Also, June 28 through July 8 at 8:30 P.M. at Lyle Hall of the First Methodist Church, Cape May.
Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly. (201) 863-6436.
FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Through July 9.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly.
Burlington County College.
Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.
McCARTER THEATER "Random Acts '95," the second annual festival of new plays, presents "A Park in Our House," by Nilo Cruz.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Staged readings of one-act plays by Wendy Wasserstein, Joyce Carol Oates, Mac Wellman and Jane Anderson will be presented today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $18. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Harold Pinter's "Homecoming." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tickets: $16 to $30.
Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
PARSIPPANY PLAYHOUSE "Run for Your Wife." Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $7 for students and the elderly. 130 Knoll Road, Lake Hiawatha. (201) 263-7020.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995.
"Into the Woods." Starts Wednesday at 8:30 P.M.
Through July 1.
Tickets: $3.
Edison. (609) 548-2884.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "Inherit the Wind." Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $10 on Friday and Sunday; $12 on Saturday.
Route 514, Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.
THEATERFEST "Lost in Yonkers," with Doris Belack.
Tuesday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $23-$25, or $12.50 for the elderly and $10 for students.
Montclair State University.
Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.
MUSEUMS AND GALLARIES ARTWORKS Paintings of Dante's "Inferno," by Eric Fowler.
Thursday and Friday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M. 19 Everrett Alley, Trenton. (609) 394-9436.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze.
Through July 16.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet Engeman and Dwight Hiscano.
Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M.
Through Aug. 10. 300 Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.
BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by all members of the center.
Through Aug. 20.
Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover. (201) 328-9628.
COOPER GALLERY "Tangible Insites," textural paintings and clay vessels by Susan Hogan.
Through July 1.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 7 P.M. 295 Grove Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-1074.
CORYELL GALLERY Oil paintings by Albert Bross, watercolors and acrylics by Vincent Ceglia and watercolors by Charles Ross.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through July 5. 8 Coryell Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0804.
CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings; Elaine Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Through July 14.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 340 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.
EVERHART GALLERY Abstract paintings by Jim Fuess.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Through July 12. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.
EXTENSION GALLERY "Hug the Noise," an exhibition of cast metal sculpture and drawings by Sean Poreda.
Through June 29.
Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.
GALLERY JUPITER "Recent Works," paintings by Evelyn Leavens.
Through July 1.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 25 Church Street, Little Silver. (908) 530-8035.
GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE "Displacement," a collage by Peter Jacobs, and "Home," a collage in mixed media by Valerie Sivilli, are on display.
Through next Sunday.
Tuesday and Wednesday, 6 to 8 P.M.; Thursday, 10 A.M. to noon and 6 to 8 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Baird Community Center, 5 Mead Street, off Ridgewood Road, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.
GUILD OF CREATIVE ART "Rhythms of Nature," a collection of landscapes, watercolors, pastels and collages by Fran McIlvain.
Through July 6.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.
HOUSE OF BRATA ART GALLERY "So Big, So Little," five paintings by John Krushenick.
Through June.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. 46A Fairfield Street, Montclair. (201) 783-7348.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER A faculty exhibition of painting, sculpture and mixed-media collages; "Sculpture and Collage," assemblage sculptures and photo collages by Carol Rosen.
Through next Sunday.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880.
J.
RICHARDS GALLERY Oil paintings of faraway beaches, old Paris streets and landscapes of the French countryside by J. P. Dubord are on display.
Through next Monday.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 64 East Palisade Avenue, Englewood. (201) 871-1050.
LEBANON MUSEUM "Details," color photgraphs by H. Lisa Solon.
Through June next Monday.
Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M. 57 Muscanetcong River Road, Hampton. (908) 537-6464.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Choice Collection -- Crafts 1995," an exhibition and sale, and "LBI Art Foundation Faculty Exhibition." Through June 27.
Free.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. 120 Long Beach Blvd., Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "From Darkness Into Light," paintings and drawings by Howard Lerner.
Through June 30.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.
MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights: Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Starts Tuesday.
Through February 1996.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Through next Sunday.
"Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
NABISCO GALLERY "Lost and Found," an exhibition of 80 works of three-dimensional art using recycled objects.
Through Thursday.
Today and Monday through Thursday, noon to 4 P.M.
River Road and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to 19th centuries.
Through July 2.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through July 2.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEWARK PUBLIC LIBRARY "Lasting Impressions: The Jewish Legacy of Greater Newark" showcases the development of neighborhoods and culture in Newark by Jewish residents.
Through July 3.
Monday, Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8:30 P.M. 5 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 733-7798.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters.
Through Aug. 7.
"Baseball in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through today.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PALMER SQUARE, PRINCETON Strictly Art in Princeton at Palmer Square features the works of more than 75 local artists.
Watercolors, pastels, oil and acrylic paintings, paper collages, sculptures, photographs and mixed-media creations will be on display and on sale.
Saturday and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Palmer Square, downtown Princeton. (908) 874-5247.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its Sixth Annual Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art.
Through July 30.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism.
Through July 9.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown.
Through July 20.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.
PINE SHORES ART ASSOCIATION Spring Art Show, featuring the works of members and local artists.
Wednesday, 10 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. 94 Stafford Avenue, Manahawkin. (609) 597-3557.
RABBET GALLERY "Five Sculptors: Clay, Wood, Metal." Through July 7.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 120 Georges Road, New Brunswick. (908) 828-5150.
RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "50 Years Retrospective Art Exhibition" features the works of Arthur J. Barbour in the Barn Gallery.
"Printmaking and Sculpture" offers the works of Barbara W. Frazier and Helene Hirmes in the West Wing Gallery.
Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M., with a reception next Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M.
Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "New Insights -- Rising Talent," an exhibition of the work of John Bingham, glass craftsman; Andrew Braitman, painter, and Lisa Gralnick, metal- smith.
Through July 8.
Monday through Wednesday and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
SHOE-STRING GALLERY "Presence by Absence," paintings by Peter Siegel.
Starts today with an opening reception from 3 to 6 P.M.
Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. or by appointment. 111 First Street, Jersey City. (201) 420-5018.
STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia.
Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend.
Through July 20.
Tuesday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.
UNTITLED (#130), LTD "Intro Art -- Children's Art Exhibit." Through next Sunday.
Gallery hours: Friday, 1 to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WILLIAMS GALLERY "The Changing Landscape: Contemporary Interpretations of Landscape Painting and Photography," by David Scott Leibowitz, Marlene Lenker and Rena Segal.
Through July 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 8 Chambers Street, Princeton. (609) 921-1142.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM More than 100 prints document "Printmaking in America" from 1960 to 1990.
Drawn from private collections and museums around the country, the exhibition includes works by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Roger Brown and others.
Through today.
Free.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
SPOKEN WORD BELLEVILLE PUBLIC LIBRARY Linda Heimall, an opera singer, gives a lecture on "Opera Becomes Real Verismo." Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free. 221 Washington Avenue, Belleville. (201) 450-3434.
BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE "New Jersey Politics in 1995 -- What Is Right and What Is Wrong?" with Tom Bryne, state Democratic chairman; Virginia Littell, state Republican chairwoman, and Bobbi Horowitz, president of Hands Across New Jersey.
Next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 536-9078.
CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY Azimi Collections presents an art show and lecture series featuring African and African-American artists.
The exhibition begins today with a reception from 3 to 8 P.M.
Lectures include "How to Assure Longevity in African- American Arts," with Alonzo Adamson, on Tuesday at 7 P.M.; "An Eye for Jazz, an Ear for Art," with Verna Hart, on Thursday at 7 P.M. and "Art as Metaphor -- Verbal and Visual Imagery in Contemporary African Art," with Ibitayo A. Ojomo, on Saturday at 3 P.M.
Free. 7 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (609) 259-9705.
ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Gerald Drasheff, the manager of public safety planning for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, will discuss "Building a Stronger Future," with a historical overview of the Port Authority's bridges, tunnels, airports and the World Trade Center.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
PARENTS PLACE "Beyond Motherhood: Women's Work in Women's Words" focuses on the concerns of women who are trying to combine career and family.
Tueday at 8 P.M.
Admission: $10. 1 Munn Street, Montclair. (201) 744-0734.
RIVER EDGE PUBLIC LIBRARY Wayne Russell presents a color slide presentation of New Zealand in the first of a series of monthly armchair travel programs.
Thursday at 2:30 P.M.
Free.
Elm and Tenney Avenues, River Edge. (201) 261-1663.
SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER A series of lectures on health and medicine includes "After Breast Cancer: Fashions for You," Wednesday at 7 P.M.
Free.
"The Brain at Risk," Thursday at 10 A.M.
Free.
Advance registration required. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2200.
FOR CHILDREN FRELINGHUYSEN ARBORETUM "Branching Out" will allow children to participate in arts and crafts, get their faces painted, listen to garden stories and munch on vegetable treats passed out by Peter Rabbit.
Saturday at 2 P.M.
Free. 53 East Hanover Avenue, Morris Township. (201) 326-7627.
MEADOW THEATER "Behind the Scenes" offers a hands-on tour of the theater that will allow children to try on costumes and makeup, operate sound effects and lights, and rehearse and perform a scene on stage.
Free.
Advance registration is required.
Saturday and next Sunday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Today, Saturday and next Sunday.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian Grand Canyon in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn about the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through July 2.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Gingerbread Players present "Beauty and the Beast." Today at 11 A.M.
"Mozart, Monsters and Matisse" combines puppetry and music to tell the tales of "Little Blue," "Tamino and Dorabella" and "Why the Willow Weeps." Saturday and next Sunday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $6 and $7.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
PARAMUS PUBLIC LIBRARY Bruce Laird presents "The Whale Show," a lecture that will tell children ages 4 through 12 everything they ever wanted to know about whales.
Tuesday at 3:45 P.M.
Free, but registration is required. 116 East Century Road, Paramus. (201) 599-1309.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
ETC.
ANNUAL ROCKLAND COUNTY FAIR The celebration of Rockland County continues with a "$25 Per Carload" admission price on Wednesday and unlimited free rides on Sunday.
Daily free entertainment includes Dondi, the comedy elephant; the Zampella Outdoor Thrill Show and Circus and the Razz Matazz magic and illusion show.
Through next Sunday.
Anthony Wayne State Park, off Exit 17 of the Palisades Interstate Parkway. (914) 358-2272.
ART CENTER OF NORTHERN NEW JERSEY In "Watercolor Workshop," led by Johanna Salomon, students will paint a traditional painting from a still-life set-up.
Wednesday through Friday, 7:30 to 10:30 P.M.
Fee: $100; advance registration is required. 250 Center Street, New Milford. (201) 599-2992.
CONGREGATION B'NAI TIKVAH It's that time of the year again: garage sale time.
The public is invited to come and sift through a collection of the congregation's "treasures" and cast-offs.
Next Sunday, 9 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Finnegan's Lane, just west of the intersection of Route 1, North Brunswick. (98) 297-0696.
COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS A mini-foreign film festival with "The Revolt of Jon" on Friday and "Sweetie" next Friday.
All show times 8 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Dragonetti Auditorium in the Student Center, 214 Center Grove Road, Randolph. (201) 328-5024.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER The 1995 Spring Heritage Festivals conclude with the Irish Heritage Festival next Sunday.
A piping competition with 20 piping bands from the tritate area starts the day off at 9 A.M.
Other activities include an Irish shopping village with sweaters, crystal, food and other imported goods.
The Celtic Cross, Richie O'Shea, Willie Lynch and Mike Bryne perform in the mall at noon.
Tickets: $10.
Exit 16 on the Garden State Park Way, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.
GOLF CHAMPIONSHIP The Monmouth County Park System is host to the 1995 U.S.
Women's Amateur Public Links Championship, in which 132 golfers will tee off in practice rounds on Monday and Tuesday.
Competition play begins on Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 A.M. and noon, and quarterfinal and semifinal rounds will be on Friday at 7 A.M. and noon, and Saturday at 7:30 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
The championship tournament will be held next Sunday at 12:45 P.M.
Free.
Harmony Hill Golf Course, Mercer Road in Colts Neck. (908) 462-9222.
GREATER NEW JERSEY STAMP EXPO A chance to learn about postal history and purchase stamps, postcards, postal supplies and other memorabilia.
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and next Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Holiday Inn Springfield, Route 22 West, Springfield. (201) 379-3779.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Latcho Drom," Friday, and "The Last Klezmer," Saturday.
All show times 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.


Christine Fletcher and Howard Stein
Christine Kierulf Fletcher, a daughter of Lt.
Col.
Edward T. Fletcher, M.D., and Maria C. K. Fletcher of Savannah, Ga., was married yesterday to Howard Stein, the son of the late Charles and Frieda Stein.
The Rev.
William H. Pindar performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Stein, 29, was until last fall the membership coordinator of the Soho Partnership in New York, a nonprofit jobs organization for the homeless.
Her father is the resident physician at Fort Stewart in Savannah.
Her mother is an interior designer.


Miss Spaeder, Mr. McWilliams
Deborah Ann Spaeder, a daughter of Francis X. Spaeder of Greensburg, Pa., and the late Geraldine Spaeder, was married yesterday to John Lawrence McWilliams 4th, a son of Mr.
McWilliams 3d of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., and the late Paula R. McWilliams.
The Rev.
William A. Kelly, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Ponte Vedra Beach.
The Rev.
James H. Cooper, the rector of the church, took part in the ceremony.


The Short Shelf Life Of Generation X
IF you were going to tell a tale of how modern versions of myths are created, exploited, debunked and killed in an increasingly short and frenzied cycle, the story might begin like this:
"Back when it all started, there was that word -- twentysomething." The speaker, in a recent telephone conversation, was Douglas Coupland, and it all started in the summer of 1991, when people began noticing his first novel, "Generation X," an odd-size day-glo paperback published by St.
Martin's Press.
At the same time, the rough-edged rock called grunge was making itself heard outside its incubator in Seattle, and "Slackers," Richard Linklater's low-budget first film, was released.


Sarah Rueppel, A. P. Monaco Jr.
Sarah Githens Rueppel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Merrill Clement Rueppel of Needham, Mass., was married yesterday to A. Peter Monaco Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Monaco of Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
Helen Moore performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Monaco, 29, is a broadcast producer at Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father retired as the director of the Contemporary Museum in Honolulu.
Mr.
Monaco, 30, is known as Peter.
He is an investment analyst and portfolio manager for Tudor Investment in Boston.
He graduated from Harvard University.
His father is a professor of surgery at the Harvard Medical School and a transplant surgeon at the Deaconess Hospital, both in Boston.


Foreign Aid's Uses Got Twisted in Panama
To the Editor:
Re "Foreign Aid Has Its Uses" (Op-Ed, June 12): Is Brent Scowcroft really a supporter of America's foreign assistance program for our foreign policy interests or does he see it for what it often is: another entitlement program for America's big banks and corporations?


Growth Is Eluding Women's Fund
THE Women's Equity Fund, begun with much fanfare a year and a half ago, has quietly racked up one of the worst records in the fund industry.
The fund aims for long-term growth by investing in shares of "women friendly" companies, or those that encourage the advancement of women in the workplace.
But growth of any sort has been elusive so far.


Elizabeth Biddle And John M. Philo
Elizabeth Silsbee Biddle, the daughter of Ernest Law Biddle of Rosemont, Pa., and Elizabeth Clay Lange of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to John Matthew Philo, the son of Clifford H. Philo of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Dorothy DeGrush Philo.
The Rev.
Kenneth C. Rodgers, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Kenneth R. Lange.
Mrs.
Philo, 28, is the showroom manager of Windows by Design, an interior design firm in Darien, Conn.
She graduated from Roger Williams University.
Her father is the vice president of King Tester Corporation in King of Prussia, Pa.
Her mother owns Clay-Biddle Associates, ceramic-tile designers in Stamford.


When Landlords Take a Stand Against Drug Dealers
Drug dealers plying their trade on the front stoop at 1469 Fifth Avenue in East Harlem were so menacing that the post office refused to deliver mail there.
Working with officers from the 25th Precinct and an assistant Manhattan district attorney, the building's landlord, William Marryshow, has spent the last few months trying to turn things around.
He installed new locks, a new intercom and bright lights in the hallways.
He also hired a security guard and posted a "No trespassing, loitering, gambling, drug sales" sign over the entrance.
And he has allowed the police into the building on a regular basis to search each floor, given officers a list of tenants and signed a document that allows them to arrest nontenants for criminal trespass.


It's Time to Send a Message: Guns Are Not Chic or Cool
To the Editor:
As vice president of New Yorkers for Gun Control, I find that your June 11 article "Hunting for the Perfect Weapon? Try Madison Avenue," about the opening of an upscale gun shop, sends exactly the wrong message: that guns are chic.


Ami Rubinowitz, Gary Israel
Dr.
Ami N. Rubinowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert S. Rubinowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Gary M. Israel, a son of Allan Israel of East Brunswick, N.J., and the late Ronee Israel.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
The bride, 26, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.


POSTINGS: $4 Million Restoration for Mansfield Hotel; A Renovation On W. 44th St.
Built as a bachelors' hotel in 1906, the 131-room Mansfield Hotel, at 12 West 44th Street, had decayed considerably by the time the real estate lawyer and hotelier Bernard Goldberg bought it last year for his Gotham Hospitality Group, which includes the Wales, the Franklin and the Shoreham Hotels.
Now the 12-story neo-classical brick and stone building is near the end of a $4 million restoration, the most striking evidence of which can be seen in the gleaming copper mullions on the double row of bay windows, freshly stripped of decades of grime.
With its exterior (front and rear) now cleaned, the hotel fits easily into a block that includes several other notable rooming establishments, from the Algonquin and Royalton Hotels to the Harvard and Penn Clubs.


Lexicographer at Play
WORD WATCH The Stories Behind the Words of Our Lives.
By Anne H. Soukhanov. 429 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


Black and White, Career by Career: How Younger Workers Compare
Some were babies when Jackie Robinson joined the Dodgers, others were teething as the Voting Rights Act was signed, but all black children born in the second half of the 20th century were supposed to have greater opportunities that their parents did.
Having finished school and entered the workforce, those black born between 1946 and 1965 have made advancements in the workplace compared to workers in the same age group two decades earlier.
But they still make less than white employees, on average, and have seen only small hiring increases in some of the most prestigious occupations.


On Sunday; Being a Man And a Father Is Being There
BY biology and familial connections Geoffrey Canada is the father of four.
By mutual affection and choice he fathers many others.
Mr.
Canada is a man of many faces.
He is president of the Rheedlen Centers for Children and Families, a group based in Harlem that aids poor children.
He is on tour for his first book, "Fist Stick Knife Gun: A Personal History of Violence" (Beacon Press).
He is a black belt in tae kwon do.
He is a Harvard graduate.


Nancy Muirhead, Seth Shepetin
Nancy Lynn Muirhead, a grants officer for projects in South Africa and East Central Europe at the Rockefeller Brothers Fund in New York, is to be married today to Seth David Shepetin, a vice president in retail investment services at Chemical Bank in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
R.
Maurice Boyd, the minister of the City Church, New York, is to perform the interfaith ceremony at the New York Society for Ethical Culture.
Ms.
Muirhead, 34, will keep her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Constance and Robert Muirhead of Mountainside, N.J.
Her father retired as the manager of project development at Cyanamid International in Wayne, N.J.
Her mother retired as the assistant office-services manager at the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Newark.


Sonia F. Turek, Gilbert F. Curtis
Sonia Fay Turek, the deputy managing editor for arts and features of The Boston Herald, is to be married today to Gilbert Frederick Curtis, the vice president of customer service for the Programart Corporation, a software company in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard A. Dannenfelser, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the ceremony at Sakonnet Vineyards in Little Compton, R.I.
Ms.
Turek, who is 45 and is keeping her name, is also The Herald's wine columnist.
She graduated from City College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Ms.
Turek received a master's degree in library science from Drexel University and a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
She is the daughter of the late Louis and Julia Turek.


National Coach, Yes. American Coach, No.
If the United States Soccer Federation ran a want ad during its search for a new coach for the men's national team, it might have included a line saying Americans need not apply.
Since dismissing Bora Milutinovic in April, the federation has been trying to recruit a foreigner with international experience.
Carlos Queiroz, a former national coach in Portugal, turned down an offer in May.
Carlos Alberto Parreira, who coached Brazil to the World Cup title last summer and was recently dropped by Valencia of the Spanish League, was the front-runner until today, when he accepted a one-year contract to coach Fenerbahce of Turkey.


Even the U.S. Mail Says So: It's the Year of the Comics
A CENTURY ago, a strange-looking street urchin, officially named Mickey Dugan but later much better known as the Yellow Kid for the color of the nightshirt he wore, appeared in Joseph Pulitzer's New York newspaper, The World.
It was the start of an American art form -- and big business -- known as the comics.
This year, the centennial of the comics has been getting a lot of attention in newspapers and elsewhere, even the post office.
This fall, the United States Postal Service will issue a series of stamps featuring Blondie and Popeye, Dick Tracy, Little Orphan Annie and others.


Moving On Up; The Greening of America's Black Middle Class
WHETHER or not judges and legislators limit affirmative action, its promise is being fulfilled for many blacks who have made striking gains in income and employment in the 30 years since the Government began guaranteeing equal rights to jobs and education.
Just how much those gains can be attributed to affirmative action preferences and other Government remedies is arguable.
But over those three decades, a tiny middle class typified by doctors, teachers and small entrepreneurs working often within the boundaries of the black community evolved into a larger, more diverse group that has been charted by economists, courted by politicians and validated by prime-time sitcoms on television, which belatedly discovered a vast consumer market.
It also appears that the boats of the middle class rose on the high tide of the 1980's.


With Deng's Influence Waning, Privatizing of China's State Industries Stalls
The last great task of Deng Xiaoping's era of economic reform, the restructuring and privatizing of China's huge state-owned industrial sector, is under assault at a time when he appears to be too infirm to respond.
Since consolidating power in 1978, Mr.
Deng, now 90, has supervised each phase of economic liberalization, ending agricultural communes and creating "special economic zones" as experiments in capitalism.
In doing so, he laid the foundation for the "socialist market economy" that became national policy in October 1992 and has accounted for the tenfold increase in China's gross national product from 1978 to 1994.


Freedom Rider
THE PRICE OF A CHILD By Lorene Cary. 318 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf.


New Assaults on Legal Services
The Legal Services Corporation, the federally funded program to help poor people with legal problems, has never had it easy.
Created by Congress in 1974 to insulate poverty lawyers from political pressure, the corporation barely survived the destructive Reagan Administration and the neglectful Bush Administration.
Now the program has friends in the White House but must endure a hostile, Republican-controlled Congress.
Powerful Republican enemies include Senator Phil Gramm and Representative John Kasich, who would use their budget axes to kill the program entirely.
The Senate's budget resolution is only slightly more benign, calling for a 35 percent cut in a meager budget of $415 million.
Some cuts are inevitable in these times, but crippling or killing the program must be resisted.


Blind Student Speaks of Private Struggle
THE normally restive seniors in John Donnelly's psychology class at Westlake High School here offer an attentive silence when their classmate Elizabeth Castellano gets up to make a presentation about visual disability.
Many of them have known Liz, as the poised, outgoing young woman is called, since kindergarten.
But as her presentation makes clear, many of Liz's peers haven't really understood her struggle to be like them.


Role of North Shore Community Arts Center
In response to your mention of the North Shore Community Arts Center in "New Center Tries to Recapture Great Neck's Arts Heritage"  [ April 30 ]  on the Great Neck Center for the Visual and Performing Arts, we'd like to set the record straight.
From 1949 to 1983 the North Shore Community Arts Center was a major school of the arts and presenting organization in western Nassau County and eastern Queens.
The faculty and the artists who performed at the center were legendary.
While no longer serving in that capacity, we continue to serve the arts, artists and audience on the North Shore of Long Island as a support and advocacy organization.
We are not a foundation.
We have never presented programs at Great Neck House, splendid as that facility is.
Currently we support a number of arts organizations on the North Shore and present events and workshops in cooperation with them.
We commission works of art on socially significant subjects, i.e., a sculpture by Paul Petroff on preserving the environment and a musical composition which opened the dedication ceremony to the monument to the victims of the Holocaust by Ellen Levy.
We sponsor a poster contest in the schools each year on a relevant subject.
This year it is "What the Arts Mean to Me." We award Certificate of Merit awards to graduating seniors in 16 North Shore high schools who have shown outstanding achievement in the arts.
We are consultants on the cable TV program "Artscene on Long Island." It is the only regularly scheduled program on the arts on the Island.


Bosnian Drive to Relieve Sarajevo Slows
The Bosnian Government's most ambitious offensive in three years of war, aimed at easing or breaking the Serbian encirclement of Sarajevo, slowed today after making limited headway during the last two days.
The Bosnian Army halted an attack on a critical supply route linking the Serb stronghold of Pale with the garrison in Lukavica.
It appeared that they were taking heavy casualties on the road.
But the Bosnian troops remained within firing range of the road, and the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, issued a statement urging people to avoid using it.


Fiscal Triage At Hospitals: Doing Less With Fewer
Thousands of hospital employees have lost their jobs this year, and tens of thousands more have had their working conditions change drastically as hospitals deal with a drop in revenues caused by lower reimbursements from Medicaid, Medicare and insurance companies.
The cuts this year have been made at institutions across the city, from prestigious, world-renowned medical centers to small local hospitals.
Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn, for one, laid off 95 employees.
Flushing Hospital Medical Center in Queens cut 60.
Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx cut its personnel budget by 5 percent.
New York Hospital let 126 people go -- 89 at its Manhattan location and 37 at its psychiatric center in White Plains.
In addition, 22 psychiatrists and 4 psychologists on contract at the White Plains site were told that their positions were being eliminated.


Pamela Zimmerman, Gerald Cohen
Pamela Zimmerman, an editor and writer of corporate publications at Information Builders Inc., a computer software company in New York, is to be married today to Gerald D. Cohen, the company's president and founder.
Rabbi Pamela Wax is to perform the ceremony at the Sign of the Dove restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Zimmerman, who is keeping her name, graduated from Northeastern University.
She is the daughter of Frances and Carl R. Zimmerman of Teaneck, N.J.
The bride's father is the promotions manager at Hoffmann-La Roche, the pharmaceuticals company, in Paramus, N.J.


The Door Is Open
To the Editor:
Veronica Chambers bemoans "the exclusive white male club of late-night television" since Arsenio Hall went off the air.
But the "door," as Ms.
Chambers laments, is not "closed." African-Americans are behind and before the cameras throughout the day.
Montel and Oprah are doing just fine.
And what is Al Roker's nightly 2 A.M.
"CNBC Talks" show -- chopped liver?
SYLVAN SUSSER  Roslyn, N.Y.


Sarah R. Altman and Yale E. Stark
Sarah Rena Altman, the daughter of Justices Myriam J. Altman and Herbert I. Altman of New York, is to be married today to Yale Edward Stark, a son of Dr.
Helene Stark and Norman Stark of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Saul Berman is to perform the ceremony at the Vista Hotel in New York.
The bride, 21, is to enter her senior year at Yeshiva University this fall.
Her father is a justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Her mother is an associate justice in the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Transplant, Sow, Prune and Mow
Start seeds of biennials, like forget-me-nots, English daisies, foxgloves and verbascums, and seeds of perennials, like columbines, coreopsises, gaillardias and geums.
Sow in a cold frame or well-prepared seed bed, and keep soil evenly moist for good germination.
Transplant to a nursery bed or cold frame when seedlings develop their second set of leaves.
They should be ready to move to a permanent site by early fall.


The New Gulf War: Man Your Computers
TWO feet of rain had fallen around New Orleans at the height of last month's fierce Gulf storm, shutting down regular air service into the city, and still the oil executives kept coming.
One group hired a private jet and then a helicopter.
Others had to abandon their car to wade through water up to their necks, holding their briefcases high to keep them dry.
The Government was selling oil and gas leases in the Gulf of Mexico and a little derring-do to get to the auction site was a small price to pay for a piece of the action.
When the bidding was over at the Interior Department's Minerals Management Service office in the flooded suburb of Metairie, the executives had forked over $307 million for drilling rights -- nearly triple what the Government had expected.


Pasta and Pizza, Sauces and Thin Crusts
WE'RE in the old opera house," the voice on the phone told us, "it's on Plaza Middlesex." We were seeking directions to the Tuscany Grill in Middletown.
Well, the opera house looks more like a 1930's movie theater and Plaza Middlesex would have been easier for out-of-towners to find if we had been told the actual College Street address.
Nits, nits.
In spite of this, Tuscany Grill turned out to be a winning surprise, from its high ceilings, balcony, ochre walls with terra cotta and slate blue trim and decorative plasterwork, to its understated Italian menu.


Light Summer Salads Without Potatoes
POTATO salad has long been the traditional accompaniment for cookouts.
But now, with the current interest in Mediterranean cooking and light, healthy food, chefs are becoming increasingly inventive with summer salads that use starches other than potatoes.
Grappa, a Mediterranean-style cafe in Litchfield, Conn., owned by James O'Shea and Charlie Kafferman of the West Street Grill in Manhattan, specializes in pizzas from a wood-burning oven.
It also serves wonderful salads made from chick peas, beans and lentils.


The End of the Match
AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER?
By Blake Morrison. 219 pp.
New York: Picador USA. $21.


Many Create The Climate For Violence
The welcome-back party for Mike Tyson seems to have fizzled from a Harlem parade and street festival next Tuesday to what it always really was, a photo op/press conference outside the Apollo Theater for Don King and Showtime to boost their rapist into the rankings.
The outrage of commentators scared off the local leaders who wanted to bask in the glow of a "hero."
In the professional sports subculture, such baskers are the political equivalent of those groupies known as "sniffers," the least sexually predatory of women who swarm around athletes.
They are featured in the latest addition to the literature, a fascinating master's thesis called "Athletes and Rape: How Sport Culture Complicates the Establishment of Consent."


Tidying Up Amid Spring's Faded Foliage
THE spring-flowering bulbs were magnificent this year.
Starting with the earliest snowdrops and snowflakes, through the crocus and glory of the snow, on to the daffodils and tulips, the show was as steady as it was spectacular.
Now that the bulb season is over, however, and the glory gone by is just memories, there remains a good deal of foliage.
And some of it, particularly that of the late tulips, is ugly.


Creating Fathers Out of Men With Children
Charles Ballard was talking to a roomful of teen-age boys at an inner-city high school in Cleveland years ago when he had a stunning revelation about their view of fatherhood.
"I asked, 'How many of you are dads?' and only three hands went up," he said.
"That didn't sound right to me. So later on, I asked, 'How many of you guys have kids?' And almost every hand went up. These guys made a distinction. Fatherhood meant taking responsibility, providing security and affection, being there, which they'd never seen.  Having a kid just meant they'd had sex with a girl, and she had a baby."


June 11-17; An Ill-Fitting Strategy
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson murder trial were hoping for a fairy-tale ending last week when they asked the former football star to try on gloves they say he wore the night Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.
But they were not a perfect fit, and Mr.
Simpson tugged, grimaced and wrestled before finally getting them on.
The only fairy tale scene this recalled was the one in which Cinderella's stepsisters tried to cram their oversized feet into the glass slipper.


Mutiny Appears to Show Problems for Hussein
The brief mutiny by Iraqi Army units against President Saddam Hussein that was reported to have occurred this week, while insignificant in military terms, seems to reflect tribal fault lines among Sunni Muslims, the core of political support for the Iraqi Government since the Persian Gulf war.
Iraqi opposition figures in Europe and Arab diplomats underlined in interviews on Friday that the rebellion on Wednesday was led by the very Sunni clansmen who fought for Mr.
Hussein four years ago when other Iraqis -- Kurds and Shiite Muslims -- rose up to try to oust him after the Persian Gulf war.


A Satirical Portrayal of Prominent People
RONALD REAGAN and his wife, Nancy, play the California Raisins; Dan Quayle is the Energizer Bunny, and Jesse Helms, stark naked, pays homage to Robert Mapplethorpe with a bunch of lilies.
It is all happening here, at the Schoolhouse, but in the galleries, not the theater.
These and other notables are on paper and canvas in "Uncensored," a show of satire by Ori Hofmekler, John Robert Lloyd, Renee Kahn and June Ahrens.
The success of satirical art, like that of formal portraiture, depends to a great extent on the fame of its subject and Mr.
Hofmekler, who adorns Penthouse Magazine, has gone straight to the top.
In addition to the notables already mentioned, he portrays Newt Gingrich from below as Il Duce, standing in shiny boots with arms akimbo; Robert Dole as "the last of the Republicans," complete with rifle, tomahawk and bow, and Al Sharpton, looking good to the last bite as "The Marshmallow Man" of Thanksgiving Day parade fame.


The Roots of Terror -- A special report.; Is Abortion Violence a Plot? Conspiracy Is Not Confirmed
Handcuffed and nondescript in jailhouse blues, Shelley Shannon, a housewife from rural Oregon, stood before a Federal judge here on June 7 and admitted waging a terrorism campaign against abortion clinics and doctors.
Mrs.
Shannon was already serving a 10-year prison term in Kansas for shooting and wounding a doctor in Wichita in August 1993.
Now, in a series of one-word responses to questions from a judge, she was admitting that a year before the shooting she had tried to burn down or disable six abortion clinics on the West Coast.


F. G. Olivieri, Christopher White
Francesca Gallatin Olivieri, the daughter of Frances Olivieri of New York and the late Antonio G. Olivieri, was married yesterday to Christopher Ludlow White, a son of Anne Markwood of Los Angeles and Alexander M. White of Old Chatham, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Webber, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's maternal grandmother, Frances Reese, in Hughsonville, N.Y.
Ms.
Olivieri, 26, is keeping her name.
She is the sales director of Marina Killery Couture Hats in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father was a New York City Councilman at Large from 1977 until 1980 and a State Assemblyman from Manhattan.
Her mother is an associate in New York at De Bandt, van Hecke &amp; Lagae, a Brussels law firm.
The bride's stepfather, Lowell Johnston, is a lawyer in New York.


New England
To the Editor: Susan Spano has been one of my favorite travel writers, but she needs to be disabused of the notion that frost heaves are potholes. ("A Monastic Retreat in New Hampshire," May 7.) Here in the Granite State we know that as the ground freezes, it expands and heaves up ("to raise or lift with great force or effort," the American Heritage Dictionary says).
While the results of heave or pothole may be the same for the automobile driver -- bad bumps -- there is a distinction to be made for "the rest of us." JOAN H. MIDGLEY  Dunbarton, N.H.


Mary Goodman And Scott Sauter
Mary Louise Goodman, a magazine circulation director, was married yesterday to Charles Scott Sauter, an architect.
Both work in Manhattan.
The Rev.
C.
H.
Powers performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Goodman, who is keeping her name, is the circulation director of Time Out New York magazine, which expects to publish its first issue in the fall.
She and her husband graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a daughter of John T. Goodman of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Olive L. Goodman.
The bride's father retired as a manager of engineering and marketing at the Mallory Corporation, a manufacturing concern in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Corrections
A heading on this page last Sunday about the decision of the entertainment agent Michael Ovitz to reject an invitation to run MCA Inc., misstated the money package he declined.
It was $250 million in equity and compensation, not $250 million a year.


HER OWN PRIVATE TAILHOOK
Palmer's article confuses the misbehavior of Tailhook with Elizabeth Saum's inability to endure the rigorous but necessary preparation about which she complains.
As our troops prepare to leave for Bosnia amid news reports that rape is especially prevalent against politically active women in that country, we have every reason to believe that female prisoners of war will be treated similarly.
MARY JO FLORIO FLANAGAN Stamford, Conn.


Sao Paulo
To the Editor: In her essay, "Feverish in, and About, Sao Paulo" (April 16), Jennifer Allen points out that her Brazilian host did not comment upon Sao Paulo's slums, pollution, gang signs on walls and bridges, and race relations.
Perhaps he didn't think it necessary, since the writer is a New Yorker, and he probably assumed she was very much at home.
I too am a New Yorker, and I too visited Sao Paulo for one week, my first trip to Brazil.
Unlike Jennifer Allen, I came back from Brazil hopeful for its future and for the future of other emerging nations.
Brazil is still fighting tremendous socio economic and political odds, and most Brazilians I met are conscious of where they have failed as a society.


Morality Has No Place in Organ Transplants
To the Editor:
Re "Transplants, Morality and Mickey" (Week in Review, June 11):


CELEBRATING DIVORCE
The ceremony designed by the Reverends Conte and Gioia meant to mark the ending of a marriage is nothing new (Sunday, May 14).
The 1987 new book of worship for the United Church of Christ included the Order for Recognition of the End of a Marriage.
I doubt if U.C.C. clergy would charge the exorbitant fee of $400 for such a rite.


Planes the Generals Don't Want
It is not often the Pentagon declines a chance to get money from Congress.
But the Joint Chiefs of Staff did just that on the B-2 Stealth bomber, saying the Air Force needs no more than the 20 planes already approved and in production.
In a depressing display of parochial greed, the House voted last week for more planes anyway, hoping to pump money and jobs into districts around the country.
It was hardly an inspiring example of the budget-cutting discipline members so fervently espouse.
The Budget Committee chairman, John Kasich, a Republican, defied his party leaders and co-sponsored an amendment to excise the two additional $1.2 billion B-2's from the defense authorization bill.
But more than 70 Democrats, many from states with B-2 production facilities, joined 146 Republicans to defeat the amendment.
In a crazed spending spree, the House went on to authorize a $267 billion defense budget for 1996, $9 billion more than the Pentagon requested.


Boon for Security Trade, Bane for Buyer; Wares Behind Walls, as More Merchants Go Bulletproof
To inquire about a plane ticket at the Impeccable Express travel agency in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, visitors must stand behind an inch-thick wall of plexiglass.
To buy aspirin at the nearby Pharmacie Du Peuple, customers have to talk through a hole cut through a bulletproof barrier.
And to buy bread a few doors down at La Patisserie bakery, customers must point to the loaves through a glass window, telling the clerk which one to retrieve.


The King of Ephemera


The Bloopie Awards!
NOW IS THE MOMENT FOR THE dread Bloopie Awards, formerly the coveted Bloopie Awards. (And why do we drop the -ed from dreaded? Because the shorter and simpler dread shifted to adjective use in the 14th century.)
First, a note about a disturbing trend: What's the matter with advertising copywriters.
What have they got against question marks.


Nancy M. Gray and Eben W. Pyne
Nancy Maguire Gray and Eben Wright Pyne were married on Wednesday in Washington.
The Rev.
Stuart A. Kenworthy performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Georgetown.
Mrs.
Pyne is the daughter of the late Brig.
Gen. and Mrs.
Hamilton Ewing Maguire.
She graduated from the Madeira School and Vassar College.
She was the widow of Gordon Gray, a Secretary of the Army in the Truman Administration, a president of the University of North Carolina and a chairman of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.


Separating Rich People From Their Money
"It's remarkable. It's absolutely above board, thoroughly honest. It may sound a little bit too good to be true, but it's absolutely wonderful." . . . . . . . .
MAY 2, 1995.
"We're not naive dupes, I don't think." . . .  MAY 15.
"Oh, my God, I cannot believe it." . . . . .  MAY 16.
JOHN C. WHITEHEAD, FORMER CO-CHAIRMAN OF GOLDMAN SACHS, SPEAKING TO STEVE STECKLOW OF THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, AS IT DAWNS ON HIM THAT HE HAS LOST CLOSE TO $1 MILLION IN THE FOUNDATION FOR NEW ERA PHILANTHROPY CHARITY FRAUD.


Ideas &amp; Trends; What It Takes to Make a Hero
The hero is a feeling, a man seen  As if the eye was an emotion,  As if in seeing we saw our feeling  In the object seen and saved that mystic  Against the sight, the penetrating,  Pure eye.
Wallace Stevens  "To a Hero in a Time of Crisis" AMERICA has often been indiscriminate about who gets called a hero.
The title has been bestowed upon everyone from multi-million-dollar athletes to ordinary men and women who risk their lives to save others.
Today, the term is bandied about so loosely, Arnold Schwarzenegger is mentioned in the same breath as Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Increasingly, heroism has become open to interpretation, with little distinction given to personal achievement or the circumstances under which acts of valor occur.


When Downtown Meets Uptown
Itching in their blue serge suits and white lace dresses, the sixth graders arrived at P.S. 92 in Harlem on graduation day seven years ago and were met by a mystery: a line of television vans.
No one explained why the vans were there, and there were no clues in the speeches that droned on during the ceremony.
But then, remembers Cheryl Scott, who was barely listening, the students around her started screaming.
"I thought something bad had happened," she said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Long Island copies last Sunday about waterfront improvements misstated the original asking price for the Mobil property in Port Jefferson.
It was $3 million, not $8 million.


Ethnic Food Rates High With Gourmet Club
TWO or three times a month a small army of amateur reviewers descends on a restaurant in Nassau or Suffolk.
They are the men and women of the local chapter of the Single Gourmet, an international club.
Although their primary purpose is to eat, meet and socialize away from the frenetic meat-market atmosphere of the bar scene, they also rate the restaurants they visit.


Cross-Country Horse Finds Mile or So Easy
Bobby Frankel, the California horse trainer who commutes to New York with dead-on accuracy, worked his cross-country magic one more time yesterday: His colt, You and I, who flew here three weeks ago and won the Metropolitan Mile, made another trip from the West Coast and this time won the Brooklyn Handicap by one length over Key Contender.
That made it two major stakes in a row at Belmont Park for Frankel, who was recently voted into the racing Hall of Fame for precisely that sort of coast-to-coast success.
And You and I ranks as one of his most successful travelers.


Ms. Appelbaum And Mr. Mitre
Deborah Jo Appelbaum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
David Appelbaum of Rochester, is to be married there today to Edward E. S. Mitre, a son of Drs.
Ricardo and Blima Mitre of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Shamai Kanter is to perform the ceremony at the Radison Rochester Hotel.
The bride, who is 24 and is keeping her name, is to start teaching English at the Birch-Wathen-Lenox School in New York in September.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in secondary English education from Johns Hopkins University.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4  Just because a broker sounds good doesn't mean you should trust him with your money.
Between Wall and Main, by Susan Antilla.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 6  The Longleaf fund picks stocks the old-fashioned way, buying cheap and waiting for the market to catch up.
It often does.
By Timothy Middleton.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  What the financial magazines are saying about auctioning your home and fee-frenzied banks.
Off the Rack, by Brett Brune.
SPENDING IT /Page 9  If you need life insurance but can live without a broker, your time has come.
By Mary Rowland.


On Street Where Confederates Reign, Arthur Ashe May, Too
The City of Richmond, which banned the young Arthur Ashe from lighted tennis courts because he was black, is now considering enshrining him alongside the heroes of the Confederacy.
The Richmond Planning Commission will debate a proposal on Monday to place a statue of Mr.
Ashe, the champion of Wimbledon and civil rights, on Monument Avenue, a boulevard lined with granite giants of the Confederacy.


Graham S. Hawkes, Karen H. Rubin
Karen Hilary Rubin, the manager of international business for Scientific Search Project, a marine archeology concern in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Graham Sidney Hawkes, the operations director of the company.
Rabbi Mark Newton performed the ceremony at Westcliff, a private home on Nantucket Island, Mass.
Mrs.
Hawkes and her husband have formed a production company, Ocean Exploration Group, to develop an underwater-adventure television series.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree in international affairs and an M.B.A. degree from New York University.


Guidelines for Euphemistic Writing
To the Editor:
Michael Wood's review of "Guidelines for Bias-Free Writing," by Marilyn Schwartz and the Task Force on Bias-Free Language of the Association of American University Presses (May 21), could have been more critical of the authors' fondness for euphemism.


What's New
THERE IS CONTROVERSY ABOUT THE nature of news.
People think the media are too negative or too cynical or too opinionated.
That the loudest of these complaints come from the most negative, cynical and opinionated talkers on radio does not disprove them.
They are in fact chronic complaints and not now the most serious heard about the news business.
The public, as measured by opinion polls, does not so much object to "bad" news as it wants a balanced diet, with more "good" news.
The public, as measured by its reading habits, wants considerably less news of every kind.
And the public, as measured by television ratings, favors trashy gossip about the rich and famous, "magazine" exposes of skulduggery and hourly updates about a certain murder trial.


Journal; The Gloved Ones
Never having been treated as an untouchable myself, I asked Mike Nelson what the experience was like.
Mr.
Nelson, a 31-year-old alderman in Carrboro, N.C., was one of the first to be greeted by Secret Service officers wearing gloves when he arrived at a White House briefing for gay elected officials last week.
"We were in disbelief," he said.
"One of us kept saying over and over again, there must be some rational reason they're doing this, other than the one you might think." But then one guard said the blue rubber gloves were "for protection" -- presumably against AIDS.
"I was very angry," said the soft-spoken Mr.
Nelson.
"It was an offensive action . . . and it betrayed a serious misunderstanding of how H.I.V. is transmitted."


Ms. Wigglesworth And Mr. Cushing
Philio Evangeline Wigglesworth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Wigglesworth Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Edward Baldwin Cushing, a son of Mary Margaret Loring Cushing of Beverly Farms, Mass., and the late George M. Cushing Jr.
The Rev.
James Hughes Purdy performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Beverly Farms.
Mrs.
Cushing is a social worker at Deaconess-Waltham Hospital in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree from the Simmons School of Social Work.
Her father is a composer and her mother is a portrait and landscape artist.


Defying Time and Space, the Band Plays On
How's this for a picture of incongruity: A village band plays 19th-century concert music from a bandstand on a shady town green, in a place where a child could climb the Presbyterian church steeple and see the Empire State Building.
But there you have it.
On a number of summer nights, Bloomfield, an old post-industrial town of 45,000 in the Newark suburbs, actually resembles a Victorian lithograph of small-town America.


And Now, You Can Worship by Modem
The newest church here lacks hymnals and stained-glass windows, not to mention pews and a pulpit.
Instead of going to Sunday services, its members log onto their computers and check in with the First Church of Cyberspace.
The Rev.
Charles P. Henderson, the pastor of Central Presbyterian Church here, started the on-line religious forum last month, hoping to attract the growing number of people who have left mainline Protestant churches like his own.
Anyone with access to the Internet can plug into the cyberspace church -- the address on the World Wide Web is http://execpc.com/ chender -- to read sermons, take part in discussions, listen to religious music and view artwork from the Sistine Chapel.


The View From: The Mystic River Foundry; Where to Be an Artist, Athlete and Engineer, All at Once
AT the Mystic River Foundry in Mystic, three women tackle the work of shoveling sand, making molds, melting metals, cleaning castings and smashing the occasional whisky bottle.
It's a kind of work that few places do anymore, and that none of the three -- including the foundry owner, Phyllis Brooks Borges, who is 70 -- ever expected to do.
"It's very much of a lost art, the way we do it here," Ms.
Borges said.
"Most foundries today do machine molding. We're one of the few left that can do 'loose' molding -- carving in the sand." Modern "production-type" foundries, she said, don't have the time, equipment or trained personnel to such work.
She held up a piece from an old steam engine, with a little bit missing.
"We put this broken piece in the sand and made a mold," she explained.
"We carved out the piece that was missing; we recreated the shape of the piece."


Nancy Ferraro, Michael Wechsler
Nancy Ferraro, a daughter of Theresa and Pasquale Ferraro of Oceanside, L.I., is to be married today to Michael Jonathan Wechsler, the son of Rochelle Pedretti of Scottsdale, Ariz., and Dr.
Lawrence Wechsler of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Roger Ross is to perform the ceremony, assisted by his wife, the Rev.
Barbara Ross, an interfaith minister, at the Alger Mansion in New York.
The bride, 29, is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated from St.
John's University.
She received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School and a Master of Laws degree from the University of the Pacific.


Renew a Driver's License And Encounter a Miracle
To the Editor:
Something miraculous has happened to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
I first discovered this when I called to get the address of the license express office and the clerk answering the phone was courteous, helpful and friendly.


Odd Desk Decor? Let Us Know!
Strange stuff on your office desk.
Maybe it's a carnivorous plant.
Or a brick from your hometown high school.
Or some figures from "The Little Rascals" parading atop your computer (Spanky in front).
Tell The Times what's on your desk and why.
Mail to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


DANGEROUS WORLD: The Hazzards of Summer
Summertime officially begins Wednesday.
The living, as the song has it, is easy.
But it's also risky.
Summer is the season of sunburn, sprained ankles, lightning strikes and drownings, among other dangers.
Here's a mixed bag of statistics on just how dangerous different recreational activities are.
The numbers can help with health and safety considerations as you start vacation planning.
Hang gliding or boating?
Swimming or billiards?
Read On.
SWIMMING PARTICIPANTS: More than 63 million in 1994.
DEATHS: 3,400.
Most were drownings.
Also included in this tally are people who fell into pools, oceans or lakes.
Numbers suggest that swimming is more dangerous than bowling and less dangerous than hang gliding.
INJURIES: About 120,000.
Plus an estimated 500,000 unreported jellyfish stings.
BOWLING


In Praise of Neolithic Values
SACRED PLEASURE Sex, Myth, and the Politics of the Body.
By Riane Eisler. 495 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $25.


Car-Pool Campaigns Dangle Green Stamps, Days Off, Traveler's Checks
Craig Bussey has an idea he hopes will go a long way toward satisfying Federal guidelines intended to clean the air by easing traffic congestion: S &amp; H Green Stamps.
In January, Mr.
Bussey's chemical company, Huls America Inc. in Piscataway, began awarding books of stamps to those among its 372 employees who don't drive solo.
They get two books every time they bike to work, one book for car-pooling with one other person and two books for car-pooling with two other people.
By June, two-person carpools had increased from zero to 68 and public transit had tripled.


The Next Generation: Tom Byrne, the Democratic Chairman, Finds Himself in an Uphill Battle. It Runs in the Family.
WHEN Brendan Thomas Byrne Jr., the financial consultant, called Brendan Thomas Byrne, the former Governor, last year to say he had a chance to run for chairman of the state Democratic Party, father and son learned that they shared more than just a name and a political heritage.
They shared astonishment.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Acting Like Men, Getting in Trouble
SOME call it the Dirty Harriet syndrome.
It can appear wherever a woman sees a reason to out-Eastwood her male colleagues.
One such place, it seems, is the New York Police Department.
The bannister-riding bacchanalia in a Washington hotel last month has so far led to the resignation of only one officer, a woman.
And in a bar brawl last weekend in Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., a female officer was arrested, accused of assaulting a man and resisting local police.


Urban Cliff, Airy Space, Great View
For thousands of years, peregrine falcons have dwelled on high cliffs in isolated places, but today the highest concentration of peregrines in the world is in the New York City area, said Christopher A. Nadareski, a biologist with the City Department of Environmental Protection.
There are peregrine falcons uptown, downtown and midtown.
They zoom through the canyons of Wall Street and perch on the gargoyles of Riverside Church.
A pair even hunt pigeons and blue jays around the grounds of the New York Public Library on 42d Street.
And two chicks recently hatched in a nest on the Brooklyn Bridge.


Natalie Hutner, Michael Pont
Natalie Claire Hutner, a daughter of Irene Hutner of New York and the late Dr.
Arthur I. Hutner, is to be married today to Michael Adam Pont, a son of Herbert and Janet Pont of Southfield, Mich.
Rabbi William Lebeau is to officiate at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
Rabbi Robert Dobrusin, a friend of the bridegroom's family, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, was until recently the executive assistant to the dean of Columbia University's School of General Studies in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father, a radiologist, was an assistant professor of radiology at the Columbia University School of Physicians and Surgeons.
Her mother was a French teacher at the Fleming School in New York.


Whitney Kelting, Steven C. Runge
Mary Whitney Kelting, a daughter of Mrs.
Fred J. Keen of Tenafly, N.J., and Howard W. Kelting Jr. of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Steven Carl Runge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip S. Runge of Springfield, Va.
The Rev.
Myrick T. Cross performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Messiah in Woods Hole, Mass.
Mrs.
Runge, 28, is known as Whitney.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in South Asian studies from the University of Wisconsin.
She and her husband graduated from Colby College.
Her father is the president of HK Partners, an investment management firm in Wilton.
Her mother, M. Whitney Keen, is a senior consultant at Pierpont &amp; Wilkerson, fund-raising consultants in Garrison, N.Y.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Fred J. Keen and of Emily Kelting.


Should I Have Left An Hour Earlier?
FOR all its allure, the American dream has always come with strings attached.
The catch is that hard work and long hours on the job are part and parcel of getting ahead and making money.
Family life often pays the price, of course -- a bargain that makes many Americans queasy.
Bob Israel, co-owner of a motion-picture ad agency in Los Angeles, knows the feeling well.


Police Officer Wins Suit Against Brister
The Jets' backup quarterback, BUBBY BRISTER, and his brother-in-law, MIKE VAN VECKHOVEN, must pay $280,000 to a Monroe, La., police officer for injuries he sustained on March 21, 1992, a state District Court jury ruled Friday.
Police Cpl.
VINCE W. HODNETT filed suit after an incident at the Honky Tonk nightclub.
Hodnett, who was working off-duty at the club, claimed that Brister shoved him in the parking lot.
His attorneys said the fight caused Hodnett back problems that required two operations. (AP)


Someone to Lean On
To the Editor:
Your June 13 front-page article shows that young people like Latoya Sims can overcome tough realities.
Be it relative, teacher, mentor, volunteer, you can't deny the value of one person giving of themselves to one child.
A lot more of us could do this.
MERCEDES LAWRY  Communications Dir., Natl.
Court Appointed Special Advocate Assn.
Seattle, June 14, 1995


Callie Weiant, Fritz Holleman
Clarissa Leigh Weiant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Morrow Weiant of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Paul Frederick Holleman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Douglas Holleman of Denver.
The Rev.
Dr.
John David Burton performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Red Bank, N.J.
The bride, who is 27 and is keeping her name, is known as Callie.
She and her husband graduated from Amherst College.
She will be a third-year law student at New York University in the fall.
Her father is a managing director at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


Commercial Property/Dual Agency; When a Brokerage Represents Both Sides in a Deal
IT has become a common sales pitch: Hire our firm to handle your building's leasing, and not only will our brokers funnel the hundreds of tenants they represent to your property, but you will save money when they do.
After all, if the tenant's representative and the leasing agent are from different firms, you would have to pay the tenant's rep a full commission, and the leasing agent a smaller one, usually called an "override." If both those people work for us, the sales pitch goes, you'll pay only one full commission, and we'll worry about how it gets split.


Amanda Neuman, Kenneth Goldstein
Amanda Sarah Neuman, a daughter of Robert H. Neuman of Washington and Emily Davis of Sag Harbor, L.I., is to be married today to Kenneth Michael Goldstein, a son of Steven M. Goldstein and Marcia Burick, both of Northampton, Mass.
Rabbi Philip Graubart is to perform the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Israel in Northampton.
The bride, 25, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the program assistant at the office of community and public relations for the University of Michigan's health centers in the Ann Arbor area.
Her father is a partner in Baker &amp; Hostetler, a law firm in Washington.
Her mother is a writer in Sag Harbor.


A Little League Lesson That My Son Doesn't Need to Know
To the Editor:
Some things my son learned in Little League he really didn't need to know.


Susan Hubbard, Robley Wilson
Susan Hubbard and Robley Wilson, both writers, were married yesterday at the Kresge Chapel of the Southern California School of Theology in Claremont, Calif.
The Rev.
Colin Henderson, an Anglican priest, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Hubbard, who is keeping her name, is a writer in residence at Pitzer College in Claremont.
She is to join the faculty of the University of Central Florida in Orlando as an assistant professor of English in August.
She graduated cum laude from Syracuse University, where she also received a master's degree in creative writing.


A Challenge to the Concept of 'Disadvantaged'
If Adarand Constructors were not around, Federal incentives to hire minority firms would not make much sense in the state of Colorado -- at least not when the work in question involved highway guardrails.
Of the four or five companies that do most of the guardrail construction and maintenance in the state, Adarand is the only one owned by a white man.
All the other companies have been given the Federal designation "disadvantaged business enterprise," which allows them to win contracts even when they do not submit the lowest bid -- as long as the lowest bid comes from Randy M. Pech, the owner of Adarand.


Katherine Hall and Andres Martinez
Katherine Collins Hall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Hall of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Andres Martinez, a son of Jeanette B. Martinez of Boston and Alfredo Martinez Urdal of Mexico City.
The Rev.
Robert E. Taylor performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
Ms.
Hall, 29, is an associate at Kirkpatrick &amp; Lockhart, a law firm in Pittsburgh.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Computer Output Systems, a laser printing company in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Judith Hall, is the vice president of Hall's Magazine Reports, a research service in Stamford.


Hilary W. Barclay, Peter F. Cooke Jr.
Hilary Westervelt Barclay, a daughter of William Kennedy Barclay 3d of Vero Beach, Fla., and Page Bartholomew of Tokyo, was married yesterday to Peter Fischer Cooke Jr., the son of Mr.
Cooke of Blue Bell, Pa., and Sara Mullin Graff Cooke of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Robert L. Tate performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Barclay Cooke, 30, is a manager at the Franklin Institute, a science museum in Philadelphia, where she is in charge of rentals of museum space for special events.


Jeannie Staunton, Christopher Bean
Jeannie Brightwell Staunton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney A. Staunton of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Bean, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Bean of South Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Weymouth performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Mrs.
Bean, 27, is a prekindergarten teacher at the Putnam Indian Field School in Greenwich, Conn., and a candidate for a master's degree in reading at the College of New Rochelle.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the executive vice president of Benefit Technologies Inc., a benefits consultant in White Plains, and a managing partner in Staunton Associates, a merchant banking concern in New Canaan.
Her mother, Josephine Woolston Staunton, is an interior decorator.


Kingman Journal; In Arizona Desert Town, Suspicion Walks Streets
James Maxwell Oliphant has waited more than a decade for United Nations occupational forces to come knocking at his door here in the desert scrub of Mohave County.
During that time, the 70-year-old Mr.
Oliphant, a self-described patriot who proudly displays a Ku Klux Klan business card, has blown off one of his arms practicing with explosives, taken in skinheads who later turned against him and served a spell in prison for conspiring to rob armored cars.
Now his expectations are finally being realized: the first wave of enemies, Mr.
Oliphant says, has arrived.


Joanne Wright, Lars Reierson
Joanne Wright, a daughter of Charles and Judith Wright of Indianapolis, was married yesterday to Lars A. Reierson, a son of Maria Reierson of Granite Springs, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Roy L. Reierson.
The Rev.
Roger Imhoff performed the ceremony at the Lutheran Church of the Ressurectionin Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Mrs.
Reierson, 23, was until recently a benefits consultant for KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.


June 11-17: John Doe No. 2; A Dragnet Leads Down One More Blind Alley
One of the biggest dragnets in American history finally scooped up the elusive John Doe No. 2 last week (well, maybe) -- and then released him.
In any event, the F.B.I. said that after extensive questioning they had cleared Todd Bunting, an army private from Fort Riley, Kan., of involvement in bombing the Oklahoma City Federal Building.
He closely resembled the widely distributed sketch of the glowering tattooed man in a baseball cap who supposedly accompanied Timothy McVeigh when he rented the Ryder rental truck that housed the bomb.


Pictures in History
Joseph and Elaine Monsen were among the first serious private collectors of photographs when they began acquiring prints in the late 1960's at the suggestion of a Harvard art historian.
Already serious collectors of Asian art and American ceramics, and not particularly fond of photography at the outset, the Monsens nonetheless went on to build an impressive and wide-ranging collection of 19th- and 20th-century photographs, concentrating on photography as art -- or, as Joseph Monsen puts it, as a history of ideas.
AFTER ART: Rethinking 150 Years of Photography (University of Washington, paper, $37.50) uses a selection of prints by 191 photographers from the Monsen collection to view the short history of photography from a post-modernist perspective.
In separate essays, Andy Grundberg, the director of the Friends of Photography in San Francisco, and Chris Bruce, the senior curator of the Henry Art Gallery at the University of Washington, describe the loss of innocence for photographers working in the image-laden environment of the post-modern era and suggest connections between the art of the recent past, which dominates the collection, and trends in photography stretching back to the mid-19th century.
The prints are organized, with a bracing disregard for chronology, into topical sections that facilitate the kind of dialogue between periods that Mr.
Grundberg and Mr.
Bruce are after.
An image of a Gettysburg battlefield strewn with corpses, for example, is shown opposite two photographs taken more than 100 years later of Western construction sites -- also bleak images of destruction.
The essays, despite outbursts of critical jargon, are thoughtful and informative, but the real pleasure of the book lies in the quality of the photographs and the sly juxtapositions.
ROSEMARY RANCK


New Name and New Menu, Old Owners
LAST summer, for the first time in many seasons, more American than Italian restaurants opened on the East End.
The arrival in the spring of the Deerfield Inn showed that the trend was continuing.
The restaurant in Water Mill that was I Santi for three seasons has changed its name, menu and outlook.
The owners remain.


East Side, West Side: Casinos on The Thames
ANGERED at how a casino has changed their rural area, residents of three towns have bitterly opposed the expansion of the Mashantucket Pequot reservation for more than two years.
The towns -- Ledyard, North Stonington and Preston -- have spent more than $150,000 on legal fees, and vow to take the battle over the tribe's annexation of land to the United States Supreme Court if necessary, even if it takes $1.5 million.


Dusting, Shopping, Cooking, Scrubbing, Ironing, Killing
SOME MONTHS BEFORE the French maids Christine and Lea Papin butchered their employers in 1933, the sisters set aside a few francs from their modest earnings to buy themselves something special.
Wearing their Sunday best, they visited a photographer's studio in the provincial town of Le Mans and posed for a portrait.
"Sister My Sister," a modestly budgeted British suspense film that opens on Friday, is the story of what came before and after that photograph.
Julie Walters plays a well-to-do society matron who is satisfied with the work of the sisters (played by Joely Richardson and Jodhi May), until she realizes that an incestuous affair is pushing the sisters out of her control.


Fear, Self-Pity: A Therapist's Ordinary Life
Kathy Conway had the biopsy on a Thursday, and on Monday she learned she had Stage I breast cancer, a good prognosis but unsettling to a precise, highly organized 43-year-old psychotherapist with a husband, two school-age children and 15 patients.
"Getting sick is very humbling for a therapist," she said the other day over lunch.
"You want to convey this sense of dependability, and you are dependable, and you even begin to believe in a certain kind of invulnerability. Getting cancer threatens your identity; you don't have control anymore.


A Penny Saved Is a Penny to Spend: Berlin; Christo and free jazz, $10 feasts in the east
Though the dollar has lost more than 10 percent of its value in less than a year, and is now selling at around 1.40 marks, budget-conscious travelers can still find many opportunities to cut the cost of a stay in Berlin.
What has always been free in the city -- like Sundays in museums -- remains free, and several new establishments have made cutting costs a priority.
A REALLY BIG HOTEL.
The new Estrel Residence and Congress Hotel (225 Sonnenallee; telephone 68 310) offers four-star service at two-star prices with a standard rate of $113.50 for a double room.
The hotel comprises four buildings connected by a glass-roofed atrium, and when the fourth wing opens in the fall, it will be the largest hotel in Germany.


Sleepy Congo, a Poor Land Once Very Rich
The sandy streets of this riverside capital are just as sleepy as they were 15 years ago, but with more potholes and fewer cars.
Other than a new building here and there, and the bullet holes that scar buildings in outlying neighborhoods, little jars the memories of a returning visitor.
In most African countries, with their failing economies and booming populations, a rundown capital would not be surprising -- indeed it would be expected.
But Congo had been considered a special case.


William W. Ambler; College Official, 71
William W. Ambler, the former director of admissions at Haverford College in Haverford, Pa., died on Tuesday at his home in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 71.
The cause was a heart attack, a press release from the college said.
Mr.
Ambler had served on the admissions staff at the college for 30 years, retiring in 1987.


Glorifier of Provence Seeks Refuge in the Hamptons
Above the gray wash of Napeague Bay, shielded by a dark wall of trees and protected by burglar alarms, Peter Mayle, the best-selling author, has quietly retreated to Amagansett, L.I., from fame, France and fanatics.
No photographs -- please -- pleads the author of "Toujours Provence" ("Forever Provence"; Alfred A. Knopf, 1990).
And no questions about his departure from a remote medieval village in southern France for a fashionable Hamptons community where the strongest European influence is the steaming espresso served at Astro Pizza on Main Street.


Bronwen Hruska, Graham Rayman
AS a couple, Graham Rayman and Bronwen Hruska are like a Lyle Lovett song: laid back and low key, with an almost mischievously idiosyncratic take on life.
Mr.
Rayman, 28, is a tall, thin copy editor at New York Newsday.
Since college, he has been known for carrying sandwiches in his coat pockets and pulling them out at all hours the way other people might pull out a handkerchief or ball-point pen.


Scotch, And Water
Cocktails, dinner and dancing at the South Street Seaport, June 13.


Amy Edmondson, George Q. Daley
Amy Claire Edmondson a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Edmondson of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
George Quentin Daley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank L. Daley of Catskill, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Memorial Church of Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Ms.
Edmondson is keeping her name.
She is a Ph.D. candidate in organizational behavior at Harvard, from which she received a B.A. and a master's degree in psychology.
She was formerly the chief engineer for R. Buckminster Fuller and is the author of a book about the late architect's mathematical theories.
Her father is a management consultant in New York.
Her mother, Mary Edmondson, retired as the director of admissions at the Loyola School in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Bowe Stops A Battered Gonzalez In Round 6
Riddick Bowe revived his career tonight, sending Jorge Luis Gonzalez into oblivion with a measured, yet ferocious, attack.
Bowe swatted Gonzalez so often before knocking him out at 1 minute 50 seconds of the sixth round that the giant was reduced to helplessness after the third.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FAMILY VALUES
In 1928 folks in the United States were having a lot of trouble with family values.
Take "The Wild Party," a scandalous book-length poem by Joseph Mancure March that portrayed amoral city life in the jazz age and was as successful as it was scorned.
Considered a cult classic, it was re-published last year in an uncensored form, and now it has been turned into a shadow puppet production at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's National Puppetry Conference.
Larry Reed, a performance artist and practitioner of the Balinese shadow puppet art, devised this black and white production with life-sized cutouts carried on the actors' shoulders, and an accompaniment of live jazz.


A Bit of Sunshine on Some Grim Proceedings
IT isn't easy, infusing a dour musical like "The Secret Garden" with a scintilla of cheer and uplift, but somehow the Paper Mill Playhouse has found the light.
Not that a happy time is guaranteed at a show that sends its 10-year-old heroine off to a musty English manse named Missel thwaite, bearing death certificates.
Mum and Daddy succumbed to cholera after drinking contaminated water in colonial India.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $800,000
147 West 15th Street  4,500-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, 14-ft. ceilings, terrace, 1 bath, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,800, 46% tax-deductible, listed at $875,000, 35 weeks on market (Broker: Eychner Associates)  INWOOD  $60,500
72 Park Terrace West  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, dining area, eat-in kitchen, 8- by 12-ft. balcony, 2 exposures; maintenance $778, 35% tax-deductible, listed at $61,000, 1 year on market (Broker: New Heights)  TRIBECA  $630,000
311 Greenwich Street (Reade House)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,050-sq.-ft. condo in an 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, 1,500-sq.-ft. roof terrace, 3 exposures, marble baths, darkroom; common charge $1,623; taxes $7,476, listed at $695,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Delson-Ginsberg; Douglas Elliman)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $480,000
171 East 84th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,253-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24 hr. doormen, concierge, eat-in kitchen, marble baths, balcony, 2 exposures, health club, pool; common charge $800; taxes $6,024, listed at $525,000, 14 weeks on market (Brokers: Feathered Nest; Equinox Property)  BRONX
CLASON POINT  $125,000
353 Leland Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,124, listed at $144,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Heritage First Realty)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN COLLEGE AREA  $227,000
638 East 23d Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 117-year-old detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, dinette, 1 bedroom, 1 bath, hospitality suite in attic, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600, listed at $239,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Wilk; Davis Home Sales)  COBBLE HILL  $565,000
249 Clinton Street  4-family, attached 1850 town house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in others; 1 bath in each; taxes $2,507, listed at $595,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark)  PARK SLOPE  $326,000
117 Berkeley Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone in need of major renovation; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; 15.9- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,856, listed at $349,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Susan N. Breen)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $201,000
68-64 Selfridge Street  3-bedroom, 1 full- and 2 half-bath attached brick town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,580, listed at $214,900, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Kingdom)  JACKSON HEIGHTS  $200,000
30-34 69th Street  2-family, 34-year-old attached town house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchens, 1 bath in each; taxes $1,650, listed at $215,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Best)  STATEN ISLAND
ROSSVILLE  $210,000
145 Lucile Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 full- and 2 half-bath brick and vinyl-sided colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 36- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,968, listed at $214,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Salmon)  SNUG HARBOR  $305,000
170 Tysen Street  6-bedroom, 1-bath, 80-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, barn with sleeping loft, 1-car garage, 125- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $1,750, listed at $350,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Vitale-Sunshine)  WESTCHESTER
LARCHMONT  $510,000
19 Wildwood Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Tudor; entry hall, library, slate terrace, dining room, breakfast room, fireplace; taxes $10,935, listed at $549,500, 18 weeks on market (Merritt Associates; Julia B. Fee)  NEW ROCHELLE  $335,000
61 Donnybrook Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old split level; c/a, 2-car garage, .25 acre; taxes $9,617, listed at $357,000, 14 weeks on market (Dudley D. Doernberg; Houlihan/Lawrence)
POUND RIDGE  $440,000
5 Doe View Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; sunroom, skylights, fireplace, h/w floors, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $7,624, listed at $459,000, 18 weeks on market (The Prudential Ragette; Houlihan/Lawrence)  SCARSDALE  $1.75 million  1 Oak Lane  8-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 67-year-old colonial; circular staircase, built-in bar, music room, paneled library, terrace, .75 acre; taxes $26,245, listed at $1.95 million, 12 weeks on market (Dudley D. Doernberg)  LONG ISLAND
GLEN HEAD  $645,000
12 Wedgewood Court East  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 21-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, fireplace, pool, 1 acre, 4-car garage; taxes $10,700, listed at $685,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Daniel Gale MacCrate)  RUSSELL GARDENS  $324,750
31 Tain Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 69-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, beamed ceiling, 2-car garage; taxes $6,300, listed at $389,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty Better Homes &amp; Gardens)
SEA CLIFF  $330,000
58 Prospect Avenue  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 86-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage, water view; taxes $5,200, listed at $409,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Harmonious Homes)  WILLISTON PARK  $185,000
445 Pennsylvania Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old Tudor colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600, listed at $197,900, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: U.S. 1 Laffey; Atanas)  CONNECTICUT
COLCHESTER  $184,500
45 Park Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, fireplace, rear deck, 1.86-acre lot; taxes $3,250, listed at $189,900, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley Co.; Real Estate Today)  GREENWICH  $1.1 million
36 North Stanwich Road  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 38-year-old aluminum-sided ranch; dining room, fireplace, solarium, 2-car garage, 4 acres; taxes $9,260, listed at $1.2 million, 25 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Schlott)  NEW CANAAN  $430,000
17 Thayer Pond Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 17-year-old contemporary; screened porch, whirlpool tub, terrace, rear deck, 4-car garage, barn, 2.4 acres; taxes $6,157, listed at $475,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; William Pitt)  RIVERSIDE  $650,000
14 Hidden Brook Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 78-year-old stone antique cottage; dining room, eat-in kitchen, c/a, fireplace, terrace, bay window, 1-car garage; taxes $5,034, listed at $649,500, 1 week on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Prudential Connecticut)  NEW JERSEY
BRIDGEWATER  $235,000
13 Deer Run Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; family room, .82-acre lot, c/a; taxes $3,266, listed at $243,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Weichert)  DENVILLE  $202,500
362 Diamond Spring Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; 1-plus acre, h/w floors, 2-car garage; taxes $4,649, listed at $225,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  LAVALLETTE  $275,000
22 Camden Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Cape Cod; fenced rear yard, family room, master bedroom suite; taxes $2,712, listed at $295,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)
MAHWAH  $142,750
674 Juniper Way  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old town-house condominium; w/w carpeting, fireplace, c/a; monthly maintenance $98; taxes $2,041, listed at $145,500, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins; Re/Max Services)


Putting Cricket In a League Of Its Own
There was tension on the field next to the baseball diamond at Kissena Boulevard and Booth Memorial Drive last Tuesday.
The hometown New York Tigers were down 80 runs late in the game and counting on Tony Rampasad's batting.
The white-clad New Yorker stood stiffly, bat pointing down, and with an upward stroke lifted a hard-thrown ball deep toward La Guardia Airport.
Then he watched in disgust as Dineesh Mongia, an 18-year-old from India, made an acrobatic over-the-shoulder, bare-handed catch.
There was no joy in Flushing -- Mr.
Rampasad was out.


Ms. Stockdale, Mr. Wachtel
Carolyn Ann Stockdale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray C. Stockdale of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to Jonathan Marc Wachtel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Wachtel of New York.
Judge Alan Penkower of the Fifth District Court of Common Pleas in Pittsburgh officiated at the Phipps Conservatory.


Habitats/Bay Shore; An L.I. Mansion for a Maven of Foreign-Car Repair
VINNIE DELL, as he likes to be known, or Vincent M. DelBorrello, as he was christened, pulled up to the train station in a big and glossy black Mercedes.
The sun roof was open and the sun poured in on Mr.
Dell's wavy black hair.
He was on the car phone and gave a big wave.
Mr.
Dell is a very friendly man, more or less self-made -- a little less because his father actually founded Flushing Autorama in Queens, but it was just a gas station, not the million-dollar exotic foreign car repair Autorama Bodyworks that Mr.
Dell made it.


In the Region/Westchester; Housing Sales Just a Bit Off Record 1994 Pace
LAST MONDAY Uta and Bob Hershey closed on a 60-year-old English Regency-style house in the Village of Bronxville.
For more than six months, they had been looking in the suburbs closest to New York City for a house with "an excellent school system," Ms.
Hershey said.
There was a sense of urgency, she added, since they wanted to be ensconced in their new surroundings by the time their son, Bo, started kindergarten in September.


Benefits of TV's Failure To Cover New Jersey Well
To the Editor:
Just because events in New Jersey receive little coverage by television news programs based in New York doesn't mean that New Jerseyans who want to stay informed are out of luck ("No News, Most of the Time," June 4).
NJN News covers the state as well as a half-hour a day allows, and there are several quality newspapers that do present salient facts and provide forums for debating issues.
That the networks don't cover events pertinent to New Jerseyans isn't surprising; they rarely cover events pertinent to New Yorkers.
Unless they have recently been indicted, New York legislators are unknown to those who rely solely on network news.


In Toronto, Face Lift for A Revolving Restaurant
When the CN Tower restaurant, one of the world's largest (seats 410) and tallest (1,150 feet) revolving restaurants opened 19 years ago in Toronto, the food was promising and the 360-degree view spectacular.
When the restaurant reopened recently after a four-month renovation, it was completely changed, with vibrant colors like orange, red and green, Art Deco style touches, new chefs, and a menu that includes organic vegetables, free-range chicken and lambs.
Other changes include a fixed gallery displaying the work of local artists while the restaurant revolves around it.


Paul S. Foley and Carolyn A. Poux
Carolyn Ann Poux, a daughter of Rita and Pierre DeMaison Poux of White Plains, was married yesterday in Larchmont, N.Y., to Paul Stephen Foley, the son of Lawrence and Jennifer Foley of Chelmsford, Essex, England.
The Rev.
Richard B. Martin, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Larchmont Avenue Church.
The bride, 31, is an associate marketing manager at Pepsi-Cola in Somers, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father retired as a program manager at the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains and is the vice president and secretary of Shore Inc., an organization in White Plains that provides housing for homeless people.
Her mother is a retired occupational therapist.


Abigail L. Casner, Jeffrey Ackerman
Abigail Lee Casner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Truman S. Casner of Belmont, Mass., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Ross Ackerman, the son of Elizabeth H. Werner of Englewood, Colo., and Michael B. Ackerman of Denver.
The Rev.
Edward O. Miller Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the garden of the bride's parents' house in Nonquitt, Mass.
Mrs.
Ackerman, 26, is an assistant account executive at DDB Needham Worldwide, the advertising agency, in Chicago.
She and her husband graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the managing partner in Ropes &amp; Gray, the Boston law firm.


For Strawberry, a Pocket Guide on the Wayward Souls of the Stadium
George Steinbrenner considers himself something of a savior of men's souls.
He has indeed charitably helped needy students go to college and has contributed generously to other causes, even the training expenses of a needy Tonya Harding.
Steinbrenner's latest charitable effort comes on behalf of Darryl Strawberry, the suspended, convicted baseball player seeking a job and new scenery for completion of his house arrest (the House That Ruth Built, of course).


Susannah Kerr And John F. Adler
Susannah Gaskill Kerr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Kerr of Des Moines, is to be married today to John Friedman Adler, a son of Mrs.
Robert V. Adler of Stockbridge, Mass., and the late Mr.
Adler.
Judge Charles D. Gill of the State Superior Court in Litchfield, Conn., is to perform the ceremony at a home of the bride's parents in Litchfield.
The bride graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where she is studying for a master's degree in architecture and city planning.
Her father is the president and chief operating officer of the Meredith Corporation, the publishing conglomerate, in Des Moines.


A Fast 500 Points for the Dow
The Dow Jones industrial average took less than four months to get to 4,500 after it topped 4,000 for the first time in February, and the gains were widespread, with only one of the 30 Dow stocks failing to make money for its investors.
The laggard was Westinghouse, which disappointed buyers by reporting lower profits.
But otherwise, even the losers were winners.
Woolworth shares tumbled when the company stopped paying dividends, but recovered enough with the rest of the market to show a small gain.


A Balkanization of the Group of 7
It has not been a great week for the Americans here in New Scotland, the cool northern land the Cajuns fled for the steamy Louisiana bayous.
Oh, there were a few pluses for the crew from Washington at the weekend summit conference.
President Clinton, his jaw set for the television cameras, stood up to the Japanese on trade and evoked in response a few tentative signs of flexibility.
And, in a resolution on international financial institutions, he achieved the kind of language and range of ideas he had sought for more than a year.


A Village That Travels on Its Stomach
A kind of mobile village has grown around the Grateful Dead in its 30-year history.
For several months of every year, devoted followers pile into hatchbacks, vans and buses, setting up camp in the parking lots at arenas and stadiums where the band plays.
Over time, this village has developed its own customs, dress, language and even some Internet sites.
And, as in every other culture, it has to eat.
Elizabeth Zipern, a 1993 Rutgers graduate who grew up in Scotch Plains, realized not long ago that the food for sale in the parking lots at every show offered a kind of window on life on the road.
In "Cooking With the Dead," published last month by St.
Martin's Paperbacks, she profiles the itinerant cooks who sell the scene's signature dish, veggie burritos, and much more, feeding hungry concertgoers and earning money for tickets.
Ms.
Zipern was in New Jersey recently for a book signing and two concerts, tonight and tomorrow at Giants Stadium.
We talked to her about her travels.


Elissa Vecchione, Jeffrey Wetherbee
Elissa M. Vecchione, a daughter of Joseph J. and Elizabeth M. Vecchione of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey King Wetherbee, a son of Mrs.
Herbert Freeland of Warren, Ore., and John Wetherbee of St.
Helens, Ore.
The Rev.
Gary Shrower of the Interdenominational Church performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Chapel of the Flowers in Las Vegas, Nev.
Ms.
Vecchione, who is 29 and is keeping her name, is the owner of EVPR, a public-relations and events-management agency in Portland, Ore.
Her father is a senior editor at The New York Times.
Her mother is a professor of nursing at the City College of the City University of New York.


Text of Board's Statement On Cortines's Resignation n
Following is the text of a statement on the resignation of Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, issued on Friday by five members of the New York City Board of Education: Carol A. Gresser, Louis DeSario, Sandra E. Lerner, Luis O. Reyes and William C. Thompson Jr.
We five Board members thought it was important to speak out collectively on Ray Cortines's decision to leave the New York City public school system.


Conversations / Manly Catalogues; Wild Thing, Inner Child, Robo-Dad: Gadgets for the Gung-Ho Father
MAN does not live by bread alone.
He needs gadgets.
On Father's Day, the day dedicated to worshiping the ground he procrastinates upon, he should get more stuff.
And not some limp travesty of a tie or blip of a Swiss Army knife but something that resonates.
Like a miniature blowtorch.
Or a satellite uplink to find his way home.
Operators are standing by at the Edge Company, U.S.
Cavalry, Lifestyle Fascination, the Sharper Image and the Sportsman's Guide, ready to take orders for night vision goggles, pen-size laser pointers and other collectibles.
These and other male-oriented mail-order catalogues home in on the discretionary incomes of baby boomers and younger urban professionals who are attracted more by the sexy flash of technology than by its practicality, lured more often by the look of the wild than its call.


RESULTS PLUS
RUGBY South Africa Advances  Joel Stransky made all three second-half penalties and led South Africa to a 19-15 victory over France in a rain-drenched rugby World Cup semifinal yesterday in Durban, South Africa.


Tamar Gendler, Zoltan Szabo
Tamar Gendler, a daughter of Dr.
Mary Gendler and Rabbi Everett Gendler of Andover, Mass., is to be married today to Zoltan Szabo, the son of Zsuzsanna Olti and Laszlo Szabo, both of Budapest.
The bride's father is to perform the ceremony at the DeSisto School in Stockbridge, Mass.
The couple are to join the philosophy department at Cornell University next month, she as a visiting lecturer, he as an assistant professor.
They are to be known as Tamar Szabo Gendler and Laszlo Gendler Szabo.


Acres of of Satisfaction For Computer Shoppers
First there was Home Depot.
Then Sports Authority.
Now say hello to Incredible Universe, your one-stop shopping megastore for electronics -- or as the promoters are calling it, a "gigastore."
Incredible Universe, owned by Tandy Corporation, the Fort Worth-based parent of Radio Shack, will open next year in Elizabeth off Exit 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike, near the giant Ikea furniture store.
It will occupy 185,000 square feet, the size about three football fields, and contain a karaoke studio, a McDonald's and a children's play area.


Lauren Farber And John Miller
Lauren Vicky Farber, the daughter of Drs.
Leonard and Stephanie Farber of Branford, Conn., was married last evening to John Miller, a son of Dr.
George and Arlette Miller of New Haven.
Dr.
Mindy Novick, a Jewish marriage celebrant, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Farber, 28, is keeping her name.
She is to be a second-year medical student at Tufts University in the fall.
She graduated cum laude from Columbia University and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Delaware.
Her father is a hematologist and oncologist in New Haven and a clinical professor of internal medicine at Yale University there.
Her mother is the director of outpatient psychiatric services at the Hospital of St.
Raphael in New Haven.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
EMILY'S MEMORIES
The Actors Company of Nyack will present its new production of "The Belle of Amherst" by William Luce in five performances over the next two weekends.
Phyllis Rice will portray the title role of Emily Dickinson and Peter DeMaio, artistic director of the nine-year-old company, is the director.
Performances are on Saturday at 8 P.M., Sunday at 7 P.M., June 30 at 8 P.M., July 1 at 3 P.M. and July 2 at 7 P.M. at the Nyack Center, at South Broadway and Depew Avenue.
The play has only the one character, the poet Emily Dickinson, who conjures up the many people who influenced her life but are never seen onstage.
The original production had an extended run on Broadway in 1976 starring Julie Harris and directed by Charles Nelson Reilly.
It has since been a popular choice for regional theater nationwide.
The Actors Company is well known for its range of presentations, from Cole Porter to Shakespeare.
Tickets for "The Belle of Amherst" are $10, $8 for people 62 and older and students.
Call 358-3544 for reservations.
CLASSIC FILMS
Whippoorwill Hall, named for its 19 Whippoorwill Road East address in Armonk, is the new theater at the North Castle Library where a summer film series is under way.
Ten films will be shown on Wednesday evenings at 8, through Aug. 23.
"D.O.A.," a 1949 suspense classic with Edmond O'Brien, is this week's offering.
All the films are classics of their genre, jumping around in time and place from Harrison Ford in the 1993 thriller "The Fugitive" on June 28 to Laurel and Hardy comedies of 1932 on July 5 to Noel Coward's "Brief Encounter," made in England in 1945, to be screened on Aug. 9.
Discussions will follow each film.
Admission is by suggested donation of $2 a person or $5 a family.
For a complete schedule or more information, call 273-3887.
PATAKI SPEECH
Gov.
George E. Pataki will be the keynote speaker at the Westchester County Association dinner meeting on Thursday at the Rye Town Hilton, 699 Westchester Avenue in Rye Brook.
He is expected to focus on the economy, potential business changes and the effects on Westchester.
A reception is at 6 P.M. with dinner to follow at 7, both open to the public at $125 a person.
Call 948-6444 for reservations or more information.
CAFE LECTURES
Two lectures will take place at the Borders bookstore at 60 South Broadway in White Plains.
The first, at 2 P.M. today, is by Jianying Zha, author of "China Pop: How Soap Operas, Tabloids and Bestsellers are Transforming a Culture," published by New Press.
Ms.
Zha was born in Beijing and brings Eastern and Western perspectives to her assessment of the vast changes in her native country, particularly among the younger generation.
On Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Paul Gibler, a personal financial consultant who has not written a book but will recommend some to his audience, will talk about "Financial Planning for the 90's." He will offer tips on saving money to keep pace with inflation, and he will distribute worksheets intended to point up areas where one's financial activity needs improvement.
Admission is free. Call 421-1110 for more information. AH, THE STRAWBERRIES
Since the 1940's the United Methodist Church in Katonah has run the town's yearly Strawberry Festival the hard way.
Insisting on only local produce, they harvest no berry before its time.
Consequently, the organizers must keep in touch with farms for about six weeks before scheduling the festival.
When the berries are ripe, they corral as many volunteers as possible to pick and clean them in time for the appointed day, which is today.
Visitors will have two hours, from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M. to gorge on strawberry shortcake with whipped cream and ice cream, and scoop up pints or quarts of berries to take home.
Deborah Moore, one of the organizers, said, "These strawberries, ripened on the vine, are outstanding in flavor and far sweeter than those shipped in from the West."
The festival will be held on the church lawn, 5 Bedford Road at Woodsbridge Road.
In case of rain, it will move indoors to the Parish House behind the church on Edgemont Road.
Admission is free, and proceeds from sales will aid the Katonah Community Center, which is supported by several civic groups, churches and synagogues.
Call 232-4094 for more information.
NEW VENUE FOR POEMS
The Creative Arts Cafe, a new venue for poetry, will open its doors on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. in the gallery of the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts, 272 North Bedford Road in Mount Kisco.
Each week a published poet will be featured, and an open microphone will give lesser-known poets a chance to read their works.
The center wants to attract an audience of writers, artists and listeners.
Admission is free, but there will be a charge for coffee and dessert from the bakeries of Arthur Avenue in the Bronx.
Cindy Beer, coordinator of the program, will conduct the open-mike segments.
Poets wishing to read will be asked to sign in on a first-come-first-served basis.
The programs will end about 10:30.
The first featured poet will be Rick Pernod, organizer in 1991 of Exoterica, a weekly poetry series at An Beal Bocht Cafe in Riverdale.
Ms.
Beer is also affiliated with Exoterica and has been featured at several readings in Manhattan.
She is a teacher of poetry at the Fieldston School in the Bronx.
For more information, call 241-6922.
A DAY OF OPENINGS
The Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan, which has a strong contingent of artist members from Westchester, will open four exibitions today, with simultaneous receptions from 2 to 4 P.M.
Gordon Micunis's painted tapestries and James Jackson Burt's sculptures and painted ceramics are in the main gallery.
Jane de Jonge's mixed-media sculpture will be in the Farrell Gallery, and an exhibition of 12-inch-square works by guild artists will occupy the Vassos Gallery.
At 4 P.M. a flute recital -- for which tickets are required -- will be performed by Andrea Griminelli.
Call (203) 966-9700.
The four exhibitions will remain through July 16.
Viewing hours are Wednesdays through Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., Sundays from 1 to 5 P.M.
The center is at 1037 Silvermine Road; admission is free.
Call (203) 966-5617 for more information or driving directions.
ELEANOR CHARLES


Moving a Housing Office Would Be a Public Service
To the Editor:
You reported a plan to move part of the New York State Division of Housing out of Gertz Plaza in Jamaica, Queens ("Forecast of Downturn?: 1,000 Jobs May Move," May 14).
The department in question is the Office of Rent Administration, which oversees rent control and rent stabilization.


Janet M. Harvey, Peter D. Ley
Janet Macon Harvey, the daughter of Susan and Edward Harvey of Pinehurst, N.C., was married yesterday to Peter Darwin Ley, the son of Elizabeth and Darwin Ley of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Bobby C. Black, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Village Chapel in Pinehurst.
Mrs.
Ley is a senior account executive at Ketty Maisonrouge &amp; Company, a marketing and public relations firm in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.


TASTES JUST LIKE . . .
I was interested to see all the "tastes like chicken" references in "Tastes Just Like. . ." (Sunday, May 28), and wondered who may have been the first to say it.


In Detroit, a Red Wings Renaissance
Around a 2.9-mile loop of downtown Detroit there circles a shuttle train called the People Mover.
Perched on a monorail above the city streets, the system opened eight years ago to promote business and to make the district more user-friendly.
For part of the route, the People Mover takes travelers through an urban ghost town of abandoned hotels, vacant stores and nearly empty streets.
For the rest of the circuit, tourists see gleaming, modern hotels and office buildings on a sparkling waterfront that is especially bustling and festive during the summer months.


Matrons of Honor
Down to the middle of this century, old ladies were visible and recognizable (Sara Delano Roosevelt, Queen Mary).
They had a style of their own, from their unbobbed gray hair coiled into a bun or topknot and their lightly powdered faces all the way down to their near ankle-length hems and sensible shoes.
Old ladies carried handkerchiefs long after tissues were available and observed certain stylistic cliches.
For example, a brooch always nestled at the point of a modest V-neck.
Shapelessness was the most striking characteristic of old-lady style.
Some women shriveled with age, while others doubled in bulk like dough set to rise; but whether their steely undergarments supported a wisp or restrained an excess of flesh, old-lady corsetry was designed to eliminate references to traditional feminine form.
Belts marked midpoints, not waists.


Light Summer Salads Without Potatoes
POTATO salad has long been the traditional accompaniment for cookouts.
But now, with the current interest in Mediterranean cooking and light, healthy food, chefs are becoming increasingly inventive with summer salads that use starches other than potatoes.
Grappa, a Mediterranean-style cafe in Litchfield, Conn., owned by James O'Shea and Charlie Kafferman of the West Street Grill in Manhattan, specializes in pizzas from a wood-burning oven.
It also serves wonderful salads made from chick peas, beans and lentils.


MARKET TIMING
Monday OPEC members to meet in Vienna.
Analysts do not expect the group to raise its current production ceiling of 24.5 million barrels a day.
The president of OPEC said members would discuss the impact of the American economic embargo against Iran.


Filipinos Splurge on Resorts to Woo Tourists
After decades of a downward-spiraling economy and tumultuous politics, the Philippines has steadied itself.
The economy is beginning to boom.
Politics has settled down to a more genial level of boisterousness.
And finally the door to tourism has been opened with enthusiasm.
Tourist arrivals in the Philippines, especially from other Asian countries and Hong Kong, have climbed rapidly in the last three years.
From just over 900,000 visitors in 1990, the Philippines saw a record 1.6 million last year.
High quality, Governmentapproved hotel rooms, which numbered only 9,000 in 1990, have mushroomed to 11,000.


Straight Out of the City, for a Summer on the Farm
Even with a stack of black-and-white photographs in front of her, Elli Gordon finds it more and more difficult, with the passing years, to recall many specifics of her Fresh Air Fund summers.
"I don't remember too much about it, except that it was rural," said Mrs.
Gordon, 68, who began 11 years as a Fresh Air child when she was 5.


Delinquents Get to See Softer Side of the I.R.S.
Louis W. Gratter figured that if he made it out of the battlefields of World War II, he would probably make it through the Internal Revenue Service office today, even if he had not filed an income tax form in six years.
"You do what you have to do," Mr.
Gratter, a 74-year-old retired custodian from East Orange, said after an I.R.S. officer told him during a special two-day session set aside for delinquent taxpayers that he owed more than $10,000 in back taxes.
"I wasn't afraid on the battlefield and I wasn't nervous today."


Prejudice and Property: Desegregation Can Help
To the Editor:
Your article on school segregation -- "School Colors," June 11 -- quoted a Bergenfield resident: "I'm not prejudiced. But blacks moving in will hurt property values."
What is the housing market but a reaction to the values that people place on things?
If the value of a piece of property decreases when a black person moves to my town, it is because my town and the majority of home buyers are prejudiced, because the property is in proximity to an "undesirable" element.
Society has engineered that trend.


A Success Story Starts in Milan
Miuccia Prada's designs have so accurately mirrored the spirit of the 1990's that they have emerged as a worldwide fashion influence.
Last year, her satin slip dresses and skirts cut on the bias were a success with customers and a major influence on other designers.


No Way Out On Chechnya
It looked at first as though Russia's hostage nightmare would have at least one major beneficiary: after six months of calling Chechnya a society of bandits and thugs, President Boris N. Yeltsin seemed finally to have found the moral high ground.
The brazen attack on the southern city of Budyonnovsk, in which scores of innocent civilians have so far died, has certainly cast the Chechen underdogs in a nasty new role.
But once again it is Mr.
Yeltsin's conduct, and the conduct of his Government, that has so far received the most criticism in Russia.


Pamela Lester And William Ford
Pamela R. Lester, the vice president of business affairs and general counsel for Time Warner Sports in New York, is to be married this evening to S. William Ford, an antique and estate jewelry dealer in New York.
Justice Moses Weinstein, a retired associate justice of the Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court, is to perform the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 36, graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Lester of Palm Beach, Fla.
The bride's father is a senior partner at Lester, Schwab, Katz &amp; Dwyer, a law firm in New York.


Affirmative Action Never Ended Racism
To the Editor:
Re "A Sad Day for Racial Justice" (editorial, June 13): You seem to interpret the 5-to-4 Adarand v.
Pena decision as a requiem on racism, when it is only a denunciation of the failed racial remedies of the past 25 years.
In effectively striking down the precedent-setting cases of Metro Broadcasting v.
Federal Communications Commission (1990) and Fullilove v.
Klutznick (1980), the Court gave Federal imprimatur to the "strict scrutiny" criterion of Richmond v.
Croson (1989).


The World; The Face Of Cold, Hard Cash
IN an age when radio stations chronicle the moment-by-moment rise and fall of the yen, the dollar, the mark and the peso -- and when huge sums change hands without ever being touched, thanks to computers -- it is not hard to forget about cold, hard cash.
No matter what happens in the currency markets, a $1 bill has one thing in common with a 100-franc note or a million-mark bill that was worth exactly one penny when it was issued 70 years ago: it is only a piece of paper.
What paper, though.
In this country, a $1 bill is 25 percent linen and 75 percent cotton, with red and blue synthetic threads woven in to thwart counterfeiters.
The Bureau of Printing and Engraving says a bill can be folded and unfolded 4,000 times without tearing.


BEST SELLERS: June 18, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
2
4
149
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
3
3
3
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
4
2
6
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
5
6
143
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
6
5
68
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
10
4
MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.
8
8
5
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight "politically correct bedtime stories."
9
9
52
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
10
7
8
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
11
11
2
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
12
2
THIN AIR, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $21.95.) The private eye Spenser investigates the kidnapping of the young wife of a Boston cop.
13
13
17
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
14
15
2
OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) The romance of a girl and a priest who is assigned to oversee her exorcism.
15
12
11
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
36
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
2
3
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
3
10
3
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist examines the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
4
16
2
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
5
4
67
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
3
8
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
7
6
18
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
8
5
25
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
9
8
78
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
10
7
9
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
11
2
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
12
17
14
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
13
9
5
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
14
12
7
MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.
15
14
41
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
108
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
3
13
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
2
54
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
5
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)  COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University, $27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the mercy of organized crime.
DEEP RIVER, by Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr.
Endo's novel follows soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.
THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg. (Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct under the old regimes.
THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr.
Amis's cool and brilliant novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.
IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur -- The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World, by David Fromkin. (Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made the 20th century what it is.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
LYTTON STRACHEY: The New Biography, by Michael Holroyd. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A substantially reworked version of Mr.
Holroyd's two-volume biography of Strachey that appeared in the 1960's, this painstakingly researched portrait contains new disclosures about the lives and loves of Strachey and his Bloomsbury contemporaries.
MY USUAL GAME: Adventures in Golf, by David Owen. (Villard, $23.) Mr.
Owen, a journalist, had a handicap numbering in the dozens when he set out to devote every waking moment to improving his golf game; he recounts his obsessive odyssey in hilarious detail here.
RETHINKING AMERICA, by Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of America's economy and prescriptions for repairing it to accord with a changed world order, by a journalist who does not fear big subjects.
THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr.
Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.


Architect of House Measure to Limit Lawsuits Is Himself the Subject of a Suit
Representative Christopher Cox of California, the architect of a House bill that would make it harder for investors to sue for misconduct, has been sued for fraud as a result of legal work he did for an investment group 10 years ago.
The suit, filed on Wednesday in state court in Los Angeles, charges that Mr.
Cox, his former law firm and two of Mr.
Cox's former colleagues at the firm misled regulators and investors in the 1980's about the condition of a real estate investment fund.


Twin Cities' Islands of the Mississippi
MORE than 115 islands dot the Mississippi River in the greater Twin Cities metropolitan area, giant emerald stepping stones strung along a 46-mile river corridor that flows south from Coon Rapids Dam to the Cottage Grove area.
These peaceful urban retreats provide an intriguing introduction to the Twin Cities' history, plants and wildlife.
Last June on a three-day trip to Minneapolis, I explored five of the islands.
I stayed on one of them, Nicollet (pronounced NIK-o-let) Island, a quarter-mile-long, two-block-wide oasis in the midst of metropolitan Minneapolis.
The only clues to its thriving industrial past are the shell of a boilerworks, now used as a park pavilion, and a 19th-century wood-products factory that is now the stylish Nicollet Island Inn.


Planned Parenthood Extends Services to Aid Older Women
PLANNED PARENTHOOD of Westchester, Rockland and Putnam Counties is expanding its services to include women from 30 to 60.
Known primarily for providing reproductive care and education to women in their 20's and teens, the group is offering what it calls mid-life services.
The new program will include cancer screening, hormone-replacement therapy, nutritional counseling, gynecological care, treatment for menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis prevention.


An Early Start On Televising A Candidacy
Eight months before the first primary balloting, the Republican Presidential campaign of Lamar Alexander announced plans today for a television advertising drive in the pivotal states of Iowa and New Hampshire.
Worried, perhaps, that Mr.
Alexander is still a stranger in those states despite repeated visits, the candidate's advisers are hoping that the commercials make him a known quantity.
The advertisements will also be a way for him to try to keep from being overshadowed by a more recent, better known entrant who, like Mr.
Alexander, casts himself as a Washington outsider, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Mercedes-Benz SL600; Playing to the Masses With a Star Vehicle
I WAS dawdling along, basking in other drivers' covetous glances, enjoying the envy generated by a roadster so expensive that it constitutes a crime against nature.
But I was grumbling, too, because traffic on the Long Island Expressway is generally about as brisk as the O.J. trial.
"If you were smart," my son said, "you'd get into the H.O.V. lane. Our seats are filled and this is a high-occupancy vehicle."


Correction
A front-page picture last Sunday showing a demonstration outside a New York University seminar about the author Jack Kerouac carried an incorrect credit.
The photographer was Julio A. Ibarra, for The New York Times.


They Feel Our Pain
To the Editor:
One gets the impression that Sarah Boxer, in her review of "When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of Animals," by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy (May 28), has gone out of her way to find the most anemic examples imaginable as a prop for slyly selling us her own bias: the unscientific belief that animals are devoid of feelings.


School Weighs A Boycott Of Graduation
Administrators and teachers at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan said they would meet tomorrow to consider a boycott of graduation on June 27 if students involved in a bias incident are allowed to attend the ceremony, a union leader said yesterday.
Two teachers at the school have received anonymous, anti-Semitic notes, and four students have been arrested.
The school's 130 teachers and 10 assistant principals are scheduled to discuss the issue at noon in the building at Park Avenue and 34th Street, said Nicholas Licari, head of the school's United Federation of Teachers chapter.


POSTINGS: Rethinking the Adonis Site; Fade Out, Fade In
Demolition has begun on the Adonis theater, which was acquired by William Zeckendorf Jr. last April after years of maneuvering.
The shuttered theater, on Eighth Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets, is a block north of the Worldwide Plaza housing and office complex that Mr.
Zeckendorf completed in 1989.
As part of a commitment to the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, a key early tenant at Worldwide, Mr.
Zeckendorf succeeded in January 1994 in closing the theater, which showed pornographic films intended for a gay audience.
But he had been unable to come up with the right plan for the 20,000-square-foot lot, including proposals for hotel or a headquarters for the Internal Revenue Service.


A Penny Saved Is a Penny to Spend
TO spend or not to spend, that is the question every traveler to Europe must face.
Whether 'tis nobler to scrimp and pinch, trading three-star for two-star, first-class for coach, awesome for adequate, or to unleash the mighty power of plastic and in so doing pile up a mountain of debt.
Each year, my wife and I scale the mountain.


Rockefeller Estate: A Hot Ticket Yet Again
When Kykuit, the Rockefeller estate in Pocantico Hills, N.Y., opened to the public for the first time last year, virtually all of the 45,000 tickets were snapped up.
This year the number of tickets ($18 each) has been increased to 50,000, but they, too, are going fast, according to a spokesman for Historic Hudson Valley, the nonprofit organization that operates Kykuit.
Riders of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad out of Grand Central Terminal in New York and the N.Y.
Waterway ferry service from the West 38th Street pier in New York, however, can obtain tickets by reserving a Kykuit package.


Sarah Ingersoll and Anthony Mestres
Sarah Bernard Ingersoll, the daughter of George F. Ingersoll Jr. of Pipersville, Pa., and the late Susan Ingersoll, was married yesterday to Anthony Gwynne Mestres, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ricardo A. Mestres Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Mary Tiebout, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the garden ceremony at Woolverton Inn in Stockton, N.J.
The couple graduated from Dickinson College.
Mrs.
Mestres, 24, is a production manager at Chromacopy Imaging, a commercial photography laboratory in San Francisco.
Her father is a vice president, in Doylestown, Pa., of Prudential Securities.


A QUESTION FOR: Peter Byrne
Q: What do you use to track Bigfoot?
A: We have five vehicles -- a Jeep, a Toyota Land Cruiser, an International Scout, a big workhorse of a snowmobile and a van, the Bigfoot Mobile Base.
In the van, there's a two-way radio and a cellular phone, of course, and three cameras that can shoot 30 consecutive frames automatically.
We have night-vision devices with which you could see a man in total darkness 400 yards away and rifles and pistols that shoot a biopsy dart.
It penetrates the skin and seizes some blood and some tissue, then it pops out onto the ground and the animal walks away unharmed.
We have two helicopters.
One is just for transporting us around, but the other has a forward-looking infrared unit on it.
That's a heat-sensitive device used, generally, for tracking fugitives.
It's very good.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Katherine Allen, Gordon M. Kessler
Katherine Allen, a daughter of Marjorie Dore Allen of Washington and the late John E. Allen 3d, was married last evening to Gordon Morris Kessler, a son of Barbara and Richard B. Kessler of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi Nathaniel H. Schwartz performed the ceremony at the Mill River Club in Upper Brookville, L.I.
Mrs.
Kessler and her husband, both 27, received law degrees from Duke University.
The bride graduated from Emory University and is an associate at the New York law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
Her father retired as the president of Broadcast Computing Inc., a television and radio market research company in New York.
Her mother is a lobbyist for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, in Washington.


School Board Members Accuse Mayor of Hounding Cortines From Office
Members of the Board of Education and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani hardened their positions yesterday on the selection of a new schools chancellor, with each side pointedly accusing the other of having failed New York City's one million schoolchildren.
In a sharply worded statement, all the members of the board except the Mayor's two appointees accused Mr.
Giuliani of driving out Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines with his relentless criticism and added that his attacks were timed to draw attention away from City Hall's deep cuts to the board's budget.


Step by Step, a Violin Maker Escapes Stradivari's Shadow
UPSTAIRS above a downtown coffee bar here, Rachel Golub, a sophomore at Yale, frowned as she drew the bow across her 100-year-old violin, playing the opening notes of Wieniawski's Second Concerto.
She said her instrument had a problem: a tinny A string.
She handed it to Robert Isley, who inserted a small metal tool and moved the sound post a few millimeters.
She played again; he adjusted again.
The cycle continued until the noise disappeared and she left, another happy customer.


New England
To the Editor: In "Byways of Western Massachusetts" (May 7), E. J. Graff warns would-be travelers: "To avoid the post-industrial decay that litters North Adams, which is next on Route 2, reverse direction . . ." The directive ill-serves the author's readers.
North Adams has been dingy for many years.
E.
J.
Graff, however, has thrown out the baby with the bath water.
Just beyond North Adams is "the Village Beautiful," so announced by the signposts as you approach Williamstown.
Williamstown boasts two art galleries with glorious Impressionist paintings, a popular summer theater and one of the best liberal arts colleges in the United States.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the Audubon Biomedical Science and Technology Park in Washington Heights carried an outdated groundbreaking schedule for the project's second building.
After the article was prepared, the groundbreaking date was changed to June 26, from June 19.


Warrior for the Bodega Owners
SEATED AT A PLAIN table in a boxy, bare-walled storefront office in a nondescript section of Bellerose, Queens, Richard Lipsky is the picture of modesty.
Soft-spoken and professionally self-effacing, he describes himself merely as someone "paid to make arguments," an idealist engaged in nothing more subversive than a "cheering-up process."
Shift the scene to municipal buildings and executive suites, and the picture of Mr.
Lipsky cast by city planners, nutrition advocates and supermarket executives turns dour.
He is an obstructionist extraordinaire, they say, a kind of Luddite hired-gun opponent of progress and big stores who stirs baseless fears among the small merchants he organizes and represents.


'Knotted Tongues'
To the Editor:
As co-directors of the Birch Tree Foundation, which was designed to provide support for people who stutter, we would like to reply to Derek Bickerton's review of "Knotted Tongues: Stuttering in History and the Quest for a Cure," by Benson Bobrick (May 7).


HER OWN PRIVATE TAILHOOK
I am a woman, a former Air Force pilot and former Air Force Academy flight instructor.
I, too, went through survival/P.O.W. training (SERE) ("Her Own Private Tailhook," by Laura Palmer, May 28).
I was in the cell and the little box and got the abuse and general "break the bitch down" treatment.
It seemed very real and I learned a lot about myself from it.


Two Arts That Beat as One
EMBLEMS OF MIND The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics.
By Edward Rothstein. 263 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


Care and Feeding
THE view from the modest lectern at the entrance to Roberto's, the Italian "ristorante prima classe" at Trump Plaza, could be better.
The maitre d'hotel, Ciro Merlino, who quietly stations himself at Roberto's five nights a week in his smartly pressed tuxedo, has seen more and more patrons arriving for their expensive five-to-eight-course dinners in T-shirts and shorts.


Plans for Armory Stir Up 14th St.
Nine days ago, the city announced plans to use the long-vacant 14th Street Armory as a job placement center for welfare recipients, part of Mayor Giuliani's welfare reform.
It didn't take long for community advocates, who said they feared an increase in loitering and crime, to start mobilizing.
"They are making 14th Street into a welfare thoroughfare," said Simone Sindin, a block association president.
She said that the Waverly Income Maintenance Center, another city-run agency just a block east of the armory, attracted loiterers and drug dealers, and that the new center would only add to the problems in the neighborhood.


Roger Bauman and Julia Flynn
Julia Grace Flynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Westbrook Flynn of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., was married yesterday to Roger Raymond Baumann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philippe Emile Baumann of New York.
The wedding took place at the bridegroom's parents' house in Clinton, N.J.
Rabbi Irwin H. Fishbein performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Fred H. Turpin, a minister of the United Church of Christ, took part.
Mrs.
Baumann, 32, is the director of Research at Amroc Investments in New York.
She graduated from the University of Kansas and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the vice president of operations and general manager of the Renaissance Center Venture in Detroit.
Her mother, Sally Flynn, is a broker at Max Broock Inc., a realtor in Bloomfield Hills.


Anita Grossman, Horace Solomon
Anita S. Grossman, a computer programming consultant, is to be married today to Horace H. Solomon, the president of Arts Video News Service, a producer of programming on art exhibitions.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel is to perform the ceremony in the bridegroom's apartment in New York.
The bride graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a daughter of Carolyn and Stanley Grossman of Niagara Falls, N.Y.


Bach, a Cello, a Church in Burgundy, Rostropovich
A MAJOR PUZZLEMENT of our musical time has been the absence of a recording by Mstislav Rostropovich, clearly the greatest cellist of the last 35 years, of Bach's six suites for unaccompanied cello (BWV 1007-12), which are not only the greatest music written for the instrument but in the running for the greatest music ever written.
It seemed possible, but not really likely, that somehow he had just never gotten around to them.
Now he has, and he makes clear in a parallel video release that the omission was not an oversight.


A Garden Quarterly With a Calming Influence
Glossy garden magazines make me nervous.
All those gorgeous photographs of gardens more beautiful than mine.
Famous gardeners I want to interview but who could die before I get to all of them.
Nifty rustic trellises that are a cinch to make -- if you plant a field of willows.
The latest in foliage plants (because the truly sophisticated are into green gardens, where leaves and textures are in and flowers are out).
Where to buy a gunnera, the new status symbol of the garden world (because growing one in this climate is like trying to keep an elephant happy in a garage).
I can almost feel the anxiety: what will gardeners lust after next?
What new trend can they invent to make advertisers beg for space?


A New Route to the Internet In Northern New Jersey
Internet users in Northeastern New Jersey have a new choice for a local access carrier.
The Intac Corporation has installed new high-speed fiber-optic telephone lines to expand internet service to businesses in Bergen, Essex, Passaic and Union Counties and New York City.


Outward Bound for Glory; Such Artifacts; Howl
UPTOWN -- They had already weathered a flood season of fund-raisers.
But with the stoic determination of intrepid patrons, the guests attending the New York City Outward Bound Center's benefit on June 12 valiantly disembarked from cabs and limousines to walk through a driving rain into the Reebok Sports Club/NY at Columbus Avenue and 67th Street.
Inside, the adventure was just beginning.


F.Y.I.
Art for Subway's Sake
Q.
In the Christopher Street station on the 1/9 line there are several evocative mosaics.
On the uptown side there are two series, and the images they portray are quite odd: one has what resembles a Wayne Newton-as-Lady-Liberty-in-the-3d-ring-of-Hell feel.
On what themes were these mosaics hinged, and have I completely missed the point?


Cone Loses No-Hitter in 9th, Then Holds On for Victory
Blue Jays 4, Rangers 3
David Cone lost his no-hitter, then had to sweat out the final result.


Light Summer Salads Without Potatoes
POTATO salad has long been the traditional accompaniment for cookouts.
But now, with the current interest in Mediterranean cooking and light, healthy food, chefs are becoming increasingly inventive with summer salads that use starches other than potatoes.
Grappa, a Mediterranean-style cafe in Litchfield, Conn., owned by James O'Shea and Charlie Kafferman of the West Street Grill in Manhattan, specializes in pizzas from a wood-burning oven.
It also serves wonderful salads made from chick peas, beans and lentils.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE FAMILY HEART: A Memoir of When Our Son Came Out By Robb Forman Dew.
Ballantine, $11.
A novelist reflects on the ignorance -- her own and society's -- that is the usual response to homosexuality.
The issue was literally brought home to her by her elder son, who at 19 told his parents he was gay.
She "has much to say about tolerance, disappointment and love, themes that concern all parents and their children," Meg Wolitzer said here last year.
THE WATERWORKS By E. L. Doctorow.
Signet, $6.99.
Part fable, part mystery, part Oedipal drama, this novel unfolds in 1870's New York, where the moral atmosphere is as dingy as the streets.
Here McIlvaine, a newspaperman, relates the odd tale of Martin Pemberton, a young writer who is convinced that he has recently glimpsed his late father -- a profiteer in the best Boss Tweed tradition -- alive in a carriage.
Last year our reviewer, Simon Schama, called the book "startling and spellbinding." He added, "The reader is helplessly and gratefully caught in the current" of Mr.
Doctorow's story.
Another journalist narrator reveals the depravity of old New York in THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr (Bantam, $6.99).
In a kind of novelistic twist on Jack the Ripper, a serial killer is murdering and mutilating young boy prostitutes in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
The result is "a pleasing entertainment," Stephen Dobyns wrote in these pages in 1994, one that proves "Mr. Carr knows his history." Also reissued is a nonfiction work by Mr.
Carr, THE DEVIL SOLDIER: The American Soldier of Fortune Who Became a God in China (Random House, $15).
The author maintains that Frederick Townsend Ward, a mercenary for the Manchu dynasty in its 1860's war against rebelling Taiping peasants, was not only a brilliant tactician but a good guy as well.
In 1992 Annette Kobak wrote, "Mr. Carr gives a good picture of the buccaneering milieu . . . and makes a plausible case for the devil soldier being on the side of the angels."  THESE SAME LONG BONES By Gwendolyn M. Parker.
Plume, $10.95.
Hay-Ti is "the colored section" of Durham, N.C., an area that in 1947 is an oasis but not a refuge to people like Sirus McDougald, a black businessman whose price for success appears to be the death of his daughter.
This is "a thoughtful and generous-hearted novel that shows a life . . . aglow with insoluble mystery," Josephine Humphreys said in the Book Review last year.
Another black neighborhood comes to life in the interconnected stories of RATTLEBONE, by Maxine Clair (Penguin, $9.95), which follow a young woman, Irene, from her 1950's childhood in a Midwestern town through high school.
Writing here earlier this year, Veronica Chambers found them "extraordinary. . . . There is magic dust sprinkled over each and every page."  THE DOWNING STREET YEARS By Margaret Thatcher.
Harper Perennial, $16.
These are the memoirs of the grocer's daughter who became Prime Minister of Britain and a standard-bearer for a conservatism that brooked no compromise, whether the issue was the Falkland Islands or European supranationalism.
The result is "the gripping tale of a leader who has triumphantly answered the question nagging at every political figure: whether his or her actions are making any real difference," Henry A. Kissinger said here in 1993.
Madeleine M. Kunin, an American trailblazer from a different political camp, reveals her struggles in LIVING A POLITICAL LIFE: One of America's First Woman Governors Tells Her Story (Vintage, $13).
Now the Deputy Secretary of Education, Ms.
Kunin describes the circuitous, uphill route she traveled to the Vermont Statehouse.
She writes "vividly, and with a power derived from experience," William H. Chafe said in the Book Review in 1994.
SMALL WORLD: An Academic Romance By David Lodge.
Penguin, $10.95.
Certain professorial types are often considered funny by everyone except themselves, and the author sends them up smartly in this novel, which presents the pursuit of an endowed faculty chair as if it were a latter-day quest for the Holy Grail.
"His deliberately outrageous manipulation of character and event is entirely successful," Michael Rosenthal said here in 1985.
I AM ROE: My Life, Roe v.
Wade, and Freedom of Choice By Norma McCorvey with Andy Meisler.
Harper Perennial, $11.
The woman whose third unplanned pregnancy led to the Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion reveals the person behind the pseudonym: abused, impoverished, unglamorous and gay.
The story of the crusade she never asked to lead is "a powerful and important American document," Susan Cheever wrote in the Book Review last year.
The transcript of Roe v.
Wade appears in MAY IT PLEASE THE COURT: Arguments on Abortion, edited by Stephanie Guitton and Peter Irons (New Press, $27.50), a book packaged with two accompanying cassette tapes featuring the actual testimony from this and seven other decisions.
The book grew out of the editors' earlier project, "May It Please the Court: The Most Significant Oral Arguments Made Before the Supreme Court Since 1955," which provides "a strong and direct whiff of history," Melvin I. Urofsky said here in 1993.
Roe is also highlighted in A HISTORY OF THE SUPREME COURT, by Bernard Schwartz (Oxford University, $15.95), which "in a well-written account takes us from the beginnings of the American judicial system . . . to the present," Mr.
Urofsky wrote in the same review.
THE LONGINGS OF WOMEN By Marge Piercy.
Fawcett Crest, $6.99.
What are traditionally seen as feminine objects of desire -- love, a husband, a house -- prove full of misery for three women whose lives become entwined: a writer and academic, an accused murderer and a housekeeper with no home of her own.
Last year our reviewer, Patricia Volk, said, "These characters are so authentic, you'll want to shake them." LAUREL GRAEBER


Affirmative Action Never Ended Racism; The Favoritism Factor
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court's decision requiring "strict scrutiny" of affirmative action government contracts (front page, June 13) is galling because historically not only have minorities been systematically excluded from competitive bidding on infrastructural improvements, but also such contracts have not infrequently been granted to political insiders.


The Mets' Fans Get a Chance to Glimpse the Future, and It Blinks
The future looked a little bit nervous.
The rest of the Mets, especially Brett Butler (who was repeatedly booed) and Bobby Bonilla (who again appeared to be upset at his third-base coach), are just frustrated.
Bill Pulsipher, the touted rookie, made his long-awaited major league debut at Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon.


ENDPAPER
Your winsome Mother's Day photo for Endpaper (May 14) made me wonder what your corresponding Father's Day illustration might feature.
LINDA HARRIS Dallas


Deals and Discounts
CHARTERS TO SHANNON Sceptre Charters will inaugurate charters from Newark to Shannon International Airport in Western Ireland on June 15; the flights, operated by American Trans Air, will run weekly until Sept. 15, leaving Newark on Thursdays and returning on Fridays, with stops in Boston each way.
Round-trip fares will range from $449 to $489 plus $40 tax.
There are no advance purchase or other restrictions.
Information: (718) 738-9400; outside the New York metropolitan area, (800) 221-0924.
HOTELS DOWN UNDER Accor Asia Pacific Hotels is offering a Dreamtime Hotel Pass program of prepaid vouchers in 12 countries.
The vouchers may be used at more than 60 hotels in Australia, French Polynesia, Thailand and elsewhere.
Vouchers are available in three color-coded categories: $86 (red), $94 (green) and $132 (blue).
A one-night stay at the Hotel Ibis Darling Harbor in Sydney requires one red voucher; the Novotel Langley Perth, one blue.
Rates are valid through March 31, 1996, and include tax and service.
Vouchers are sold in packages of 10 of a single color; they must be purchased before leaving the United States; travelers can reserve rooms ahead or as they go.
There is a $10 handling fee when unused vouchers are refunded.
Call (800) 821-7373.


Correction
The What's Doing column on March 12, about Amsterdam, misstated the payment policy of the Prinsen Hotel.
A letter from the hotel, dated May 16, pointed out that credit cards are accepted.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Romancing the Locals Isn't Part of the Job
PHOTOJOURNALISTS OFFER good dramatic value as protagonists, if movies are any yardstick.
Their workaday lives can be bullet-strewn with adventure, chock-full of sexual and political intrigue in foreign lands.
We have seen the news photographer as crime solver (in Hitchcock's "Rear Window"), as sleazy opportunist (in Oliver Stone's "Salvador") and, recently, as the leonine conscience of his village (in Milcho Manchevski's "Before the Rain").
But photojournalism has never inspired as seductive a cliche as Robert Kincaid, the manly shutterbug in "The Bridges of Madison County." Twice a hero, first in the pages of Robert James Waller's best-selling novel and now handsomely played by Clint Eastwood in the movie, Kincaid sweet-talks Francesca Johnson, a lonely Iowa farm wife played by Meryl Streep, with tales of faraway places.


Perfect Game
WELL before the baseball game, the purple sky and the wind-whipped ripples on the Delaware River told of a storm coming.
Some of the fans streaming into Waterfront Park to watch the Trenton Thunder play the Binghamton Mets cast anxious glances upward.
If a minor league game means less than, say, the cost of living or the fate of the blue whale, it still means a lot to those who fill the Thunder's idyllic playground, where enthusiasm for the summer game burns as fiercely as the midday sun.


Lisa Becker, Kenneth Lipner
Lisa Dale Becker, the daughter of Jerome and Sharon Becker of East Northport, L.I., is to be married today to Kenneth Eliot Lipner, the son of Marshall and Susan Lipner of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Myron Fenster is to perform the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 28, is a physical therapist at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She received bachelor's degrees from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and from New York University.


Tway's Baby Steps Are Looming Large
Bob Tway has been at the top of the golf world and buried beneath it, so he knows the difference between exhilaration and suffocation.
As he emerges from one of golf's more notable slumps, Tway is breathing a little easier now and looking toward the game's upper level with the idea of eventually returning to it.
Slowly.


Mixed Feelings Over Jewish Community Center
The Jewish Community Centers Association of North America has its headquarters on East 26th Street, but until four years ago, none of the 200 centers it runs across the nation was in the city.
Then, a J.C.C. opened on the second floor of a residential building on West 80th Street.
From there, it offers educational and recreational programs -- a crash course in basic Judaism, water aerobics for older adults -- in larger, borrowed spaces like synagogues and schools.
Now the J.C.C. is planning a home of its own -- a plan that has drawn both support and concern among the area's 90,000 Jews and at least 20 synagogues.


Matthew Suffness, Taxol Developer, 52
Dr.
Matthew Suffness, a medical research manager who helped develop the cancer drug taxol, died on Wednesday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 52 and lived in Silver Spring.
The cause was pneumonia, said a colleague, Tony Mead of the National Cancer Institute.
Dr.
Suffness had received a bone-marrow transplant in November to treat leukemia.


A Spot in the Order, a Home in the Burbs
The young man lay face down and quiet as a corpse on a brown leather couch in the Cleveland Indians' clubhouse.
His face lay buried in a jacket that had been bundled to serve as a pillow.
His body was blanketed by a blue team parka adorned with the goofy, smiling face and feather that is the team's odd logo.
The young man's bare legs and feet, in sweat socks, extended from the parka.
This was early June, several hours before the team's game, and players were drifting into the clubhouse.
One player walked over, peered at the body, and gave it a playful slap upside the head.
The head stirred slightly.


At Last, an Adviser With Nothing to Sell
AN axiom of the insurance business is that life insurance is sold, not bought.
And aggressively sold it often is, sometimes inappropriately, to judge by a rash of recent lawsuits against Metropolitan Life, New York Life and John Hancock, among others, as well as a spate of fines by regulators.
Yet most middle-class families need life insurance to make sure their dependents will be financially secure if the breadwinners die.
The crucial questions are: How much insurance?
And what kind -- term, whole life, universal, variable?


Spring Housing-Sales Climate Is Chilly
SPRING is the time of year when residential real estate markets often blossom.
This spring, though, the market's climate in most of the New York metropolitan region has been cool.
House closing figures -- which typically reflect contracts signed one to three months earlier -- have been below those of a year ago in most areas and sale prices have been somewhat lower for many types of houses.


The World; Why the Richest Nations Want to Insure the Rest
IF Citibank's depositors panicked and tried to withdraw all the money from their checking accounts, the Federal Reserve would be ready within hours to lend billions to cover the bank's obligations.
And in the wake of the collapse of Mexico's currency, the case for creating an analogous lender of last resort to cash-poor governments has been thrust to the top of the global economic agenda.
That explains the broad support at the economic summit this weekend for creating an emergency loan window, to be managed by the International Monetary Fund.
And while the plan may raise eyebrows in a Congress skeptical of multilateral entanglements, the idea of asking other countries to bear more of the risk might be more appealing than America's bearing the risk alone.


DIARY
THE BUDGET  Clinton's Balancing Act  To balance or not to balance, that used to be the question, with Bill Clinton clearly favoring a lopsided budget over the pain of a balanced one.
But the slings and arrows of outrageous Republicans proved too painful, and last week the President hummed a radically new tune.
O.K., balance it, he said, but do it in 10 years, not 7.
His formula: save on Medicare, but not as drastically as the Republicans want; cut taxes for the middle class, not the wealthy; cut welfare, but protect children.
But the question remains: Will any of the grand formulas being tossed out in the current political frenzy actually stick for 7 or 10 long years?
As one lawmaker put it: if you don't like the President's stance on a given issue, just "wait a few weeks." AUTOS  Fiery Voice at the U.A.W.
When Stephen Yokich first picketed G.M., he was in a stroller.
He was, after all, just 22 months old; his mother, a G.M. worker, was pushing.
That was in the late 30's, a hot time for union battles.
Cut to the 90's: automation, Japanese cars, an economy manically reinventing itself, fading memories of union power.
United Auto Workers membership has slumped from 1.5 million in 1979 to perhaps 800,000 today.
Mr.
Yokich, now 59, wants to change that -- and he just might.
Last week he was elected U.A.W. president, and hopes are high that he can bring vigor -- and members -- to the struggling union.
He's got a fiery resume -- he was, for one, behind last fall's strike in Flint, Mich., which rippled through plants nationwide.
But he's also known as a realist, one who can cooperate with management when the handwriting's on the assembly line.
SOFT DRINKS  A Cola With Snob Appeal  It's a time-honored marketing tactic: put some bows and ribbons on it, call it "premium" or "luxury," and double the price.
Look at "gold" cards, which quack pretty much like humbler pieces of plastic.
Look at Lexuses, which look a lot like Camrys with gold earrings.
And now comes -- take a deep breath -- "Royal Crown Draft Premium Cola." It's "rich and smooth," the company says, "with a long-lasting head." It comes in beer-style bottles.
"We're inventing a whole new category," Royal Crown's president said.
And, yes, a whole new price: up to $4.99 a six-pack.
Actually, given the huffing and puffing of the great "cola wars," it's a wonder no one has thought up the "premium" angle before.
DRUGS  The Menopause Market  Menopause has clearly arrived as a hot topic.
Why?
Because all those baby boomers are hitting the relevant age, of course; out of sight, out of mind.
And, yes, it's a hot business topic too, as drug makers hover hungrily at the gates to this life passage.
So when news came last week -- from The New England Journal of Medicine, of course -- that estrogen therapy lifts the breast-cancer risk by at least 30 percent, drug makers watched carefully.
Many experts say the cancer risk is more than offset by estrogen's protection against osteoporosis and heart disease -- a view sure to be embraced by American Home Products, which last year sold nearly $1 billion worth of Premarin, the leading estrogen.
It gets complicated, though, for Merck is nearing the market -- a market that will bulge in a few years -- with a drug that treats osteoporosis without hormones.
For women caught in this vise, this means the added assault of marketers confusing them even more.
MEN AT WORK  Father?
What's a Father?
At the risk of sounding like a greeting card: What is a father? (This being His Day, you were naturally wondering this, weren't you?) Don't get soppy or philosophical, though; we're talking statistics, just statistics -- offered by Catalyst, a research group aimed at helping women in business.
Does Dad bring home the bacon to two children and stay-at-home, slipper-bearing Mom?
A mere 3.1 percent of families fit this cuddly mold in 1993.
Fully 10 percent of American husbands are "designated homemakers" (no relation, presumably, to designated hitters), up from 2 percent in 1986.
And among households with working parents, those headed by single fathers are increasing fastest.
Still, Child magazine, which tracked "father-friendly" companies in 1992, stopped the next year because so few qualified -- or even cared.
O.K., back to the football game (or whatever season it is).
CYBERSPACE  Between Consenting Computers  On the Senate floor last week, Jim Exon of Nebraska waved a blue binder with a red label reading "Caution." Mr.
Exon was shocked to find this "disgusting material" on the Internet, and he and most of the rest of the Senate don't want your children to see it. (Don't ask how many senators sneaked a peek.) So they did what lawmakers tend to do -- voted to impose fines and prison terms on those who distribute "filthy" material over computer networks.
A worthy sentiment, surely -- and the lopsided 84-16 vote reflects a distinct fear of being seen as "pro-filth" -- but the whole free-speech issue lurks awfully close by.
Cyberspace has created an odd new mix of public and private, and private communication between adults has always been sacred territory.
Even Orrin Hatch, that pillar of conservatism, denounced the measure, saying, "It's a political exercise, and I'm against it." THE MILITARY  Let Them Eat Missiles  Starting in the early 80's -- you remember, when we didn't worry about spending money we didn't have -- this nation spent more than $35 billion on a "Star Wars" missile defense, with little to show for it.
So you'd think those Republicans hell-bent on balancing the Federal checkbook would apply their austerity here, too -- especially with the cold war over.
But no -- even while slashing everywhere else, the House last week added $628 million to the anti-missile allotment.
The rationale: the cold war's end means greater risks of missiles from rogue nations, and thus more need for that fabled "missile shield." If, that is, it works.
POSTAL SERVICE  Moving New York's Mail  Good news, New Yorkers: those 17 catalogues and 14 credit-card offers that are jammed daily into your mailbox are arriving a bit faster this year. (Oh, yes, the real mail is, too -- when you can find it amid the junk.) The Postal Service said last week that New York no longer languishes at the bottom of the nation's big-city mailbag in on-time delivery -- with 83 percent of mail arriving punctually, up from 62 percent last year.
Westchester is another matter, though -- the county's mail service ranks second from the bottom nationally, with only San Juan, P.R., below it.
MERGERS  I.B.M.-Lotus: Teamwork?
So I.B.M. buys Lotus.
What does it get for its $3.5 billion?
Clearly, what it hopes to create, with Lotus's Notes software, is a team powerful enough to play in Microsoft's league.
But that will be a disjointed team indeed if, as promised, Lotus remains a private enclave within Giant Blue.
Louis Gerstner, I.B.M. chairman, is all for a big, solid front.
But with separate sales forces and software teams, "there is simply no way," one business professor said, that I.B.M. can "make this deal pay off." So the surprising independence granted Lotus managers may soon be in name only. . . .
Microsoft, meanwhile, got some good news.
An antitrust deal it cut with the Justice Department had been tossed out in court, but a Federal appeals court reinstated it -- and took the judge who'd rejected it off the case.


Yankees Find Out Who Has The Power
Just when the Yankees were about to question why the Indians were being hailed as a dominant team, and just as they were ready to remind everybody how powerful they could be, Cleveland spoiled their thoughts, their day and their chance for another meaningful victory at Jacobs Field.
The Yankees built an early 3-1 lead, but the Indians treated Andy Pettitte like the frazzled new kid in a foreign neighborhood, bashing him for four quick runs in the fourth inning en route to a 7-4 triumph.


Pamela Seidel, Todd Severson
Pamela Ann Seidel, the daughter of Ann and Arthur H. Seidel of Grantham, N.H., was married yesterday to Todd Orvin Severson, the son of Bernice and Orvin Severson of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Larry G. Suntken, a minister of the Reformed Church of America, performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.
The bride, 35, is a merchandising manager for Banana Republic in San Francisco.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
The bridegroom, 38, is a commercial real estate broker at Cushman &amp; Wakefield in Oakland, Calif.
He graduated from Oregon State University.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Telecommunications: Vote to kill an amendment to a sweeping telecommunications bill that would give the Justice Department a large role in deciding when to let Bell companies enter the long-distance market.
Approved 57 to 43, June 13.
2.
Telecommunications: Vote on an amendment to a telecommunications bill that would retain current limits on the number of television stations a company can own: 12 stations and 25 percent of the national viewership.
Rejected 52 to 47, June 13.
3.
Telecommunications: Vote to kill an amendment to a telecommunications bill that would require makers of television sets to install a computer chip that would let parents prevent their children from watching violent programs.
Rejected 73 to 26, June 13.
4.
Telecommunications: Vote on an amendment to a telecommunications bill that would impose fines and prison terms on people who distribute sexually explicit or other "filthy" material over computer networks.
Approved 84 to 16, June 14.
5.
Telecommunications: Vote on a telecommunications bill that is broadly intended to deregulate the telephone, cable television and broadcasting industries.
Approved 81 to 18, June 15.
1
2
3
4
5
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Nay
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
Nay
House
1.
B-2 Bomber: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department budget bill that would eliminate $553 million earmarked to buy radar components and fuselage sections for two additional B-2 Stealth bombers.
Rejected 219 to 203, June 13.
2.
Missile Defense: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department budget bill that would eliminate a $628 million increase to the Pentagon's request for missile defenses.
Rejected 250 to 178, June 14.
3.
Military Budget: Vote on a $267.3 billion Defense Department budget for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 that would authorize an increase in spending beyond the Pentagon's request.
Approved 300 to 126, June 15.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
8. Martini (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Yea
A
7. Manton (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
13. Molinari (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
19. Kelley (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
A
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
A
A
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Nay
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Anna W. Smith and Graves Theus
Anna Whitman Smith, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Leslie C. Smith of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Graves Theus Jr., the son of Kathryn T. Breese of Jackson, Miss., and the Rev.
Theus of Alexandria, La.
Bishop Joe Morris Doss of New Jersey performed the ceremony with the bridegroom's father at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Theus, 26, is the head teacher at the Transitional Living Center, a homeless shelter in Spokane, Wash.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the rector of Trinity Church.
Her mother, Lois D. Smith, is an artist in Princeton.


Groups Gain New Members Since Attack
The apparent link between the two men charged in the bombing in Oklahoma City and paramilitary groups has attracted membership in such organizations rather than discouraged it, a new report by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith says.
The report, "Beyond the Bombing: The Militia Menace Grows," concludes that while some paramilitary groups have lost membership since the April 19 bombing, which killed 167 people, "gains plainly appear to outweigh losses."


Norman and Lehman Are Tied in Survival of Fittest
The real United States Open started today, the one where the wind whips across the hard links and the golf becomes a war of attrition.
At the old Shinnecock Hills Golf Club, that mournful sound you heard wasn't just the wail of the Long Island Railroad train pulling into the Southampton campus station.
It was the moaning of golfers trying to somehow stop the bogey express.
Left standing when the final putt lipped out in the third round of the Open were Greg Norman, whose round of 74 was good enough to allow him to keep a share of the lead with Tom Lehman, who somehow shot a 67.
Norman and Lehman stood, albeit shakily, at one-under-par 209, one stroke ahead of Bob Tway (72) and Phil Mickelson (72), who are at even par.


An Artist Sees Meaning In a While
The idea of building castles in the sand generally suggests a foolhardy idealism, a beauty painful in its brevity.
But G. Augustine Lynas has made a career out of making artwork in sand, snow and anything else that might soon melt, disintegrate or otherwise disappear.
And he has brought this passion for ephemera to his apartment building at 233 West 83d Street.
On the capitals of columns flanking the doorway, Mr.
Lynas has carved intricate figures and faces -- some recognizable, some representative -- out of a material he describes as part clay stone, part liquid limestone, part self-hardening terra cotta.
He knows the mixture isn't permanent, but since he has never used it before he has no idea how long the figures will last.


Culture Shared: Telling Tales In School
At the Griot Institute at Intermediate School 246, sixth graders learn to be oral historians based on the African tradition of weaving stories into musical tales and passing them from one generation to the next.
But while the style they learn is decidedly African, the stories they weave have a rich international flavor.
There are Jamaican ghost stories, about wraiths and specters known as duppies; reminiscences of going to market in Trinidad and sleeping in a cool hammock strung between trees; parables about making do in Santurce, P.R., and Cinderella-like fairy tales from around the world.


Legalizing Ticket Scalping Would Just Increase Prices
To the Editor:
Residents should be outraged by the Legislature's passage of measures to legalize ticket scalping in New Jersey.
Unlike most products offered in free market competition, which are subject to the forces of supply and demand to control the selling price, the supply of tickets for any given event is fixed in number.
When demand far exceeds limited supply, it can only mean increased prices.


Oh, That Ride to Work: 14 Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 at Route 17, in Paramus.
Left eastbound and westbound lane closed Monday through Friday, 10 P.M. to 6 A.M, for bridge work.
Through July 1.


A Penny Saved Is a Penny to Spend: Rome; Walking with ancients, and inexpensive pizza
Recently a friend visiting us in Rome, an antiques dealer, spotted a rather fine Italian gouache in a shop window and remarked that the price was somewhat higher than he would expect to find at home in Boston.
Shoppers for shoes, bags and clothes are having similar surprises.
People still remember when it was as cheap to eat out as at home, but no longer.
However, the best things in Rome really are free, from the view from the Janiculum Hill to the Pantheon (a functioning church) to a drink from a fountain (connoisseurs like the one on Via IV Novembre at the top of Salita del Grillo).
And the second best things cost very little.
TOUR BY TRAM OR BUS.
The 30/ (say "trenta barrato") tram line starts its route at the Porta San Paolo, near the Stazione Ostiense (a secondary railroad station with Line B metro stop) and the Pyramid of Gaius Cestius, a late first-century B.C. funerary monument that was incorporated into the walls of Rome in the third century A.D. (to which the Porta San Paolo belonged).
A couple of blocks away is the Protestant Cemetery.
The 30/ wends its way slowly past the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the Circus Maximus, the Palatine Hill and the Colosseum; the Basilicas of St.
John Lateran, Santa Croce, and San Lorenzo; the University of Rome, the trendy San Lorenzo quarter, and the Campo Verano cemetery; then turns toward chic Parioli and the zoo, to end at Piazza Thorvaldsen, a few steps from your choice of the Gallery of Modern Art, the Villa Giulia Museum of Etruscan Art, the Villa Borghese and a number of the foreign academies, which often have free art exhibitions.
A single regular bus ticket allows unlimited transfers on buses and trams within a 75-minute period.
You stamp the ticket in a machine on the bus or tram each time you board.
The last stamp must be within 75 minutes of the first, but you can stay on the last bus or tram as long as you like after you stamp your ticket.
The ticket also includes a ride on the Metropolitana, or subway (you get one time through the turnstile, but you can transfer free; there are only two lines).
If you buy a block of 10 tickets, you get one ticket free.
These can be bought at tobacconists and special booths at major bus stops.
The 30/ run takes 45 minutes to an hour.
A DAY AT OSTIA ANTICA.
On a regular city bus ticket, take the little train to Scavi ("excavations") di Ostia Antica from the Stazione Ostiense near the Pyramid.
Ostia was the port of ancient Rome, situated at what used to be the mouth of the Tiber.
Admission to the site, which, like Pompeii, is a large part of an excavated ancient city, is only about $4.80, calculated at a rate of 1,629 lire to $1.
The brick buildings of Ostia glow in the sun, and the pine trees and sea breeze insure a pleasant respite from the city heat.
The site is open all day, but the wonderful museum, containing marvelous sculptures and other excavated objects, is open only in the morning.
The standard tour includes the forum, the theater (where plays are performed on summer evenings), various bath complexes, warehouses and private dwellings, a little restaurant-bar, called themopolium, and the House of Diana, an apartment building.
But it's easy to find an untraveled spot to sit quietly and eat a discreet picnic.
HOTEL IN THE GREENERY.
Although they are not the bargains they once were, Rome's small, mid-level hotels can offer charm, comfort and convenience at acceptable prices.
One hotel much appreciated by frequent visitors for good value in a country-villa setting is the 50-room Sant'Anselmo, 2 Piazza Sant'Anselmo, (396) 5783214, fax (396) 5783604, double including breakfast $114.
The Aventine Hill (one of the seven), where it is situated, is an exclusive residential quarter and one of Rome's greenest.
It's a short walk to the Pyramid of Gaius Cestius and minutes by bus to the heart of Rome.
A VIEW, OR JUST BREAKFAST.
For the price of a cappuccino, or an apertif or a sandwich, a cat can look at a king for pretty much as long as he wants.
Caffe Rosati on Piazza del Popolo is an elegant old bar with outdoor tables commanding one of the best views-cum-people-watching in town.
If you can possibly avoid having breakfast in your hotel, a cappuccino and cornetto (croissant), every Roman's favorite eye-opener, will cost only $1.60 if you stand at the bar, and $5.40 if you sit.
Hotel breakfasts can cost $9 to $16 and will never taste as good.
WALK THROUGH ANCIENT ROME.
Many people dream of creating a unified archeological park of Rome's great monumental zone, from Piazza Venezia all the way out the Via Appia Antica.
The fact is that, except for the traffic, it already exists -- it's all in one's perception.
Although admission is charged for the Roman Forum and Palatine (one ticket, but free the last Sunday of the month) and the Colosseum (for the upper levels; the rest is free), the Forum and some of the Palatine and the Imperial Fora can be viewed most excitingly from street level.
The Circus Maximus is wide open, and much appreciated by joggers.
From there, you can jog, or cycle (or taxi), down the Via delle Terme di Caracalla, view the Baths, and continue through the most beautiful gate in the most beautiful stretch of the Aurelian Wall.
After the catacombs (not visible from the road) comes ancient Rome's main highway, lined with tombs.
FOR LUNCH, STAND FOR PIZZA.
Two meals in a trattoria is too much in one day.
Many Romans have their lunch at a pizza a taglio (by the slice) stand, and possibly the best of these is the wonderfully old-fashioned Pizzeria Silvana, at 29 Via del Governo Vecchio, in the heart of old Rome.
Lunch will cost only about $1.80.
Silvana's system is this: a constant supply of yardlong plain white pizza comes out of the oven (smelling divine).
The customer indicates by whatever means at his disposal, verbal or non-, how large a piece he would like, and then chooses a condiment, which is then stuffed generously into the pizza.
Try tuna and artichokes, or bresaola-rughetta(the Roman name for arugula)-Parmesan, or shrimp and porcini mushrooms.
The house beverage, offered gratis, is acqua minerale you pour yourself from bottles set out on the counter.
There are no seats.
You can either eat standing up, rubbing shoulders (possibly literally) with a very genuine cross-section of Roman society, including so many policemen that at times you wonder if a crime has been committed, or you walk to nearby Piazza Navona, sit on a bench and contemplate Bernini's fountain.
At that point you might as well walk over to Bar Tre Scalini for a chocolate ice cream tartufo, $3 if you stand, $6.60 if you sit at a table and look at the view.
SHOP IN A MONASTERY.
The monks of Camaldoli have been in the pharmacy business since 1048.
In Rome, their products are sold in a little shop adjacent to the monastery attached to the church of San Gregorio al Celio, in Via San Gregorio, near the Circus Maximus and Palatine.
About $9 buys a digestive amaro or a sweet wine or an aperitif.
There are also chocolates, therapeutic tisanes, and hard candies, perfumes, honeys and "honey specialties." There are also jams and jellies; the confitura di marroni is wonderful: imagine spreading marrons glaces (glazed chestnuts) on your morning toast.
BROWSE FOR PRINTS AND BOOKS.
Nestled among some of the priciest shops in Rome, at Piazza Borghese, a short walk from the Spanish Steps, is a wonderful outdoor book and print market. (Walk all the way down Via Condotti, across Via del Corso, and keep going.) Trained eyes can pick out some rare first editions or original etchings, but for the rest of us, it's a place for leisurely browsing ending in the purchase of a very nice reproduction print that will cost less than $30, and more likely around $9.
The adjacent Palazzo Borghese has a beautiful garden with statues and picturesque cats.
You can try asking the guard to let you have a peek.


Multi-Medium Artist Has a Sense of Humor
WHERE else to display a show called "Hung Up" but in the Shoe-String Gallery here?
The juxtaposition is not exactly an accident, though, for Bill Barrell, the artist whose exhibition this is, works in the studio that lies below the gallery.
Connecting the two are stairs that are an event in themselves because of their zigzagging treads.
In any event, the title refers to a period when Mr.
Barrell, himself hung up by a creative block, solved the problem by hanging and re-examining earlier work that had been out of sight.


Can Trees Grow in SoHo: A Matter of History and Dirt
Last year, the Landmarks Preservation Commission said trees would ruin the historical integrity of SoHo.
In the 19th century, the neighborhood had been an industrial district, after all, with a wealth of warehouses and a poverty of trees.
But residents of SoHo, supported by the Parks Department, would not be swayed.
"What are we, a museum?" exclaimed a flier -- a call to arms -- distributed last month by a neighborhood group, Trees Not Trucks.
Now, it looks as if greenery-loving SoHo residents will get their trees.


June 11-17: Power Struggles; New York's School Chief Calls It Quits
A good school superintendent is hard to find and even harder to keep.
Ramon C. Cortines took the job of New York City Schools Chancellor less than two years ago to calm down the school system and put the spotlight back on basics -- teaching and learning.
Above all, he wanted to avoid the political turmoil that had brought down his predecessor, Joseph Fernandez, who had been all but run out of town after battles over social issues.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Actors Aren't Alone Trudging Highlands
HELEN MORRISON doesn't much mind that Rob Roy, the real person, was red-haired and just 5 foot 5, in contrast to Rob Roy, the movie character, as played by Liam Neeson in the film of the same name.
Nor is Mrs.
Morrison particularly bothered by the fact that Mr.
Neeson's Scottish accent often sounds Irish (which is what he is).
In fact, "Rob Roy's" Scottish scenery is so beguiling that its characters could almost have been dressed in chef's costumes and speaking Esperanto for all Mrs.
Morrison, who lives about 20 miles away from the Rob Roy Visitor Center here, cares.
"If it brings money into the country," she said, "they can do whatever they want."


Dinner and a Good Climb
New York Outward Bound Center at Reebok Sports Club/NY, June 12.


Mimi Willoughby, Peter T. Santry
Marilyn Johnston Willoughby, a daughter of Marie Joe and Rodney Willoughby of Hillsborough, Calif., was married yesterday to Peter Timmins Santry, a son of Julia Santry of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Arthur Santry.
Msgr.
John J. Murphy performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Burlingame, Calif.
Mrs.
Santry is known as Mimi.
She is a vice president and portfolio manager at J. P. Morgan Investment Management Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father retired as a vice president and the treasurer of the Chevron Corporation in San Francisco.


Budget Cuts and Accusations
As budget cuts threaten to increase class size, the School Board and the Mayor accused each other of failing New York City's children.
Articles, pages 26 and 27.


Margaret J. Feron, Eric M. Niles
Margaret Jeanne Feron, the daughter of Jeanne and James M. Feron of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Michael Niles, the son of Joan Niles of Dix Hills, L.I., and the late Arthur R. Niles.
William Gee, the town justice of East Fishkill, N.Y., officiated at the Circle Lodge in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Mrs.
Niles, 29, is a graduate of Marietta College.
Until last year, she was a research associate in Washington for Lehman Brothers, the investment bank.
Her father retired as a reporter for The New York Times.
Her mother, a retired freelance writer, wrote the "Careful Shopper" column for the Westchester Weekly section of The Times.


The Pursuit of Difficulty Leaves Treasures Fresh
HOW OFTEN WE HEAR A PIECE of music has a lot to do with how hard it is to play.
The process works in an unexpected way.
According to my ratio, frequency is directly, not inversely, proportional to difficulty.
A nice example is the Chopin G-minor Ballade, that top-40 breadwinner of the piano recital world.
If the piece were child's play, we might not hear it much at all.
The reason we have ended up knowing it too well is that besides being original and brilliant, it takes a lot of high-class sweat to play.
Music like this separates amateur from professional.
Current concert life is predicated on such separations.


CRIME
Time flies when you're having fun, waiting to die or reading TRUE CRIME (Crown, $21), Andrew Klavan's nerve-plucking suspense novel about . . . well, time.
Time is running out for Frank Beachum, who is due to be executed at one minute past midnight for a murder he did not commit.
Time stops altogether for Michelle Ziegler, a young reporter who is killed on her way to a death cell interview with the condemned man.
Time plays a cruel joke on Steve Everett, the hard-bitten St.
Louis newsman who takes over that fateful interview -- and comes away convinced that Beachum is innocent.


Canton to Fujian All in Chinatown
CANTON * (212) 226-4441; 45 Division Street; $$; no credit cards
Canton is ideal for those who find ordering from encyclopedic Chinese menus a challenge.
The menu here is small and, more often than not, superfluous, because patrons are easily swayed to select from the list of specials offered by Eileen Leang.
Ms.
Leang owns the restaurant with her husband, Larry, the chef.
On a given night, starters could include minced squab cooked with garlic, water chestnuts and peas, wrapped in iceberg lettuce with hoisin sauce; stuffed baby eggplant with a subtle pike mousse; salt-baked scallops, and sizzling clams stuffed with minced pork.
Entrees are straightforward Cantonese for the most part and might include a glazed chicken simply prepared with scallions; Peking duck, served in two courses; shredded beef in a spicy sauce of pepper, and fried sea bass in a hoisin sauce. (Review: 9/27/91; article: 11/27/92)


Don't Limit Park Rangers Pursuing Dogs Off Leash
To the Editor:
As far as I'm concerned, Park Rangers can't be too aggressive in dealing with dog owners ("Pet Owners Growl: Rangers Are Too Dogged," June 4).


GREETINGS FROM MINNESOBER!
I was wryly amused to note that, in his article on Minnesota, Karlen refers to Michael Fay as the Singapore caning victim.
The genuine victims in that incident were the owners of the cars that convicted culprit, Michael Fay, vandalized.
DANIEL AUBRY New York


June 11-17; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


On Blueberry Hill
When I was growing up, I used to think that blueberries were indistinguishable from their constant companion, sugar.
Blueberries were sugared and baked to a bubbling syrup under latticework crust; they were sugared and sprinkled on pancakes, sugared and folded into muffins, sugared and served with cream.
Blueberries and sugar made a nice couple, but like many nice couples, each made the other somehow more palatable.
Sugar mediated the spiciness of blueberries, and the berries gave sugar a hint of pepper and mystery.


Williams Is Released by the Angels
Mitch Williams, unable to revive his career after a half-season retirement, was released yesterday by the California Angels.
Williams, 30, the bullpen hero of Philadelphia's drive to the 1993 National League pennant, but the goat of the Phillies' loss to Toronto in the World Series, was 1-2 with a 6.75 earned run average in 20 games with the Angels.
In 10 2/3 innings, Williams walked 21 and allowed 13 hits. (AP)


Felicia E. White, Stephen F. Collins
Felicia Elizabeth White, the daughter of Mrs.
James R. Hannibal and Walter R. White, both of Omaha, was married yesterday to Stephen Fraser Collins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Collins of Vero Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
Timothy Collins, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the ceremony at St.
Clement's Church in Chicago.
Mrs.
Collins, 26, is an account executive at Margie Korshak, a public relations firm in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Nebraska.
Her father owns Walter White &amp; Associates, manufacturers' representatives in Omaha.


Jonathan A. Prince and Julie Warner
Juliet Mia Warner, the daughter of Neil and Naomi Warner of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Alexander Prince, the son of Dr.
Martin Prince and Gayle Prince, both of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Meyer Heller performed the ceremony at the Ebell Club in Los Angeles.
The bride, 30, who is known as Julie, is an actress in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a composer, pianist and arranger.
Her mother is an independent marketing consultant and the licensing director for Harry N. Abrams Inc., art book publishers in New York.


Sports of The Times; The Price Of Winning The Open
LEE JANZEN had holed his final putt in winning the United States Open two years ago at Baltusrol and Payne Stewart, the 1991 Open champion at Hazeltine, was shaking hands with the new champion.
"Congratulations," Stewart said. "It's going to change your life."


Morality Has No Place in Organ Transplants; A Medical Dilemma
To the Editor:
"Transplants, Morality and Mickey" (Week in Review, June 11) fails to present the legitimate medical dilemma of providing liver transplants to patients with alcoholism.


Broadway Is Well
To the Editor:
It would seem from Vincent Canby's diagnosis of Broadway as stricken with "terminal illness"  [ "Ready for Another Unflattering Close-Up," June 4 ]  that he had not read the previous day's article in The New York Times, which stated that attendance and ticket receipts this past season were at the highest level they have been in 12 years.


But Is It a Movie?
MASAI DREAMING By Justin Cartwright. 287 pp. New York: Random House.


Haiti Resists Increasing Police Force
In the latest dispute over security in Haiti, the Government here is resisting plans by the Clinton Administration to double the size of the country's new police force and to send the additional trainees to the United States for part of their training.
The training of the new force began under United States tutelage four months ago, and the first contingent is scheduled to begin taking over from the interim police force in June.
But President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and several of his advisers oppose Washington's efforts to further strengthen an institution that helped overthrow him in 1991.


New Effort to Keep Samaranch in Power
JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH failed by just two votes this past Thursday to win approval for a charter amendment to abolish age limits for International Olympic Committee members, but a new effort is under way to keep him in power.
Samaranch, the president of the I.O.C., was handed a petition yesterday in Budapest that calls for raising the limit to 80 from 75.
Samaranch turns 75 next month, but would remain the president until his term expires in 1997.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 New York 1900, 1930, 1960.
An architect's historical odyssey.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Tale of a lobbyist: Going to bat for the bodega owners.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9 Matching chess wits (quickly) with Gary Kasparov in Park Slope; a celebration of the turtle in Forest Hills; a bison bonanza in Flushing.
MOVIE CLOCK 11  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of Chinatown; the reliable, pleasing Nice; the persuasive specials at Canton; the seaside cuisine at Great Shanghai; the hot Jing Fong.
SOAPBOX 13 A City University remedial reading teacher weighs in.
And letters.


What's That Thunder? The Donna Karan Sale
BY 9 A.M.
Tuesday, 20 women were already lined up outside an empty showroom in midtown.
Credit cards in hands, fierce looks in their eyes and dressed in easily removable clothes, they bolted as the doors swung open.
Some were held back and told to wait until there was more room inside.
Guards barked at newcomers, "Stay to the left!" Employees, slurping on coffee and grabbing last bites of Danish inside, prepared for pain.


Bridget Guiney And Jay Devine
Bridget Walsh Guiney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis M. Guiney of Radnor, Pa., was married on Friday to John Peter Devine, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Devine Jr. of Gladwyne, Pa.
Anthony Cardinal Bevilacqua, the Archbishop of Philadelphia, performed the ceremony at St.
John Vianney Roman Catholic Church in Gladwyne.
Msgr.
Richard Malone, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Devine graduated summa cum laude from Fairfield University.
She is an executive account manager in the Philadelphia office of AT&amp;T Global Information Solutions, a computer manufacturing division of the communications company.
Her father retired as the sales manager for the Synthane Taylor Corporation, a former plastics manufacturer in Valley Forge, Pa.
Her mother, Patrice, retired as a substitute teacher in the elementary schools of Tredyffrin Township, Pa.


Golf's Appeal Embraced By Professional Women
WHEN it comes to golf, women represent the fastest-growing segment of players.
"Not only are more women attracted to the sport for its recreational value," said Lenore Janis, president of Professional Women in Construction, a trade group, "but women recognize that golf is also very good for business." She added: "And when you're in a male-dominated field like construction, you have to say, 'If golf is where it's at, that's where we'll be,' trying to expand business contacts."


In Astoria, a Different Standard for 'Middle Income'
WHEN it comes to buying a newly built house in New York City, it's sometimes better not to have too much income.
That's because the upper limit of eligibility for a new house constructed for middle-income buyers using public assistance, which most new houses in the city have, is normally $53,000.
Most buyers earn in the mid-$30,000's or low-$40,000's.
But there are often potential buyers of relatively higher income interested in finding housing in some of the far-flung neighborhoods where the city has land usable for home development.
By adjusting downward the level of subsidy made available, housing developed through the New York Housing Partnership, a nonprofit organization established in 1982 to help the city develop new homes, can be targeted to somewhat higher-income buyers.


Norfolk, Long a Host to Legends
PERFORMANCES at Norfolk go back to the early years of the century, when legendary figures like Paderewski, Kreisler, Rachmaninoff and Caruso performed in private recitals at the home of Ellen Battell Stoeckel.
Today, the rolling lawns, gardens, streams and wooded glens of the 70-acre Stoeckel Estate are as beautiful as ever, and the acoustically superb cedar and redwood Music Shed still houses performances by great artists.
Since 1976 the arts at Norfolk have blossomed each summer under the aegis of the Yale School of Music, and Mrs.
Stoeckel's private galas have given way to the public treasure collectively known as the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival.


Helen E. Cutting, Brian D. Fitzgerald
Helen Elizabeth Cutting, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Cutting 2d of Greenwich, Conn., was married there on Friday to Brian David Fitzgerald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Fitzgerald of Wolfeboro, N.H.
The Rev.
Dr.
Avery C. Manchester performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill.
Mrs.
Fitzgerald was until recently the senior manager of special events at Sotheby's, the auction house, in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, who is retired, owned the J. H. Cutting Company, textile selling agents in Greenwich.


Michelle Burnett And Peter K. Wu
Dr.
Michelle Kay Burnett, the clinical director of obstetric anesthesia at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, was married yesterday to Peter Kim Wu, a medical student at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
The Rev.
John R. Frizzell Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Woodrow Wilson House in Washington.
Dr.
Burnett, 36, is keeping her name.
She is also an assistant professor of anesthesiology at Georgetown.
She graduated from George Washington University, from which she also received her medical degree.
She is a daughter of Shizuko Burnett of Camp Hill, Pa., and the late Chief Warrant Officer Leslie S. Burnett.
The bride's father, who was retired from the United States Army, was the chief of labor relations for the Department of Health and Welfare of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Her mother is a designer at Stephenson's Flowers in New Cumberland, Pa.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley and Tina Turner.
Madonna, Elton John and the Blue Brothers join on Wednesday.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City 2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Ray Charles.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP Natalie Cole, June 29-July 3.
Claridge Hotel Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Shaboom," a musical revue about the 50's, with poodle skirts, hot rods, malt shops and rock-and-roll, with Lee Allen and Dane Anthony.
Saturday through Thursday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through next Sunday.
Tickets: $12.50 plus a one-drink minimum.
The Grand Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Liza Minnelli, with Billy Stritch.
Thursday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Friday at 10 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $75.
Next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Harrah's Hotel Casino Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "The Will Rogers Follies," a musical.
Tuesday and Friday at 7 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Through July 4.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel 1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "Hot Cha Cha." Eighteen dancers perform Latin dances, including cha-cha, mambo, merengue and tango.
Monday, Thursday and Friday at 7:30 P.M.; Wednesday at 3 and 7:30 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15; for matinees, $10.
COMING UP "The Coconut Ballroom," with the McGuire Sisters and Pia Zadora.
Starts June 29.
Sands Hotel and Casino Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COMING UP Clint Holmes's "Sophisticated Rhythms." Opens July 1.
Showboat Hotel Casino Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with music, humor, dancing and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Ralph Pope, comedian; the dancing Williams Brothers; Dolores Park, singer, and Peter Gossamer, illusionist.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through next Saturday.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM Aretha Franklin, with Brian Copeland, comedian.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP Dick Fox's "Doo Wop," July 26-31.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
COMING UP Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On," July 1.
The Beach Boys, July 6-9.
Trump Plaza Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
COMING UP Lou Rawls, June 30-July 3.
Donna Summer, July 5-9.
The Temptations, July 11-16.
Trump Taj Mahal 1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
GRAND BALLROOM "A Tribute to the Platters," with Sonny Turner, singer.
Starts tomorrow.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50, $15 on Saturday.
John Michael Montgomery, Friday at 9 P.M.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


New Terror Campaign by Drug Traffickers Feared in Colombia
The senior Colombian official in charge of trying to combat the drug trade says that a series of bombings and the assassinations of two high-ranking police officials in Colombia in the last two weeks suggest the beginnings of a new terror campaign by some of the country's cocaine and heroin traffickers.
A small bomb exploded in a storage room in the Congress building in Bogota late on Thursday night without injuring anyone.
A larger bomb, detonated at an outdoor music festival in Medellin, killed at least 29 people on June 10.


A Year of Rancorous Exchanges Ended With Cortines's Decision
The latest battle with City Hall was reaching a boil three weeks ago when Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines left New York to spend the Memorial Day weekend at the home he has kept in Pasadena, Calif.
As Mr.
Cortines sat by his pool in his neatly landscaped backyard, a friend from New York turned to him and said, "Remind me again why you're in New York."
"He just laughed," said the friend, Chip Block.


Naomi Schussler, Jonathan Mermin
Naomi Schussler, a daughter of Eileen M. Schussler of Monticello, N.Y., and Dr.
George C. Schussler of New York, is to be married today to Jonathan George Mermin, the son of Dorothy and N. David Mermin of Ithaca, N.Y.
Rabbi Lawrence Edwards is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
The bride, 28, is the environmental policy analyst for the lead poisoning prevention program at Tufts University in Medford, Mass.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Boston University.
Her father is a professor of medicine at the State University Health Science Center and the director of the thyroid clinic at Kings County Hospital Center, both in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a home-care nurse in Sullivan County, N.Y.


How to Sell Your House in a Hurry
WITH a company transfer in hand, you take the plunge and move up to a more expensive home in a new city.
But while you unpack those hundreds of boxes, butterflies crowd your stomach.
And they're not just anxieties about a new job in a new place.
You still haven't sold your old house.
And you're ready to try anything to unload it.
For you and other would-be home sellers, the July issue of Smart Money describes a do-it-yourself home auction in an article titled "Going Once . . . Going Twice . . ." It focuses on one family's intensely trying, though ultimately successful, experience.


The Budget: A Train Wreck?
President Clinton's spokesman says the President offered a 10-year plan to balance the budget last week to avert a "catastrophic train wreck" in Congress this fall.
"He wants to make sure we do not run into a train wreck," added Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin.
Senator Jim Exon, a Nebraska Democrat on the Budget Committee, warned, "There is going to be a train wreck at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue." Speaker Newt Gingrich has said a budgetary "train wreck scenario" is unfolding.
Good grief!
Are all politicians descended from Casey Jones?
What is this train wreck, anyway?


Former Police Corruption-Fighter on Peer Pressure and Ethics
John Guido was in charge of uprooting and deterring corruption in New York City's Police Department from 1972 to 1986 -- a period viewed by most police experts as one of the cleanest in the department's history.
He retired in 1986 as Chief of Inspectional Services and the Internal Affairs Division, with a reputation as the most hated commander on the force because of his relentless investigations.
Last week, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Comissioner William J. Bratton announced a new set of anticorruption measures to clean up a department troubled by a series of scandals.
In an interview.
Mr.
Guido (pronounced GUY-doe) discussed the corruption problems that are again besetting the department and ways of combatting police misconduct.
SELWYN RAAB


The Executive Dining Room Slims Down
IN the 1980's, scores of corporations around the country built opulent, architecturally significant executive dining rooms that mirrored the heady business climate.
Today, many of those rooms are used to store office furniture.


Roberta Tepper, Stephen M. Wolf
Roberta Vivian Tepper, the fashion director of Harper's Bazaar magazine in New York, and Stephen Michael Wolf, the owner of the State Painting and Decorating Company, also in New York, were married on Thursday at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony.


Disney Tries Harder in France
Space Mountain, a roller coaster at Disneyland Paris that is the park's 11th addition since its debut in 1992, opened at the beginning of this month.
Inspired by Jules Verne's novel "From the Earth to the Moon," the roller coaster hurls passengers into darkness and takes them speeding by meteorites and the moon.


Streetscapes/80 Leonard Street; Remnant of a Major 19th-Century Architectural Fad
THE 1861 marble-fronted building at 80 Leonard Street is now just a cold, burned-out shell, but its arcaded facade was one of the hottest architectural fads of the mid-19th century.
The owner says a restoration of the structure, between Broadway and Church Street, is near.
And if you think all loft buildings are alike, a trip past 80 Leonard Street and its siblings might prove otherwise.


Kite a Poster Boy for Brutal Round
Tom Kite was already nine over par for the day as he stood over his putt on the 18th green today, but things were about to get worse.
Kite missed the putt and scored a bogey 5 for a round of 80, then in the scorer's tent he revealed that the ball had moved slightly during his address.
It cost him a two-stroke penalty, and Kite, a strong believer in the sanctity of golf's rules, had to take a triple-bogey 7 on the hole.
His 18-hole score of 82 matched his highest ever in 80 previous rounds in the United States Open.
His other 82?
It came in his very first Open round, as an amateur in 1970.
Pain in Spain Key to Ryder Cup
Nagging injuries to two of its best players, both Spaniards, threatens to weaken the European Ryder Cup team, which will try to recapture the trophy in September.


Sound and Light Show at Miami International
International visitors to Miami are now treated to the croaking of frogs from the Everglades and the tropical colors of South Florida just as soon as they step off the airplane at Miami International Airport.
In a work entitled "Harmonic Runway," Christopher Janney, a Boston artist, has framed an airport corridor with 132 sheets of transparent colored glass, each 10 feet high, that when hit by sunlight, are designed to make travelers feel as if they are, in Mr.
Janney's words, "walking through a rainbow." At night, the effect is achieved with artificial lighting.


Stalin and His Victims
To the Editor:
In his remarks about "Stalin's Letters to Molotov, 1925-1936" ("Revelations, Secrets, Gossip and Lies: Sifting Warily Through the Soviet Archives," May 14), Steven Merritt Miner says that the editors make "silly observations, like one about Stalin's 'sincerity and his leadership skills.' Rather than revealing a great leader, these letters portray a deceitful man gripped by a dark view of humanity and of the world as a pit of unremitting, mortal struggle."


ENDPAPER
Thank you for Karen Kuehn's delightful Endpaper photograph.
When that darling girl has her baby, please tell us about her or him.
PAT M. MILLER Hinsdale, Ill.


Q and A
Back to East Prussia
Q.
As a native of Konigsberg in East Prussia I would very much like to pay a visit there.
Are there any hotels or other facilities?
Unlike East Germany, East Prussia was annexed by the Russians and seems to be not easily accessible. -- Esra Sherry, Philadelphia


JUST A DAMN MINUTE
Thank you for James Gleick's "Just a Damn Minute" (Fast Forward, May 14).
The 2.5 minutes it took me to read the column was time well spent.
RITA ROSENKRANZ New York


In Miami Indictment, Issue Is How Far Lawyers Can Go
William Moran, a Miami defense lawyer who specializes in drug cases, had an inquisitive client.
Was it true, the client wanted to know, that a certain doctor from Colombia had been telling tales about him to Federal investigators?
Mr.
Moran confirmed his client's suspicions, Federal officials say, and within weeks the doctor, Rafael Lombrano, was gunned down with a silencer-equipped pistol in front of a Miami restaurant.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 18, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
34
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
2
12
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
3
6
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
4
5
ALL THAT GLITTERS, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) From plantation house to shanty: Ruby's marital ordeals continue.
5
2
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
6
4
UNTIL FOREVER, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) A 10th-century sword enables a woman to take a romantic journey through the past.
7
6
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
8
3
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $6.99.) V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
9
23
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
10
9
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
11
1
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
12
7
THE KEY TO MIDNIGHT, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A 1979 novel about a man who helps a troubled nightclub singer in Japan.
13
2
WALKING SHADOW, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser investigates the murder of a member of a theatrical troupe.
14
1
TALK BEFORE SLEEP, by Elizabeth Berg. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Four women rally around a friend who has breast cancer.
15*
1
THE INTRUDERS, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $6.99.) Jake Grafton, a Navy man, has a combative time teaching marines on a carrier.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
39
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
6
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
3
12
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
4*
75
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
38
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
6*
4
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
606
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
5
SELENA! by Clint Richmond. (Pocket, $5.99.) A bilingual account of the life and career, ending in murder, of the Mexican-American singer.
9
1
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of an American family.
10
27
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
11
118
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
12
17
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
13*
6
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, by Jim Carroll. (Penguin, $10.95.) The coming of age of a poet and rock performer in New York in the 1960's.
14*
8
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected places.
15
7
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society to meet the conditions of the 21st century.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
38
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
7
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
4
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
216
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Polka Break
IN lavish white gowns the pageant contestants paraded in front of the judges.
Then they danced the polka.
Solemnly they read essays on why they wanted to be queen.
Then they danced the polka.
And after answering the all-important fishbowl question, it was back to the dance floor one more time.
When the contest is for Miss Polish Town U.S.A., the polka is an required element.
Last weekend at the Polish Town Hall in Riverhead six young women vied for the queen's crown.
For residents of Polish Town, a tightly knit community of families and store owners of Polish heritage, the contest was the Miss America pageant, homecoming and New Year's Eve all rolled into one.


Cancer Patient in Chicago Dies After Chemotherapy Overdose
Two weeks ago, Vincent Gargano was successfully receiving chemotherapy for cancer and was told by his doctors that he would soon be home.
But he died earlier this week after a doctor accidentally prescribed an overdose of an anticancer medication, hospital officials said.
Mr.
Gargano, a 41-year-old postal worker from Des Plaines, Ill., was admitted to the University of Chicago Hospitals on May 26 for his third and final treatment for germ-cell cancer.


A Healthy Start For Oysters
This spring, for the first time since Dermo parasites killed off most of the Delaware Bay oysters in 1991, there was an oyster planting season in the Lower Delaware Bay.
For 10 days in April, oystermen dredged up seed oysters from the Upper Bay and took them to saltier planting grounds to grow fat and flavorful.
The oysters were not only numerous, they were healthy.
Researchers from the Haski Shellfish Research Laboratory in the oyster port of Bivalve rated the prevalence of Dermo at 0.2 on a scale of 0 to 5.
And Joseph Dobarro, principal fisheries biologist of the Bureau of Shellfisheries in the Department of Environmental Protection's Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife, who works out of the Haskin lab, said that the 3,000 bushels of seed oysters brought in for market were yielding 6 or 7 pints of meat per bushel.


French Plans For A-Tests Incite Anger
Governments across the Pacific have condemned France over its plans to resume nuclear testing in Polynesia this fall, with diplomatic protests and calls for consumer boycotts heard from Australia to New Zealand to the tiny island nations of the southern Pacific.
Prime Minister James Bolger of New Zealand has described the resumption of nuclear testing by the French as "the arrogant action of a European colonial power," and Prime Minister Paul Keating of Australia has accused France of "environmental vandalism."


Corporate Doctors Have Priorities Straight
To the Editor:
A recent article asks "Can a Visit to the Company Doc Help a Cold but Hurt a Career?" (Earning It, May 21).
The answer has to be a resounding no.
By raising concerns about privacy and confidentiality your article diminishes the trust that is a foundation for the medical care delivered by numerous corporate medical departments.
The only ones to suffer from this unwarranted anxiety are the patients themselves.


Corrections
An article on June 4 about the effort of the Thomas Paine National Historical Association in New Rochelle to place a monument to Paine in Washington misstated the surname of a retired association officer seeking the statue's approval.
She is Florence Stapleton, not Stevenson.


Just Warming Up for a Very Big Event
SUE OLSEN, just 16 days short of the due date for her first child, ran the entire Grandma's Marathon in Duluth, Minn., yesterday and finished in 4 hours 50 seconds.
The 38-year-old Olsen, who received permission from her doctor on Wednesday to run the race, had her husband, TOM, drive parallel to the course with a cellular phone in case she went into labor.
MARK CURP of Lee's Summit, Mo., won the marathon in 2:15:23.
IRINA BOGACHEVA of St.
Petersburg, Russia, won the women's title in 2:34:11. (AP)


Don't Limit Park Rangers Pursuing Dogs Off Leash
To the Editor:
It is ridiculous for dog owners to complain about the crackdown on leash-less dogs in the parks when they have been flagrantly disregarding the law for years.


Helping the Renaissance Ballroom Live Up to Its Name
On a recent gray morning at 138th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, the Renaissance Ballroom looked like a ghostly reminder of its former glittering self -- the only remaining evidence of its heyday a sagging marquee and a faded sign for the Chinese restaurant that used to be one floor up.
Just down the block, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts was halfway through a glazed doughnut in his office at the Abyssinian Baptist Church, waxing lyrical about what the ballroom will be like once the church's development corporation is through restoring it.


Cutting Taxes: Cost or Benefit?
Supporters of Governor Whitman's plan to cut the state income tax by another 15 percent say it will distribute the tax burden more fairly and stimulate the economy.
Opponents say her timing is unwise, given the possibility of large cuts in Federal aid or a recession, and they claim it will lead to higher property taxes.
What do you think?
Not Worth the Stress


Robin Kaulfuss, Jeremy Stein
Robin Creighton Kaulfuss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Thompson Kaulfuss of Bethlehem, Pa., was married yesterday to Jeremy Vail Stein, the son of Susan Vail Berresford and David F. Stein, both of New York.
Mayor Kenneth Smith of Bethlehem officiated on the Village Green at Eagles Mere, Pa.
The Rev.
John L. McCausland, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Stein, 24, is a junior account executive at Emerling Post, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the president of an insurance and financial planning company in Bethlehem that bears his name.


Kristen Kossick, Michael Swenson
Kristen Elizabeth Kossick, a daughter of Sherry L. Kossick of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., and the late Robert M. Kossick, was married yesterday to Michael John Swenson, a son of George H. Swenson of Clifton Park, N.Y., and the late Janice L. Swenson.
The Rev.
John Breen performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in Tuxedo, N.Y.
Mrs.
Swenson, 27, is an associate in the structured ratings group at Standard &amp; Poor's in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father was the chairman and chief executive of the National Community Bank in West Paterson, N.J.


R.E.M. Deconstructs the Rock-and-Roll Light Show
AS THE ALTERNATIVE rock band R.E.M. embarked on its much anticipated 1995 world tour in January, one pressure it faced was how to light and stage its concerts with the arty iconoclasm and strong visuals for which the band has come to be known.
But art sometimes misses the nosebleed seats in 80,000-seat stadiums.
Lasers?
Hopelessly passe.
Jumpy videos edited to within a digital whisker of every downbeat?
Let's see, Pink Floyd has pretty much cornered the market on the flying-pig franchise.
R.E.M.'s image has always been contradictory: it is an internationally known band still based in this tiny college town; its pop accessibility has somehow never threatened its grunge credibility.
Characteristically, the band has created a hybrid that is perfectly consistent with that image: the spectacular anti-spectacle.
When the band arrives at Madison Square Garden on Thursday to begin a three-night engagement, pyrophiles beware.
There will be no computerized light changes, no video monitors competing with the musicians on stage, no son et lumiere pretensions.
Instead, audiences will see an eclectic and remarkably improvised ensemble of films shown intermittently on big, clunky projectors operated by, surprising enough, actual people.


Before Lightning Strikes
FEW natural phenomena are as fierce, fickle and frequent as a summer storm.
And few summer sights are as awe-inspiring as a 40,000-ampere bolt of lightning performing its brief, brilliant, pyrotechnic dance in the distance.
But what happens when Zeus picks your roof for the performance?


Tidying Up Amid Spring's Faded Foliage
THE spring-flowering bulbs were magnificent this year.
Starting with the earliest snowdrops and snowflakes, through the crocus and glory of the snow, on to the daffodils and tulips, the show was as steady as it was spectacular.
Now that the bulb season is over, however, and the glory gone by is just memories, there remains a good deal of foliage.
And some of it, particularly that of the late tulips, is ugly.


Making a Day of Fantasy for the Bride and Groom: 'Just One More!'
HE posed them on the roof.
He posed them on the street.
He posed her in her Vera Wang bridal gown and him in his tuxedo eating a hot dog from a Fifth Avenue vendor.
And when Andy Marcus finished posing the bride and groom, in, on and around the St.
Regis Hotel, the couple, Penny Ehrlich of Roslyn Harbor and Michael Stein of Merrick, headed back into the hotel to be married.
It seemed almost anticlimatic.


June 11-17: Dis-Disarmament; A Nuclear Bargain Begins to Unravel
In 1992, the United States and Russia struck a deal.
In exchange for $12 billion in hard currency, Russia would sell America 500 metric tons of bomb-grade uranium -- enough, if diluted into reactor fuel, to run the 109 operating nuclear power plants in the United States for about a decade.
The pact was embraced by the Bush and Clinton Administrations.
But now, price disputes and private interests threaten the deal.
Moscow says Washington is seeking a lower price for the nuclear material than was originally agreed upon.
The company that Washington has made its negotiating agent says the deal is in good shape and Russians are simply wily bargainers.
But the agent is also a federally owned company in the process of being privatized and, like any business, is seeking to maximize its profits.


Deborah Flagg, Christopher Smith
Deborah Selby Flagg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Flagg of Redding, Conn., was married on Fire Island yesterday to Christopher Manley Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
William Smith Jr. of Norwich, N.Y.
The Rev.
Daniel M. Young, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Point O'Woods (L.I.) Church.
The Rev.
Armando C. Russo, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Smith, 27, is a program associate for the International Marine Mammal Project of the Earth Island Institute, an environmental conservation group in San Francisco.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is an architect in Redding.
Her mother, Terry Flagg, is a landscape designer there.


Carolyn J. Loh, Robert Norden
Carolyn Jean Loh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Loh of Old Tappan, N.J., is to be married today to Robert Charles Davis Norden, the son of Jacqueline Norden of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and Robert Norden of Manhattan.
The Rev.
Edwin H. Cromey, an Episcopal priest, is to officiate at St.
Mary's-in-Tuxedo Episcopal Church in Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph H. Murphy, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 31, is a designer and illustrator specializing in infant product design and children's book illustration.
She graduated from Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a special correspondent for The Associated Press in New York.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Where Do Amateurs Play? Now You Can Look It Up
Larry Lux, a 37-year-old building manager and sports enthusiast from Rosedale, Queens, is amazed at how many people want to play amateur basketball or volleyball -- and at how few know how to go about it.
"They just don't know how to join all the leagues in this city," he said.
"They also don't know how many sports this city has to offer on the amateur level."
Mr.
Lux's solution: Sports City New York, a magazine that covers amateur in-line skating, horseback riding, biking, basketball, volleyball, softball, Frisbee, running and rugby in Manhattan.
Some 100,000 copies of the first issue were delivered last week to 500 locations in Manhattan, including health clubs, bike shops and sporting goods stores, where they are available free.
Plans call for the next issue to come out in September, and for Sports City New York to be published every other month afterward.
An Ice-Cream Parlor Where Fido Is Welcome
Chip Fisher has run an ice-cream parlor, Mr.
Chips, in Carnegie Hill for the last year.
Many of the area's youngsters stop in as they walk home from school in the company of their nannies, their parents and even their dogs.
But under the city's health code, dogs are banned from the shop at 27 East 92d Street between Fifth and Madison Avenues.
"I let the dogs in anyway," Mr.
Fisher said.
"I know it's breaking the law, but I want to change the law." Some customers, he said, fear dogs will bring in germs, a concern he thinks is unfounded.
He's not alone.
Mr.
Fisher, along with Bern Marcowitz and Margot Rosenberg, owners of the Dog Lovers Bookshop at 9 West 31st Street, have petitioned the Health Department to allow dogs into food establishments.
Crystal Companies Cluster Along Madison Ave.
Something of a crystal corridor is taking shape along the east side of Madison Avenue from the 50's to the upper 60's.
Baccarat Inc., the crystal and china retailer, has signed a 15-year lease for 8,600 square feet on two floors at 625 Madison Avenue, at 59th Street.
Baccarat has been in the building for the last seven years but not in the corner space, which had been occupied by Movado.
Three blocks north, Hoya Crystal plans to move into the site of the Bally shoe store, at 62d Street.
Also on that block are Rogaska, the Slovenian crystal company, and Royal Copenhagen/George Jensen.


In the Age of Megalopolis
THE ARCHITECT Robert A. M. Stern has written a chronicle of New York City's changing face that fills three hefty volumes, weighs more than 15 pounds and has five times as many pages as the Manhattan phone book.
And he hasn't even finished with the 20th century, much less started the 19th.
"New York is not tidy and neat," says Mr.
Stern, who just turned 56 and lives on the Upper East Side.


Is It Checkout Time for Hotel Project?
Attempting to spur a long-delayed plan to build a hotel and office complex in downtown Brooklyn, city officials have ordered its developer to come up with a definitive financing plan by Friday or face the loss of the project.
It has been a decade since the developer, Joshua L. Muss, first came up with a plan to build the complex known as Renaissance Plaza.
Since then there have been long discussions about sources of funding, possible tenants and companies to manage the hotel.
But no ground was ever broken.


Handicapped Athletes Training for '96 in Atlanta
JACKIE DiLORENZO is world-ranked in table tennis, has competed internationally in the javelin throw, dances for her own professional dance company and has played in movies and television with celebrities like Harrison Ford and Penny Marshall.
She does it all from her wheelchair.
Ms.
DiLorenzo has been a paraplegic since childhood when she was stricken with polio.
The Hastings-on-Hudson resident is training at the Burke Rehabilitation Center in White Plains for her fourth Paralympic Games.
Her chosen sport for the '96 games in Atlanta is table tennis.
She plays regularly in international competition in order to defend her world ranking.
She is now ranked fourth in the world in table tennis for athletes with disabilities.


Professional Golfer or Flower Child?
"Who's the ditz wearing the daisy on his head?" asked a spectator at the United States Open in Shinnecock Hills, observing one of the golfers as he approached the ninth green.
"I don't know," replied his friend. "But it looks like he belongs in a flower pot."


Sweet Charity
MY LUCKY STARS A Hollywood Memoir.
By Shirley MacLaine.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
New York.
Bantam Books.


Who Said 'Buy' to a Fizzled Play on Outer Space?
THE BEEF: G. Frank Bruel Jr., 65, says his broker called him after the close of trading on Nov. 15, 1993, to tell him he was the proud owner of $25,300 worth of penny shares in E-Prime Aerospace, a Florida company that says it is attempting to develop commercial space launch vehicles.
Mr.
Bruel says he told his broker that he hadn't decided to buy E-Prime, but says the broker told him it was too late to stop the trade.
His investment is now worth $6,600.
THE BROKER: James W. Bullard, of J.W.
Bullard &amp; Co., maintains that Mr.
Bruel knew of the purchase of E-Prime, according to the broker's lawyer.
Mr.
Bullard went out of business "voluntarily" a year go, and is not working at the moment, the lawyer said.
Mr.
Bullard has been disciplined by Federal, state and private regulators, all on matters unrelated to Mr.
Bruel's complaints.


June 11-17; Babes in Toonland: Boop to Brat
HERE'S the first thing you notice about Pocohantas: she's sexy.
She's a playful tease.
Her body is dark and lithe and her hair flaps seductively in the wind.
Even the animals are entranced.
She isn't alone.
To look at cartoon beauties from Betty Boop to Pocahontas is to chronicle a shifting modern fantasy, the fantasy of pretty young women wandering alone in a world of dangerous men.


Miss LeBuhn, Mr. MacCowatt
Anne Mitchell LeBuhn, a daughter of Robert LeBuhn of New Vernon, N.J., and the late Jo-Ann Fitzsimmons LeBuhn, was married yesterday to Thomas Haskell MacCowatt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haskell P. MacCowatt of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Ross Forbes performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Westfield, N.J.
Mrs.
MacCowatt, 36, is a senior product manager in the marketing department of the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as the chairman of Investor International (U.S.) Inc., an investment trust in New York.
He is now the president of the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation, the philanthropic organization based in Morristown, N.J.


June 11-17; Canadian Socks Appeal


Two Solo Performers Embrace Multitudes
AT A TIME WHEN SOCIETY SEEMS atomized into stridently contentious religious, ethnic and sexual factions, the chameleonlike solo performer who portrays many different characters may be the closest thing in contemporary theater to a social healer.
Watching the one-man Off Broadway shows of James Lecesne and Dan Butler, who traverse sexual and philosophical boundaries by jumping into the skins of one character after another, it is hard to deny the notion that each of us contains multitudes.
"My show is about our interconnectedness, and how we are all aspects of one another," said Mr.
Lecesne, who is 40 and portrays 10 different characters in "Word of Mouth," which plays Sundays and Mondays at the Promenade Theater.
"It's something I think people want to hear and need to hear."


Unlike Father, Son Gets Racing Honors Quickly
MY dad's my best friend," said John Nelson of Pleasantville, as he contemplated Father's Day recently. But behind that simple statement is a complex road traveled with, and in, racing cars.
Walter Nelson and his son John are both amateur driving champions, but one cannot say it's in the genes.
They were not introduced at birth.
Rather, Walter Nelson married John's mother, Nancy, when John was 7.


Jennifer Charlston, Andrew Williams
Jennifer Ann Charlston, a daughter of Harry and Mary Ann Charlston of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Andrew Spencer Williams, a son of Lauren and Judith Williams of John's Island, Fla.
The Rev.
John E. Halborg performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Williams, 29, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is an account manager in Chicago in the corporate division of Tiffany &amp; Company.
Her father is the founder and president of Apollo Presentation Products, a manufacturer in Ronkonkoma, L.I.


Hong Kong
THE NICE RESTAURANT ** (212) 406-9776; 35 East Broadway, near Catherine Street; $$; American Express
Romantic dining this is not, but for reliably pleasing Hong Kong-style Chinese food, consider the Nice.
The menu simply lists everything together, not as appetizers, main courses and desserts.
A good way to begin might be with minced squab and mushrooms to wrap in lettuce leaves, or barbecued pork, hacked into finger-food portions, with a honey glaze.
Also recommended are the roasted duck, salt-baked chicken with scallions and sauteed squid with black-bean sauce and green peppers. (Review: 3/9/90; revisited: 11/5/93) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


To Save Its Last Open Land, Essex County Wants to Sell It
High atop the Hilltop tract, James TrefHfinger, the Essex County Executive, paused to admire the view.
"This would make a beautiful walking trail," he said, pointing down an overgrown road, lined with wild rose bushes, that once led to the county tuberculosis sanitarium.
"Isn't it amazing up here?"


Karen R. Guss, Lewis Rosman
Karen Rose Guss, a daughter of Susan Guss and David Martin Guss, both of Arden Heights, S.I., is to be married today to Lewis Rosman, a son of Dr.
Bernice L. Rosman of Philadelphia and Prof.
Abraham Rosman of New York.
Rabbi Shelley Kovar Becker is to perform the ceremony at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Livingston, S.I.
Ms.
Guss, who is 26 and is keeping her name, is a women's law and public policy fellow in the office of the First Lady in Washington.
She graduated summa cum laude from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She and the bridegroom received their law degrees from the University of Virginia.
Her father teaches history at Staten Island Technical High School in New Dorp, S.I.
Her mother is a clerk in the information systems department at the main post office in New York.


Everyone Invited
To the Editor:
I applaud Veronica Chambers for her essay "An Emptiness in the Late-Night Laughter"  [ May 21 ] .
"The Arsenio Hall Show" is off the air, and late-night television is definitely not the same.
Arsenio Hall introduced America to a slice of black culture rarely seen on television.
He may not have scored high points with critics, but he invited everyone to his late-night party.
JOY ROGERS  Queens, N.Y.


Both Sides Claim Success on Budget
DEMOCRATS say they fought the good fight in Albany this spring, holding back the full force of a proposed spending package they termed mean spirited and harsh.
As Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, a Democrat and Liberal from Scarsdale, put it: "It was a matter of competing social perspectives. We fought to save the middle class."
Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget proposal called for increases in tuition at State University campuses, less money for public schools and cuts in state aid for nursing homes, hospitals and home care, among other things.


Why the Kirov's 'Firebird' Is Taking Fresh Flight
THE FIREBIRD HAS COME home to Russia.
So has the Firebird's creator, the choreographer Michel Fokine.
It has been both an eventful journey into art, politics and history, and the harmonious resolution of a wrenching struggle with family tradition.
Tomorrow, when the Kirov Ballet of St.
Petersburg begins a two-week engagement at the Metropolitan Opera House in Lincoln Center, the program will include "Firebird," "Chopiniana" and "Scheherazade," three major works by Fokine, the Russian choreographer who was born in 1880 and is this century's greatest balletic innovator.


Aili E. Webber, Arthur Bresnahan
Aili Edith Webber and Arthur Patrick Bresnahan, law associates in Chicago, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University in New York.
The bride's grandfather the Rev.
George W. Webber, a minister of the United Church of Christ, who is a president emeritus of the New York Theological Seminary, officiated.
The Rev.
Robert Lott, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Bresnahan, 25, works in the Chicago office of Jackson, Lewis, Schnitzler &amp; Krupman, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Columbia, and she and her husband received their law degrees from Georgetown University.
She is the daughter of Drs.
Andrea B. Webber and Thomas L. Webber of New York.
The bride's father is the executive director of the Edwin Gould Academy in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Her mother is an internist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx and at North Central Bronx Hospital.


Knicks' Future Is Now, So Coach Must Be Proven
The Knicks are beginning a critical off season with no coach, no draft choices and no time to waste.
Pat Riley's decision to walk away from his job and $15 million was shocking in many respects.
But it did not change a basic fact: The Knicks have not won a championship since 1973.
And unless they win one soon, it may not happen for a long time.


New Anti-Scam Regulations
THE National Fraud Information Center, a nonprofit group, ranks travel scams as the second most frequent type of fraud in the country, after sweepstakes, saying travel fraud costs consumers and legitimate companies $12 billion a year.
Travel scams underwent a growth spurt in the 80's, with the advent of fierce interstate telephone marketing of $29 cruises and other dubious offers.
Although education is the only real protection, people who have been defrauded, as well as travel agents and operators, have been hoping for a way to prosecute wrongdoers.


Constance Gager, Daniel E. Grupp
Constance T. Gager, a daughter of Patricia T. Gager of Harwichport, Mass., and the late John G. Gager, was married yesterday to Daniel Edmund Grupp, the son of Naomi and Michael Grupp of Brooklyn.
The bridegroom's father, a leader emeritus of the Ethical Culture Society in Brooklyn, officiated at the Beach House Inn in Harwichport.
Ms.
Gager, who is 33 and is keeping her name, is a doctoral candidate in sociology at the University of Pennsylvania, where she is also a research assistant on marital happiness and the division of labor in the family.
She graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in geography from the University of Vermont.
Her father retired as a vice president of Traveler's Insurance in Worcester, Mass.


BDM Utters Magic Word: Technology
FOR BDM International, what a difference a year makes.
And that difference tells volumes about how hot it has gotten in the market for new technology stocks.
Based in McLean, Va., BDM is a military contractor that now calls itself an information technology company.
Investors wouldn't have touched its stock a few years ago.
And last year, investor indifference and stock-market queasiness forced the company to delay its initial public offering and instead to buy back the stock of some private shareholders who wanted to cash out.


Cigarette Recall Is Good News for Lawyers
To the Editor:
Regarding your article on the recall of eight billion cigarettes at a cost to Philip Morris of over $100 million ("Tobacco: Now Will You Stop Smoking?," Diary, June 4), one segment of our economy will certainly profit.
With Philip Morris accusing Hoechst Celanese of supplying contaminated filter fibers, lawyers for both sides should reap a financial harvest.


Cars for Europe
To the Editor: Conventional wisdom as quoted in the Practical Traveler ("European Cars: Renting for Less," March 26) has it that it is cheaper to book rental cars for European vacations in the States before leaving for Europe.
This is not always true, at least not in London, where last spring the Hertz offices had their own rates and own promotions that were cheaper than anything that Hertz quoted in the United States.
Travelers should not assume that they are getting a bargain because they booked in the States.
It pays to ask what the local rates are before you pick up your car.
SUSAN GOTBETTER  New York, N.Y.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  RUSSIAN HOSTAGE CRISIS  Russian troops failed twice to take the hospital complex where Chechen fighters held hostages, and negotiations with the Chechen fighters resumed.  1  G-7 LEADERS WARN YELTSIN  The leaders of the seven leading industrial nations warned President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia concerning the military campaign in Chechnya and the sale of nuclear reactors to Iran.  1


CRIME: School for Snoops
Students at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville are getting a chance to learn what may be the most hated form of law enforcement.
Harvey Kushner, who heads the school's criminal-justice department, has brought in two agents of the Internal Revenue Service to teach financial investigations.
It's a course designed to teach snoops-in-training to shine the cold light of the law on the murkiest corners of Form 1040 or the most subtly laundered ill-gotten gains.
"In our curriculum," Kushner says, "there's more than a modicum of cynicism."


Claire Sterling, 76, Dies; Writer on Crime and Terror
Claire Sterling, an American author and correspondent based in Italy, who was known for her writings on terrorism, assassination and crime, died yesterday in a hospital in Arezzo, Italy.
She was 76 and lived in outside of Cortona, near Arezzo.
She had cancer of the colon, her husband said.


No Headline
"Across the country, we are seeing more and more neighborhoods where father-absent families are the norm. There are 180 neighborhoods where at least 90 percent of the families are fatherabsent. Young men there, when they have babies, may not know what their role can be." RALPH R. SMITH, director of planning and development at the Annie E. Casey Foundation.  [ 1:4. ]


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PSYCHO  Behind the Scenes  of the Classic Thriller.
By Janet Leigh  with Christopher Nickens.
Harmony, $22.


Libby Nelson, Shane Hiltabrand
Elizabeth Mitchell Nelson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis A. Nelson 3d of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Larry Shane Hiltabrand, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Hiltabrand of Gales Ferry, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Hammett performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Union Chapel in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
Mrs.
Hiltabrand, 26, is known as Libby.
She is an assistant account executive at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, the advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
Her mother, Adele B. Nelson, owns ABN Advertising, an agency in Bernardsville.


June 11-17: Seeking Balance; Clinton's Latest Flip On the Budget Flops With Congress
As time goes by, what may stick in people's minds about President Clinton's television address last week is the reaction of Representative David R. Obey of Wisconsin, the top Democrat on the Appropriations Committee.
"I think most of us learned some time ago," he said, "that if you don't like the President's position on a particular issue, you simply need to wait a few weeks."
Rarely has a politician of Mr.
Obey's stature offered such a devastating appraisal of a President from his own party.
But Mr.
Clinton has done more about-faces on the budget than the guards at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.


DANGEROUS WORLD: The Hazzards of Summer
Summertime officially begins Wednesday.
The living, as the song has it, is easy.
But it's also risky.
Summer is the season of sunburn, sprained ankles, lightning strikes and drownings, among other dangers.
Here's a mixed bag of statistics on just how dangerous different recreational activities are.
The numbers can help with health and safety considerations as you start vacation planning.
Hang gliding or boating?
Swimming or billiards?
Read On.
SWIMMING PARTICIPANTS: More than 63 million in 1994.
DEATHS: 3,400.
Most were drownings.
Also included in this tally are people who fell into pools, oceans or lakes.
Numbers suggest that swimming is more dangerous than bowling and less dangerous than hang gliding.
INJURIES: About 120,000.
Plus an estimated 500,000 unreported jellyfish stings.
BOWLING


Rough Go on Diamond For Diamond in Rough
Far too often in the still young 1995 season, the Mets have exited stage right to the sound of one hand clapping.
Yesterday, it was no different for the latest to don the blue and orange.
Bill Pulsipher, the first of a series of young pitchers whose expected arrivals have been heralded by the Mets, made his major league debut.


Corrections
The Your Home column last Sunday, about restrictions on the use of lobby entrances for doctors' offices, misstated the given name of a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in co-ops.
He is Edward T. Braverman, not Paul.


Careful Defense Pays Off For Devils
They could have known if they had cable and were paying attention.
But the devoted fans of the Detroit Red Wings, who were counting on the end of a four-decade wait for the safe return of the Stanley Cup into their hands, had a joy ride to occupy their thoughts.
After the Red Wings cruised through the first three rounds of the playoffs, undefeated at home, celebrating the thrilling one-goal victories over Chicago, their fans made a jarring discovery tonight: Playing the New Jersey Devils is painless, until the green light is lit and the final horn sounds.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
MY DAD Written and illustrated by Niki Daly.
Unpaged.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $16. (Ages 5 to 8)  MY OL' MAN  Written and illustrated by Patricia Polacco.
Unpaged.
New York: Philomel Books. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9)  PAPA TELLS CHITA A STORY  By Elizabeth Fitzgerald Howard.
Illustrated by Floyd Cooper.
Unpaged.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 4 to 7)


Belle and Ariel Never Chose Duty Over Love
POCAHONTAS, DAUGHTER OF Chief Powhatan, was every bit as royal in her culture as Sleeping Beauty and Snow White were in their fairy-tale realms.
That's a good fact to remember when approaching Disney's enchanting and topical new film about the American Indian who saved John Smith's life.
Amid all the pre-opening hoopla -- from a giant screening in Central Park last weekend to merchandising that outreaches that for "The Lion King" -- the most-discussed issue was the film's walking-on-eggshells approach to American Indian history.
The movie promised to be politically flammable -- either wrongheaded about Indian culture or deadened by politicaly correct buzzwords -- and safely Disney, yet it turns out to be the opposite.
It offers a sharp revision of the classic Disney fairy-tale formula while settling snugly into the political mainstream.
Pocahontas is surely the most subversive heroine in the Disney canon, a real-life princess who doesn't waltz off with the prince.
The film's animation is more sophisticated and stylized than ever before, and the catchy music (composed by Alan Menken with lyrics by Stephen Schwartz) carries the story as it might in a strong Broadway show.
The film might have been something like "The Lion King Goes to the Colonies," an idea nightmarish in its lack of creativity.
Instead, "Pocahontas" is a dream, a romantic fantasy that works for grown-ups, possibly more than it does for action-minded children.
Relying on many standard elements of the Disney formula and tossing away others, the movie becomes a model of how smartly those elements can be reinvigorated. (Now playing in a handful of cities, the film will open in New York and throughout the country on Friday.)


GREETINGS FROM MINNESOBER!
Hey, people, I enjoy a snottily comic article about the rubes in flyover land just as much as the next native New Yorker, but Neal Karlen's "Greetings From Minnesober!" (May 28) went too far.
He's talking about my friends this time -- the people at Pathways in Minneapolis, a center for alternative healing and a great support for those with chronic and life-threatening illnesses.
I discovered Pathways when I lived in Minnesota because I have a disease called lupus, which is, at present, incurable.
The wonderful people I met at a Pathways support group (some of them now dead from their illnesses) helped me to deal with my disability.
MELINDA HARRIS Norwalk, Conn.


June 11-17; A Key to the Heavens' Fireworks
Comets blazing through the sky were once viewed as harbingers of calamity, the death of a king or defeat in battle.
The dinosaurs might have met their end because of a comet, or asteroid, slamming into Earth.
It was probably a comet impact that caused the blast that destroyed 1,000 square miles of forest with the force of a 10-megaton nuclear bomb in Siberia in 1908.
Without question, fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 bombarded Jupiter last summer in a spectacular show of power.
By plotting trajectories, astronomers have traced the likely source of comets to the outer reaches of the solar system.
But not until last week were they able to report definitive sightings out that far.
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, they detected 30 objects, each from four to eight miles wide, in a flat disk extending far beyond Neptune's orbit.
They estimate that as many as 10 billion such icy objects orbit the solar system.
The gravity of the outer planets occasionally jostles a comet out of place, drawing it into the inner solar system.


New Road to Bangkok Speeds Airport Trip
For travelers to Bangkok, there is finally some good news about the traffic.
The city has some of the worst traffic jams on earth, but a new 10-mile expressway means that one can get from the airport to most of the city in less than an hour.


Orange County Gets A Message
What would you do if someone owed you a lot of money and showed no intention of paying it back?
Would you lend more money?
That's what municipal bond investors did last week, as they lent $295 million to bankrupt Orange County, Calif., which shows every intention of stiffing its previous lenders.
Orange County, as you no doubt recall, went broke by speculating on interest rates and is in bankruptcy court trying to weasel out of its obligations.


The New Paris: Growing Accustomed to Its Face
IF IT WORKS, WHY FIX IT?
WHY subject Paris, the most extravagantly beloved city since the beginning of time, to a huge program of major public works?
Wouldn't it be better to tamper with, say, Marseilles and leave the City of Light alone?
It's a little late for such questions.
The Grands Travaux -- the Big Works decreed by President Francois Mitterrand -- are all up and, for the most part, running.
Now, with Mitterrand out of office, the hour has come to reckon with their impact.
Has the change in the city's shape diminished its grandeur and ruined its image?
Is a bigger, up-to-date Paris better than the old Paris?
And what is the impact on the emerging generation of young architects?


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Net: It's Hard to Clean Up
THE "beautiful and so very exotic mistress" panted, purred, hissed and "twined the fur on his chest." She flashed her "lethal pout" at John Mayhew, and he "stirred at the movement of her fingers, which were no longer on his chest." Later, she coaxed state secrets from him.
Pretty routine stuff by potboiler standards.
But these scenes from the novel "1945," co-written by House Speaker Newt Gingrich, could be illegal in another medium -- if the Senate has its way.
Last week, the Senate overwhelmingly approved a measure that seeks to ban "obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent" material from computer networks.


Player Agents Pull Reins On N.B.A.'s 'Done Deal'
The well-laid plans of Commissioner David Stern to achieve quick and easy labor peace in the National Basketball Association encountered an angry roadblock yesterday in the form of agents and players who said they had been kept uninformed on the negotiations.
With the league and the players union apparently close enough to an agreement that ratification meetings of the owners and player representatives have been scheduled for this week, the union's agent advisory committee accused Simon Gourdine, the union's executive director, of breaching his obligations to the players by refusing to disclose to them details of the negotiations and possible agreement.


At Long Last, Pavin Fills the Major Vacancy in His Trophy Case
It was by far the biggest shot of the little man's life, 209 yards of carry over hill and heather and heartbreak to win the United States Open.
Corey Pavin had come a very long way for this.
For too many years now, he had endured the left-handed compliment -- best player never to have won a major championship.
Now, if he could hit the green, he could lose the label forever and take his place among the giants of the game.
With a Great White Shark in his wake and a distant 18th green in his sights, Pavin drew back his 4-wood today at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club and hit one of the greatest pressure shots in the 100-year history of this championship.
It landed just short of the slippery, sloping green and ran up toward the hole.


A Toast to the 'Lemon Law'
The people at the Division of Consumer Affairs were in a celebratory mood last week.
Instead of champagne, they said they wanted . . . lemonade.
The humor was strained, but the agency's director, Mark B. Herr, and Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz did not care.
They announced that the amount collected for car buyers under the six-year-old "Lemon Law" program had topped $10 million.
The program provides for hearings that can lead to reimbursement for consumers who buy faulty automobiles and motorcycles.


Hearst Book's New Chief
The Hearst Book Group in New York, a unit of the Hearst Corporation, named William M. Wright, president and chief executive.
He succeeds Howard Kaminsky who left the company in 1994.
Mr.
Wright, 46, will be responsible for overseeing the operations of both William Morrow &amp; Company and Avon Books, members of the Hearst Book Group.
Mr.
Wright said he hoped to expand the author list, as well as further develop the nonfiction, romance and children's publishing franchises.
He previously was the executive vice president and chief operating officer of Random House Inc. in New York.


Lautenberg to Visit Vietnam
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg will accompany six other lawmakers on a fact-finding mission to Vietnam.
The Senator said that he hopes to learn more about the benefits and drawbacks of normalizing relations between the United States and Vietnam, but that he is primarily interested in progress on resolving the issue of Americans still listed as missing in Vietnam.


CHRONICLE
Several brass players in the New York Philharmonic have lived up to the nickname that Leonard Bernstein gave them when he was music director.
Because of the amount of breath they need to create full-bodied sounds from their instruments, Bernstein called them the "Hunky Brutes," and even had T-shirts made for them with that legend.


I.B.M. to Introduce New Computer Line With Power PC Chip
The International Business Machines Corporation will introduce a new generation of personal computers today, the first major change to the I.B.M.
PC's basic design since the company set the industry standard in the early 1980's.
But instead of the favorable buzz that normally accompanies such announcements, I.B.M. faces embarrassment for having delayed the introduction of the new technology and for giving the Microsoft Corporation, its archrival, a head start over I.B.M.'s own struggling software.


Don't Forget Our Foreign Aid Also Helps People
To the Editor:
Re "Foreign Aid Has Its Uses" (Op-Ed, June 12): Brent Scowcroft makes a case for foreign aid as leverage for furthering foreign policy aims.
What about that very small portion of foreign aid that goes to support programs in developing countries where the people may simply need help?


ISSUE OF ABORTION IS PUSHING ITS WAY TO CENTER STAGE
The politically charged issue of abortion has returned to the Congressional stage, sooner than many abortion rights advocates or some Republican leaders had hoped but with the strong backing of the Christian conservative movement.
At least a dozen abortion-related bills, many taken directly from the Christian Coalition's political and social manifesto, the Contract With the American Family, are pending in Congress, and at least that many more are under discussion.


Sky Beauty May Have Run Into Retirement
Time and age overtook Sky Beauty yesterday in the twilight of her career when she ran third while Heavenly Prize was winning the Hempstead Handicap at Belmont Park.
The race was billed as something of a match between the reigning fillies of last year: Sky Beauty, now 5 years old and the champion older filly, versus Heavenly Prize, who was the champion 3-year-old filly.
But even that billing didn't hold up.
The 26-1 long shot Little Buckles broke out in front, led the field of four by as many as five lengths and didn't surrender until Heavenly Prize nailed her in midstretch.


Senate's Passage Of Bill Relieves Cable Industry
Cable television executives kept a vigil all last week as the Senate debated a sweeping overhaul of the nation's telecommunications laws.
Of the half-dozen major industries affected by the legislation, their industry clearly had the most to lose.
Their rates are currently under strict control, while their markets are being increasingly opened to competition.
Their fear during the debate was that they would go into the new competitive scrimmages with their hands tied.
"This could have been our Waterloo," said Marc B. Nathanson, the chairman of Falcon Cable Systems Company, a midsize cable operator based in Los Angeles.


Burning of Flag Is an Act of Contempt
To the Editor:
Re "More Flag-Waving in Congress" (editorial, June 12): You have a valid point on the flag-burning issue as far as tampering with the First Amendment is concerned.
However, ridicule weakens your argument.
For those of us who've spilled our blood while fighting for our flag, the burning of it is as offensive as burning a cross is to others.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  U.N. DROPS SARAJEVO SHIELD
In a tradeoff that secured the release of the last peacekeepers held by Bosnian Serbs, the United Nations abandoned its attempt to shield Sarajevo from bombardment by heavy artillery.
A1  MOSCOW ORDERS CHECHNYA TRUCE
After the failure of two attempts to storm the hospital where Chechen fighters still held as many as 1,000 hostages, Russia's Prime Minister ordered a cease-fire throughout Chechnya.
A1  A HOSTAGE'S ORDEAL
All Svetlana Aleksandrovna could think of after she, her son and her sister were taken hostage by Chechen militants was "how my parents would bury us." A1  MIDEAST DEADLINE THREATENED
Israel's Prime Minister said Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization would miss a July 1 target date for a full agreement on expansion of Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank.
A2  HONG KONG'S VANISHING HARBOR
If there is one immutable legacy that British colonialism will leave when China takes over Hong Kong in two years, it is the radical reshaping of its harbor.
A3  INDIA VS.
SRI LANKAN REBELS
India has set up what amounts to a naval quarantine around a Tamil Tiger guerrilla stronghold on Sri Lanka's northern coast.
A3  EXTRADITION CASE RIVETS MEXICO
The extradition case in New Jersey of a former Mexican prosecutor has created a media frenzy on Mexico's side of the border.
A5  Poland's citizens are frustrated by ineffective police.
A7  France's far right won several mayoralties.
A7  Presidente Prudente Journal: Rodeo takes Brazil by storm.
A4  National A8-11, B6-7  MANY ABORTION BILLS IN CONGRESS
At least a dozen abortion-related bills, many taken directly from a Christian Coalition political and social manifesto, are pending in Congress, and at least that many more are under discussion.
A1  LEPER COMMUNITY THREATENED
A way of life is coming to a close for the few patients left at the Carville leper compound, who may have to leave as Federal budget cuts threaten to close the complex.
A1  TAXES SPLIT G.O.P.
Congressional Memo: Republicans in Congress, who are so united on virtually every other fiscal matter, are all over the map on taxes.
A9  UNWILLING LINK IN BOMBING CASE
After officials linked an Arkansas robbery to two suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing, the Arkansas man who was robbed became a target of scrutiny himself, much to his displeasure.
A8  JAPANESE-AMERICAN G.I.'S REUNITE
The men who made up the all Japanese-American 442d Regimental Combat Team in World War II veterans met for a reunion in Mississippi.
A8  REUSABLE ROCKET PROPOSED
Two companies have proposed building a rocket that takes off and lands vertically in a competition that may lead to a replacement for the space shuttle.
A8  FROM ARMS TO REACTORS
The United States is quietly starting to convert some of its military nuclear stockpiles into fuel for civilian nuclear reactors.
A10  LOS ANGELES COUNTY PINCHED
Los Angeles County is facing the prospect of a suddenly huge budget deficit just as reductions in state aid are forcing local politicians to consider sharp cuts.
A11  POLICE PEPPER SPRAY CRITICIZED
A civil rights group said that a type of tear gas made from cayenne peppers is not a benign police tool but a potential killer.
B7  Metro Digest B1  PARTNERS IN CRIME
John Gaw, a police detective, and Michael Lee, a rookie, were partners on both sides of the law, officials say.
The authorities say they spent almost their entire careers on the payrolls of criminals.
A1  UPRISING AT IMMIGRANT CENTER
Frustration flared into violence early yesterday at an immigrant detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., that has been buffeted by charges of mistreating the illegal aliens who are held there.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-14  The What Is Jazz? festival.
C11  Rome's opera battles labor.
C11  Pearl Jam reaffirms its stand on Ticketmaster.
C12  Music: Melissa Etheridge.
C12  Dance: Black themes at the American Dance Festival.
C11  Darcey Bussell in debut as a Balanchine Swan Queen.
C13  Books: 'Betrayal: The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy.' C13  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Mets' follow script.
C7  Yankees beat Indians, 9-5.
C7  Columns: Anderson on Open.
C3  On Pro Hockey.
C5  Golf: Corey Pavin wins U.S.
Open.
C1  Hockey: Devils step up.
C5  Racing: Sky Beauty farewell?
C9  Obituaries D10  George M. Stafford, ex-chairman of Interstate Commerce Commission.
Harry Tisch, headed labor unions in former East Germany.
Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  Who will lead labor, where?
Alcohol and the police.
Mr.
Dole's duty.
Misery for Vietnamese detainees.
Letters  William Safire: Deficit epiphany.
Richard Klein: Way beyond megalomania.
Alair A. Townsend: Resist the urge to splurge.
Gail Sheehy: Angry men, resilient women.
Bridge C14  Chronicle B10  Crossword C13


List of Major Disappointments Needs Revisions
With his victory in the United States Open today at Shinnecock Hills, Corey Pavin shed the tag of "best player never to win a major," the unwanted label that makes players cringe.
But to whom did he pass it?
The leading candidate is Davis Love 3d, who turned professional in 1985, has won nine times on the PGA Tour, but had never been among the top 10 in a major until he finished second this year in the Masters.
Love finished in a six-way tie for fourth place today, four strokes behind Pavin.


Sports of The Times; Another Second Place For the Great Shark
HE could hear the cheers behind him, but he knew they weren't for him.
Greg Norman was waiting to putt on the 16th green when the cheers rolled across the Shinnecock Hills shadows for Corey Pavin's 4-wood to the 18th green that would win the United States Open.
Pavin hurried down the fairway and thrust both arms to the sky.
His gallery roared.
Those in Norman's gallery bit their lips.
Again.


A Man With a Mission in Jazz Raises the Ultimate Question
Michael Dorf, the 30-something owner of the Knitting Factory, has spent his career emulating George Wein, the impresario of the JVC Festival.
Now, metaphorically at least, Mr.
Dorf is trying to do him in with an extraordinary, 108-show festival set to open tonight.


Bowe Discovers the Unification Theory
With a thundering comeback in which he was controlled yet ornery, Riddick Bowe has suddenly unified the heavyweight title once again -- unified it in the sense that just about every person in boxing knows that Bowe, right now, is the best.
Technically, all Bowe did Saturday night was defend his lightly regarded World Boxing Organization crown in a total domination of his former bete noire, Jorge Luis Gonzalez, in Las Vegas, Nev.


India Sets Up Blockade to Aid Sri Lanka Against Rebels
Five years after India completed withdrawing 100,000 troops from Sri Lanka, the Indian Government has responded to calls for help there by setting up what amounts to a naval quarantine around the Tamil Tiger guerrilla stronghold at Jaffna on Sri Lanka's northern coast.
Indian military officials recently confirmed that navy vessels and air force surveillance planes had been ordered to enforce an embargo across the Palk Strait, which separates the two countries at India's southeastern tip.
Reports in newspapers in India and Sri Lanka have suggested that the operation has extended farther, taking Indian vessels and aircraft deeper into the Indian Ocean in a bid to seal off Sri Lanka's northeastern coast.


Chinatown Officers Said to Be Partners on Both Sides of the Law
When Michael Lee went to Chinatown in 1991 to be an undercover police officer, he was paired with a charismatic, genial detective with an infectious love of life.
His name was John Gaw.
Being a rookie still awed by police work, Officer Lee was smitten by his new partner's exuberance and self-confidence, and soon it became plain that he wanted to be everything Officer Gaw was.
People who knew the men used to joke about how Officer Lee seemed to worship his partner.
They would say, "Oh, there's Mike trying to be John again." And they would chuckle.


Rising Storm on Hong Kong's Vanishing Harbor
When she was small, Romy Chiu remembers, the waters of Hong Kong harbor lapped against the sea wall at the end of Man Yuen Street, a claustrophic alley of noodle stalls, engine shops and her family's Vietnamese restaurant.
"There was always the harbor there," she said, scrubbing a plastic table top with a damp rag before clapping down a pair of plastic bowls, chopsticks and a sheaf of paper napkins.
"We ran down there as kids to watch the boats. It's long gone now."


Breaking the Bank
Michael Jackson is back in the spotlight.
He and his wife, Lisa Marie Presley, spent an hour on ABC's "Prime Time Live" on Wednesday night.
Theshow earned a hefty rating of 25.9, a full 5 to 10 points higher than recent summer reruns.
It remains to be seen how the new album, "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book 1," will stack up against previous megahits like "Thriller" (46 million) and "Dangerous" (23 million).
"Scream," a song from "HIStory," opened at No. 3 on the music singles list for June 4, and hasn't moved since.
In other megahit news, the film "Batman Forever" set a box office record bytaking in $53.3 million on its opening weekend.


METRO DIGEST
THE MURKY WORLD OF CHINATOWN OFFICERS
Officers John Gaw and Michael Lee were partners on both sides of the law, officials say.
As the authorities tell it, the two spent virtually their entire police careers on the payrolls of high-level Chinatown criminals, feeding them advance information about raids on their gambling and prostitution dens.
Their story is emerging as the New York City Police Department grapples with a succession of scandals involving misconduct and criticism that the department has been slow to spot wrongdoing.
Detective Gaw, the senior partner, operated with such audacity -- he invited cops and criminals alike to his wedding -- that his career raises questions about why the department did not find out about him sooner.  [ Page A1. ] REFUGEES SEIZE A DETENTION CENTER
Frustration flared into violence at an immigrant detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., that has been buffeted by charges of mistreating the illegal aliens who are held there.
A ragtag band of refugees took over the building, demolished much of the interior of the Esmor detention center and barricaded themselves in for five hours before the center was stormed by law enforcement officers.  [ A1. ]
The Esmor detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., stood out as one of the harshest in the country, some immigration lawyers said.  [ B5. ]
A Sudanese immigrant tells of her ordeal at Esmor detention center.  [ B5. ] NEW YORK CITY  NEIGHBORLY ACT TURNS TRAGIC
Firefighters and neighbors say Robert Pearson is a hero for holding a bedsheet over the edge of his 11th-floor balcony so a downstairs neighbor could climb out of her burning apartment in midtown Manhattan.
But Mr.
Pearson does not see it that way.
He is overwhelmed, instead, by what he could not do -- that he could not help another neighbor who lost his grip on the sheet and tumbled 11 stories into the building's courtyard.
The man who fell was listed in very critical condition at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center with major head injuries and serious burns.  [ B3. ] A WEEK OF GAY PRIDE CELEBRATIONS BEGINS
Beginning a week of celebrations that will culminate in a march down Fifth Avenue, hundreds of gay and lesbian New Yorkers filled Union Square Park for what was billed as a rally but looked more like an enormous summertime family picnic.
One family stepped on stage to make a point about Father's Day.
"Being heterosexual doesn't make you a good parent," Doug Robinson said.
"A good parent is someone who is willing to go the distance with their child."  [ B3. ] TEEN-AGER SLAIN IN BARBECUE FIGHT
A Queens teen-ager who struggled through high school and dropped out, only to rebound and earn his high school equivalency diploma in a ceremony, was rewarded with a party from his parents.
But at the graduation barbecue, he and neighbors got into a fight that ended in a spray of gunfire that left the teen-ager dead, the police and witnesses said.
The youth, Stephen Pettigrew, 17, was shot in the head and died on the street in front of his home.
Witnesses and the police said the neighbors and the teen-agers fought after some of the youths broke malt liquor bottles in the street.  [ B2. ] FEUD WILL FADE; SCHOOLS' PROBLEM WON'T
Yes, the Mayor and the Schools Chancellor of New York City do not get along, which the whole world must know by now.
But underlying the personal feud that led to Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's resignation last week is a more fundamental problem, and it will not go away when Mr.
Cortines does.
It's that the school system is this odd duck -- independent from the Mayor, but reliant on him for its money.  [ Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.
B4. ] REGION  CLERICS DECRY YEARBOOK SLUR
It was referred to only as "the incident," but the racial slur discovered in a high school yearbook found its way into Greenwich, Conn., churches, condemned by nearly a dozen ministers who urged their congregants to begin a healing process.
"This dastardly deed is the boil of a consciousness that has to be exposed and cleansed," the Rev.
Avery C. Manchester told the congregation at the nondenominational First Church of Round Hill.  [ B2. ] Chronicle B10


Big Challenge for Harper's Bazaar Is Beating Back Gossip
In September 1992, in a frenzy of publicity, Hearst Magazines introduced the first issue of Harper's Bazaar under its new British editor in chief, Elizabeth Tilberis.
Its cover showed a strikingly cool model in a black beaded dress with a single cover line: "Enter the Era of Elegance."
It was a dramatic entrance by Ms.
Tilberis, the former editor in chief of British Vogue, into the high-stakes world of American fashion, a land of smoke and mirrors where image is often worth its weight in reality.
Her mission was to turn around the moribund 125-year-old Harper's Bazaar, once the doyenne of American fashion magazines, which was in its eighth year of a downward spiral in advertising pages.


Scholars to Go to White House
Six New Jersey high school seniors are among 141 Presidential Scholars who will be honored by President Clinton at the White House on Wednesday.
The award is given annually to students for academic and artistic achievement, leadership and school and community involvement.
The New Jersey recipients are: Corinne M. Botz, Glen Rock; James T. L. Grimmelmann, Maplewood; Hsing-Ay Hsu, Caldwell; Jared A. Kesselheim, Cherry Hill; Kristina V. Lepetio, North Brunswick, and Benjamin B. Paloff, Atlantic City.


One Deal Off. One Deal On. Well, That's Entertainment.
Two weeks into his Hollywood career, Edgar Bronfman Jr., president of the Seagram Company and acting head of MCA Inc., has endured a crash course in the entertainment business, and found the journey as turbulent as any of the rides he now owns at MCA's Universal Studios theme parks.
At this point, it is hard to tell whether Mr.
Bronfman is in over his head or is the shrewdest negotiator in town.


No Headline
"I am just an ordinary guy who raises horses, ducks, and geese, who doesn't belong to anything, and who just happened to meet the one crazy in 250 million people capable of this horrible bombing." -- ROGER E. MOORE, former gun dealer.  [ A8:5. ]


Media: RADIO; For FM music the times may be changing, but visionaries appear to be among the missing.
THE death on June 10 of George H. Duncan, who helped to develop a new type of rock-and-roll radio in the late 1960's, brought back a lot of memories of how exciting and unpredictable music radio could be -- and how unimaginative and paint-by-the-numbers it has become.
For the radio industry generally, and at many individual stations, business these days brings double-digit gains in advertising month after month.
That provides little incentive to take a chance, however much broadcasters admired the chances Mr.
Duncan took at WNEW-FM in New York.


Once Again, Napoleon Meets His Waterloo


Treasury Offering Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday the Treasury will auction a 52-week bill.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.47 percent while the six-month issue was at 5.45 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 5.34 percent.


Three Companies Choose Agencies
The Whirlpool Corporation, Umbro International Inc. and FX Networks Inc. all named agencies on their accounts Friday.
Whirlpool, based in Benton Harbor, Mich., selected Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to handle the domestic Whirlpool appliance brand account, which had been at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., for the last 22 years.
The billings were estimated at $35 million.


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Released Mitch Williams, pitcher.


Welcome to New York, Capital of Profanities
Consider the new T-shirt on sale near Pennsylvania Station, a souvenir for the discerning tourist who wants to communicate with New York City natives in their own tongue: "How to Use the F-Word." The T-shirt's four-letter Berlitz course lists ways to insert that versatile word into everyday phrases like "Who are you?" and "Pass the salt."
Consider the number of times that same word is uttered in "Do the Right Thing," the Spike Lee movie set in Brooklyn: 182, to describe everything from the heat to a slice of pizza.


Johnson Finishes Coup With a Victory in 200
Carl Lewis, winner of eight Olympic gold medals, wears a crown logo on his shoes, but he is no longer the king of track and field.
His abdication came this afternoon when Michael Johnson won the 200 meters in a wind-aided 19.83 seconds, becoming the first athlete this century to win both the 200 and 400 meters at the national championships.
Lewis qualified in the long jump for August's world championships in Goteborg, Sweden, but he finished second to Mike Powell, the world record holder who leaped a wind-aided 28- 3/4 with his first jump of the season.
Lewis, who jumped a wind-aided 27-8 3/4, has lost to Powell four times in their past five meetings.
And he has faded as a sprinter, finishing sixth here in the 100 meters.
So it will be Johnson, the sport's dominant superstar, who will savor the lion's share of visibility and expectation as the 1996 Summer Olympics approach in Atlanta.


The Last Lepers: A special report.; Lives Stolen by Treatment, Not by Disease
The debutante disappeared 68 years ago, removed from New Orleans society like a piece of chipped china.
A car pulled up to her house and carried her away, 60 miles up the dark River Road to a hospital compound guarded by tall fences and discretion.
Nuns in white robes and stiff winged hats took the young woman inside to join the sick, the crippled and the anonymous.
Back in New Orleans the neighbors wondered what had happened to Betty, the beautiful 19-year-old daughter of a proud family, but the secret gathered dust.


Who Will Lead Labor, Where?
In the 16 years Lane Kirkland has led the A.F.L.-C.I.O., organized labor has lost millions of members, dozens of political battles and much of its national influence.
Neither Mr.
Kirkland nor any other union leader set in motion the forces behind this decline.
Unions in other Western industrialized countries have done just as poorly in the face of globalized production, deregulated markets and conservative political gains.
Still, as the incumbent, Mr.
Kirkland is rightly held accountable for failing to stem the losses.
Anxious union presidents are now looking for more energetic leadership and more effective strategies to revive the American labor movement.
Their success will affect not only the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s 13 million members but the national political environment as well.
Liberal candidates for office and progressive social causes like national health insurance have suffered in recent years from labor's anemic condition.


How to Let Families Know Wishes on Dying
To the Editor:
Our organization, Choice in Dying, endorses "Living, Dying and the Law" (editorial, June 12), in which you support a family health care decisions bill in the New York State Legislature to permit family members to make medical treatment decisions on behalf of incapacitated loved ones who have not signed advance directives (either a living will or a medical power of attorney).


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hotwired gets Nielsen to rate its cyberspace auditing to help advertisers feel comfortable.
THERE were several developments late last week in the realms of interactive advertising, marketing and publishing.
One involved the step of a leading electronic publication to address a closely watched issue in cyberspace: how to figure audience size.
Hotwired, which has been called the most ambitious effort to develop a commercial media service in cyberspace, has reached agreement with the Nielsen Media Research unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation for Nielsen to evaluate the audience measurement systems and methodologies being used by Hotwired and to perform regular reviews of that audience data.


Samaranch Wins Battle Of the Ages With I.O.C.
It was hardly the most graceful of victories, but it was clearly a victory.
Juan Antonio Samaranch wanted the option of running for a fourth term as president of the International Olympic Committee.
He now has that option.


Don't Forget Our Foreign Aid Also Helps People; Shaping the World
To the Editor:
In "Foreign Aid Has Its Uses" (Op-Ed, June 12), Brent Scowcroft makes a strong case against the devastating cuts in our foreign aid budget proposed by the Republican leadership in Congress.


Harsh Memories of Detention Center
Even after 12 years as an immigration lawyer in New Jersey, Rosa Soy was stunned the first time she met a young Somalian refugee in a glass interview room at the Esmor detention center in Elizabeth, N.J.
She had visited many immigration detention centers in the past, including Varick Street in lower Manhattan and Wackenhut in Springfield Gardens, Queens, both of which had been criticized by detainees for their harsh conditions.


Quietly, U.S. Converts Uranium Into Fuel for Civilian Reactors
The United States is quietly starting to convert some of its military nuclear stockpiles left over from the cold war into fuel for civilian nuclear reactors.
With little fanfare, the process began June 6 at a sprawling plant in Piketon, Ohio, run by the United States Enrichment Corporation, a Government-owned company based in Bethesda, Md.
The company is turning 13.2 tons of highly enriched uranium into reactor fuel.


College Head Exits, With Honors
In his five years as president of St.
Peter's College in Jersey City, the Rev.
Daniel A. Degnan took satisfaction in seeing the school's enrollment increase steadily, to about 3,500 students.
Tonight, as he prepares to step down at the end of the month, he will be honored by 400 leaders in business, education and government at a black-tie dinner at Mayfair Farms in West Orange.


A Reunion of Sorts Involving a 'Miracle'
Late in the regular season, when Slava Fetisov arrived in Detroit after a trade from the Devils, he approached Mike Ramsey in the Red Wings' dressing room.
"I told him, 'You owe me dinner,' " Fetisov recalled.


Man's Legs Severed by Train
The engineer tried to stop the train the moment he spotted a man lying on the tracks early Saturday, but it was too late.
The police said the man, Eric Huff, 26, of Parsippany was drunk and lying on the tracks near the Mount Tabor station when his legs were severed by a New Jersey Transit train.
He was flown by helicopter to University Hospital in Newark, where he was listed in critical but stable condition yesterday.


Essay; Deficit Epiphany
To hear anguished liberals tell it, Rasputin has come to town to corrupt the Czar's court.
Or Svengali has just shown up at the White House to mesmerize Trilby.
Or Pere Joseph arrived to manipulate Cardinal Richelieu as his "gray eminence."
The horrific shock after Bill Clinton made his latest right turn without signaling led to a search for a hidden hand.
The finding was summed up in yesterday's Washington Post: "Republican Adviser Stages a Quiet White House 'Coup.' "


Going Out of Business
The number of business failures in the region fell last year, a confirmation of continuing economic growth in the area.
Connecticut had the nation's largest drop in failures from 1993 to 1994, 48 percent.
The number of firms closing up shop last year fell 20 percent in New York State, 23 percent in New Jersey and 17 percent in the nation as a whole.
Analysts say business failure data is a good measure of the health of the business sector because it is one of the few economic statistics that can be broken down by region or industry, or both.
It is often a lagging indicator of economic conditions, however, and many experts feel the region's economy is currently slowing.


With China Door Closed to Him, Murdoch Is Exploring Windows
Blocked by the nation's leaders from bringing news to China, the world's largest potential media market, Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation is exploring ways to cooperate with Chinese partners on advanced information technology.
Last week, the News Corporation announced a deal with The People's Daily, run by the Communist Party's Central Committee, to invest jointly $5.4 million in an information and technology business -- a deal that seems more of a door opener than a money maker.


Life Rejects Art; Students Find No Shock of Recognition In a Novel Set in Their Own Backyard
Students at the Keene Central School, one of the state's smallest, don't come face to face with novelists very often, or with novels that purport to be about them.
Maybe that's why they told Russell Banks that the mirror he held up to them had a warp in it.
Chappie Dorset, the protagonist of Mr.
Banks's new novel, "Rule of the Bone," they said, didn't live here.
"If you broke Chappie up into specific parts, a lot of people I know have those parts," one student told Mr.
Banks.
"But if you put them all together, I don't think I'd hang out with them."


INSIDE
Bit Player in Bomb Case
Since Federal officials linked two suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing to an Arkansas robbery, the man who was robbed has become an unwanted focus of investigation himself.
Page A8.
The Bottom Line Is Control
A fundamental problem exists in the school system in New York.
It is independent from the Mayor, but reliant on him for its money.
Metro Matters, page B4.


In Performance; ROCK
A Straightforward Sneer With a Pummeling Beat Mudhoney Irving Plaza
Mudhoney is the Seattle grunge band that didn't break through to million-selling albums and arena crowds.
At Irving Plaza on Thursday night, it played one more pulverizing, unsparing concert, with the momentum of a locomotive and an attitude of pure spite.


College Feasibility Is Questioned
This is the only county in New Jersey without a community college, and a state education panel indicated on Friday that it should stay that way.
Meeting in Newark, the members of a subcommittee of the State Commission on Higher Education questioned enrollment projections and the estimated cost of creating a community college in Cape May County.
The subcommittee suggested instead that students attend a branch of another county's community college, which could be located in Cape May County.


2 Killed and 1 Is Hurt At a Birthday Party
Two men were killed and a third man was shot and wounded yesterday at a house in North Babylon, L.I., when an argument at an early morning birthday party led to gunfire, the police said.
Anthony Brown, 30, an off-duty correction officer, and Tyrone Morning, 23, apparently tried to stop an argument between an unidentified woman at the party and Allen Parker, 20, of North Babylon, said Detective Lieut.
John W. Gierasch, head of the Suffolk County homicide squad.


Newark Case Is Keeping Mexico Rapt
It has not quite rivaled the O. J. Simpson trial for courtroom drama, but after only a few days the extradition case in New Jersey of a former Mexican prosecutor has created a media frenzy of its own on Mexico's side of the border.
Newspapers here gasped at the attempt -- unsuccessful -- by lawyers for the defendant, Mario Ruiz Massieu, to subpoena former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
The lawyers wanted the former President to testify about the political murder investigation that Mr.
Ruiz Massieu is accused of covering up during the Salinas administration.


Eavesdropping On the Internet
In the midst of its debate on the comprehensive telecommunications legislation, the Senate took the better part of a day last week to debate, and then to pass, an amendment making it a felony to knowingly transmit indecent material over a computer network accessible to people under the age of 18.
Within the multiplicity of Internet newsgroups, people have been discussing the legislation with a mixture of frustration and outrage for months.
The Amendment, sponsored by Senator Jim Exon, a Democrat of Nebraska, was approved in the Senate by a vote of 84 to 16, provooking reactions ranging from all-caps fury to disdaini to approval.
A selection of messages about the amendment is reprinted on the screens to the right.
They are sent by individuals whose aliases, or screen names, are not necessarily their real names.
Not all of these messages are reprinted in their entirety, though original spellings and punctuation are preserved.
While these messages were selected from Usenet news groups and America On-line's forums as indicated, many were sent to several newsgroups simultaneously.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
By Professional Choristers, Baroque in a Sacred Setting  Musica Sacra Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church
The proportions were correct when Musica Sacra under Richard Westenburg sang sacred music of the Baroque on Thursday night.
Mr.
Westenburg's highly professional ensemble, four singers on a part, performed this complex program with a precision that the high-ceiling, overactive church acoustics sometimes obscured.
Yet the appropriateness of subject matter to venue was obvious and compensatory.


Japanese-Americans Recall War Service
It was a struggle for the 125 World War II veterans, all in their 70's, some on crutches, one blind, another in a wheelchair, to march a half mile this weekend under a blazing South Mississippi sun.
But these old men were not just revisiting the place where they learned to be soldiers; this was also where they taught the nation the difference between Japanese enemies and Japanese-Americans.


Press and F.B.I. Haunt Victim of a Burglary
First Roger E. Moore lost $60,000 in guns, precious metals and cash in November when robbers ransacked his isolated rural home near here.
Now he says he has also lost his privacy and reputation as Federal officials and news organizations have investigated a suspected link between the robbery and the nation's worst terrorist bombing.


Yanks Light Up Indians With 2-Out Lightning
Were fans really booing these Indians at Jacobs Field?
Booing the team with the premier record in baseball?
The team that has burst to the best start in its 94-year history?
Obviously, the Yankees made progress this weekend in Cleveland.
They also made immediate plans to leave.
The booing was brief and it occurred early, but it was revealing.
The Yankees displayed rare clutch offense by scoring eight runs with two outs and tamed the Indians, 9-5, for their second victory in a three-game series at the boisterous park.
The Yankees gave Jack McDowell a five-run lead after five innings, but he was fortunate to get his second straight victory.
He did so in large part because his relief flourished during a critical eighth inning.


Singing Of Love Universal
The singer Melissa Etheridge did the best she could to turn the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., into a living room for several hours on Friday night.
Ms.
Etheridge is an arena-rock expert, and the 17,000 adoring fans clearly loved the fact that she played to the audience that was seated behind the stage, and that she sang a few songs in the middle of the arena floor, at the sound booth.
She and her band did a few tricks to point out that they were friends and not just hired hands: the drummer banged out patterns on the upheld guitars of Ms.
Etheridge, her guitarist and bassist.
It looked as if they were fooling around.
They weren't.
Ms.
Etheridge is a skilled writer and performer of utterly unambitious professional music.
She has taken male mainstream rock from the Kansas "Dust in the Wind" school and made it consistent: on song after song she delivered the right hooks at the right time.
Ms.
Etheridge opened her concert with the song "All American Girl," and she quickly got to screaming the chorus, making her husky voice, at times reminiscent of Mae West's, deepen into a shout.
She spent the rest of the long concert singing at the same level of emotional intensity.


Protesters Throw Gloves at White House
Several dozen people threw rubber gloves over the White House fence today in a protest over the Secret Service's treatment of gay officials of state and local governments who visited the mansion last week.
President Clinton has sent a personal letter to those gay officials apologizing for the "inappropriate and insensitive treatment" displayed by the Secret Service, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Clinton said today.


Pearl Jam Stands Firm on Tickets
Pearl Jam has reaffirmed that it will not use Ticketmaster to distribute tickets for its current tour.
As a result, it is not performing on the usual rock-tour circuit, and no shows have yet been scheduled for the eastern United States.
"We are sticking to our guns," said Kelly Curtis, the band's manager, on Saturday, just before a torrential downpour forced the postponement of a concert at Wolf Mountain here.


An Editor Mindful of the Bottom Line
Just after Mary Jo Meisner was named editor of The Milwaukee Journal, she sent a videotape to her new staff.
At the time, she was managing editor of The Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
Decked out in a Western hat and bandana, she greeted her new employees by ambling toward the camera on a horse named Big Mama.
It was certainly an unusual introduction for a new editor of a Midwestern daily.
Particularly for one who had been raised in Chicago.
But what the tape showed next, some here say, was a sign of things to come.
Just as she was talking about her plans for changing the paper, the video cut to a close-up of her riding boots.
"The message was clear," Milwaukee magazine declared later, "she plans to kick some journalistic behinds at the paper."


Taking a Tip From Dad


Illegal Aliens Overrun a Jail In New Jersey
Frustration flared into violence early yesterday at an immigrant detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., that has been buffeted by charges of mistreating the illegal aliens held there.
A ragtag band of detainees took over the building, demolished much of the interior and barricaded themselves inside for five hours before the center was stormed by law enforcement officers.
Twenty illegal immigrants were injured in the clash that ended the standoff at 6:30 A.M., when 100 baton-wielding officers from the Union County sheriff's and prosecutor's offices, the Elizabeth police and surrounding cities took control of the building at 625 Evans Street.


Companies Hope to Build Rocket That Would Take Off and Land Vertically
Two aerospace companies have proposed building a rocket that takes off and lands vertically in a competition that may lead to a replacement for the space shuttle.
The companies, McDonnell Douglas Aerospace of Huntington Beach, Calif., and the Boeing Company of Seattle, announced on Thursday that they had chosen the unusual design to compete with more conventional proposals by two other aerospace groups.


In Performance; DANCE
The Master's Settings Of Russian Favorites  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Recent programs by the New York City Ballet featured works by George Balanchine to two of his favorite Russian composers.


Makeshift Shade


Presidente Prudente Journal; Deep in the Heart of Brazil, the Bucking Bronco
Shane Sanders had barely hung on for the regulation eight seconds on the bare back of a bucking bronco, but the scrappy Texan was grinning as he packed his car in the rodeo parking lot here.
"A guy can make more money on the rodeo circuit down here than at home," the 24-year-old rodeo rider said as Portuguese-speaking women in cowboy hats warmed up their quarter horses for the barrel races.


Bridge
One of New York's best-known bridge stars will have a good chance to win a world title in Beijing in October.
Jim Cayne, president of the brokerage house of Bear, Stearns, and his team won the International Team Trials in Las Vegas, Nev., on Friday, and will represent the United States in the Bermuda Bowl.
His teammates are Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., Mike Passell and Bob Goldman, both of Dallas, and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash.
The Cayne team won the 128-deal final by 58 imps against a squad headed by Steve Zolotow of Las Vegas.
Zolotow is now in a match to determine a second American team to go to Beijing.
After 80 deals of a scheduled 128 yesterday, his team trailed by 92 imps against Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and his team.


Taking In the Sites; Mapping Out Specific Destinations to Faraway Places
Armchair travelers have long used the Internet to roam the planet vicariously, but genuine road warriors can find information within minutes that once took days to amass.
Some travel-related World Wide Web sites are commercial or government ventures intended to drum up business, but many are owned by adoring groups of Anglophiles, Francophiles and assorted other philes motivated by a desire to share their passion.
The Paris Pages, for example, are maintained by a climate scientist in San Diego who uses computer resources donated by I.B.M., and a comprehensive guide to London is posted at the University of Central London by a researcher who also maintains smaller pages devoted to Iceland and Ecuador.


Detention Jail Called Worse Than Prison
As she looked back yesterday on her stay at the Esmor immigration detention center, Suzanne Kideni recalled the day she got a taste of freedom.
It was when she went to prison.


In Performance; JAZZ
Fueling Improvisation By Doing a Little Homework  James Carter, saxophonist Village Vanguard
Toward the end of his second set on Tuesday, the saxophonist James Carter played a Don Byas ballad called "Worried and Blue" that framed the formidable arsenal of ideas Mr.
Carter brings to his improvisations.
He changed tones.
He let silence ring between phrases.
He used pitch to suggest emotion.
Yet he never strayed beyond the confines of the piece.
It was one of those extraordinary moments when craft becomes art.


Scattered Success for Far Right In Mayoral Elections in France
France's far-right National Front party won the mayoral race today in the Mediterranean port of Toulon, a city of nearly 170,000.
National Front candidates running on the party's platform of a promise to crack down on crime and on illegal immigration also became mayors in Orange, a southern French city of 30,000, and Marignagne, a suburb of Marseilles.


CHRONICLE
This year's hosts for tonight's annual "Rock the Boathouse" benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research will be the actor SARAH JESSICA PARKER, the model BRIDGET HALL and, from "Melrose Place," the actor JACK WAGNER.
It will mark the fourth year that the organization will benefit from dining and dancing at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Parker refused to comment and Ms.
Hall was not available, but Mr.
Wagner, who plays a not-so-nice guy, Peter Burns, on the weekly show, said that he had long wanted to do a charity event in New York.


Heineken Reviewing Warwick Baker
Heineken USA in White Plains, a unit of Heineken N.V., has, as expected, placed in review the account of its flagship Heineken beer brand, a longtime account of Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York.
Though the Heineken billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $20 million to $25 million.
In a statement, Heineken USA said the review stemmed from a policy of its parent that "major brands be handled by separate agencies." Although Warwick Baker will no longer handle Heineken, the agency will retain another Heineken USA brand, Amstel Light.
Heineken USA has also awarded two other brands, Murphy's Irish Stout and Buckler nonalcoholic brew, to Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., which is being acquired by the Omnicom Group.
Adweek estimated those billings at $4 million to $5 million.


Poles Dismayed by Unchecked Crime
Like many Poles, Andrzej Tomaszewski had high hopes that after Communism the new justice system would transform the police from predators to protectors and give citizens swift access to impartial judges.
Like many Poles, he has been jolted into a disappointing reality.
For Mr.
Tomaszewski, the last straw came when his station wagon was stolen from a downtown parking lot.
As has become the practice here, he decided to take the law into his own hands and put an ad in a newspaper offering a reward for the return of his car.


Mr. Dole's Duty
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, is closing his tax-exempt Better America Foundation.
That is a smart move for a man who wants to polish Presidential credentials.
The foundation, as The Associated Press recently reported, exceeded the credible limits of nonpartisanship by spending $1.5 million of the more than $4 million it raised in 1994 on a poll, a television advertisement featuring Mr.
Dole and other projects useful to his Presidential effort.
But shutting the foundation does not end Mr.
Dole's duty to disclose the names of donors and the amounts they gave.
Clearly, the public's right to know who is bankrolling one of the nation's most powerful lawmakers should weigh more heavily with the G.O.P.
Presidential front-runner than any expectation of secrecy by contributors.
As for any money that may be left over in foundation accounts, the best course would be to return it to contributors.


Once-Profligate Opera Calls the Unions' Bluff
The Teatro dell'Opera here has just ended its most successful season in two decades, a tribute to the new team that took over the debt-ridden and infamously mismanaged house last year with orders to rescue it from bankruptcy and possible closure.
Yet there is no certainty the feat can be repeated.
Audiences and critics acclaimed new productions of Berlioz's "Benvenuto Cellini" and Verdi's "Macbeth," but the theater's 650 workers are not happy with the change of regime.
And if they disrupted only two performances with strikes this spring, it was not for lack of trying.
Inside the 19th-century house, warfare continues to simmer between management and staff.


The Mole Who Never Bothered to Wear a Mask
BETRAYAL The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy  By Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis  Illustrated. 308 pages.
Random House. $25
This would be a sad story if it weren't so funny.
Unfortunately for the Central Intelligence Agency, though, this impressively reported tale of one of the most serious security breaches in the annals of American espionage is terrifically entertaining and, at times, even darkly hilarious.
Try as they do to maintain an appropriately judicious tone, the authors -- Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis, Washington correspondents for The New York Times -- cannot avoid telling a tale that often unfolds like " 'Our Man in Havana' meets 'Monty Python.' "


Red Wings Center Gasping for Air After Game 1
Another day, another trip to the hyperbaric chamber.
As the Detroit Red Wings recovered from the uncomfortable sensation of having the Devils invade their space on the ice, Keith Primeau earned the unwanted right to feel claustrophobic.


Don't Expect Police To Fix Racist Society
To the Editor:
"N.Y.P.D. White" (Op-Ed, June 10), Joseph D. McNamara's article on the racist police culture and the need for effective affirmative action programs to attract minorities to police work, puts a heavy burden on cops.
Are police to take the blame for interracial hostilities and take on the burden of improving race relations?


Devils Serve Bold Vintage in Shocking the Red Wings
The circumstances were not the most favorable.
The sight and smell of octopus and the wizardry of the Red Wings were elements the Devils had never experienced in Boston, Pittsburgh or Philadelphia, their three previous playoff stops.
Detroit, after all, was the best team in hockey during the regular season and unbeatable in the playoffs at Joe Louis Arena.
Its coach, Scotty Bowman, is a genius with six Stanley Cup championships to his credit.
Its roster is filled with stars.
The town is hockey crazy, starving for a Stanley Cup championship after a 40-year drought.


Pesticides in Food Poised for Comeback
To the Editor:
Re "Dole and Democrat in Talks on Regulatory Overhaul" (news article, June 10):
You aptly describe how changes in the regulatory process embodied in the "regulatory reform" bill sponsored by Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, would endanger consumer health and safety protections.


Chancellor Search Starts Without Accord on Goals
Should the next schools chancellor be an educator whose heart beats with chalk dust, or a business executive with a keen eye for the budget?
Should it be a savvy New Yorker with a political map of the city committed to memory, or an outsider with pristine credentials and broader experience?
These are the among the questions being asked as the New York City Board of Education once again begins the arduous process of picking a new chancellor now that Ramon C. Cortines is stepping down after only two years in office and many bruising battles with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


A.C.L.U. Report Calls Pepper Spray Potentially Deadly
A type of tear gas made from cayenne peppers is not a benign police tool but a potential killer, the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California said today in a report on pepper spray.
The report said that as of the end of May, 26 people who had been sprayed with the liquid had died in police custody in California.
These deaths had occurred since October 1992 when the Attorney General, Dan Lungren, allowed law-enforcement officers to use pepper spray.
That three-year approval expires in August, and can be renewed by Mr.
Lungren.


Alcohol and the Police
Last month's beer-fueled rampage by New York City police officers in Washington, followed by an embarrassing brawl by inebriated off-duty officers at a beachfront resort in New Jersey, has brought new attention to a longstanding problem: excessive after-hours drinking by members of the force.
Police Commissioner William Bratton is right to seize the moment to try to break down the "blue wall of silence" that, in addition to shielding police corruption and other misconduct, is an obstacle to getting alcohol-abusing officers into treatment programs.


As Aid Shrinks and Deficit Grows, Los Angeles County Faces Painful Cuts
After years of sunny expansion and quick fixes for gnawing financial problems, Los Angeles County has suddenly caught a bad case of the fiscal malaise of the 1990's: the prospect of a suddenly huge budget deficit and reductions in state aid are forcing local politicians to consider dramatic cuts in the nation's largest county government.
The problems have been mounting for years, particularly after the passage of Proposition 13, the 1978 ballot measure that put a rigid cap on property taxes in California.
Even so, news that the county government now faces a deficit totaling perhaps $1 billion of the nearly $14 billion annual budget has caught many people here by surprise.


Last Season's Big Star Is in a Big Slump, and So Is His Sport
The last time Major League Baseball limped out of a protracted strike and into a season, it declared its motto to be: "Physician, heal thyself." That was in 1982, in the wake of the 50-day strike in 1981, and baseball was able to follow the prescription to success with record attendance, four great division races and larger-than-life efforts, such as Steve Carlton's Cy Young award-winning 23 victories and 39 home runs by that ex-Yankee, Reggie, Reggie, Reggie.
This season, though, when Hippocrates himself should have been on call, the physician is off duty on too many teams in too many cities.


Rutgers Wants Stringer
Rutgers has reached general agreement for its women's basketball head coaching position with C. VIVIAN STRINGER, head coach at the University of Iowa for the past 12 seasons, according The Home News of East Brunswick.
Details, the paper said, are to be worked out.


Giant Is Arrested
TYLER LAWRENCE, a linebacker signed by the Giants as a free agent last February, was charged with sexual battery and false imprisonment Saturday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., after a 25-year-old Pompano Beach, Fla., woman said Lawrence forced her to have sex with him at a hotel in Dania, Fla.
Lawrence posted $6,000 bond Saturday night and was released from the Broward County Jail.


Technology: ON LINE; Conspiracy buffs see things to worry about in Microsoft's electronic software registry.
THE Microsoft Corporation, already beleaguered by Federal regulators, judges and its software rivals, is under pressure from yet another source: the cyberspace rumor mill.
Even as a Federal appeals court panel gave the company a victory last week, approving the 1994 consent decree between Microsoft and the Justice Department's antitrust division, conspiracy theorists continued to cast the company in a villain's role.
The issue this time is not how much power Microsoft has but what it may do with it.


BUSINESS DIGEST
No Republican Agreement On How Much to Cut Taxes
As the House and the Senate try for a third week to blend their disparate budget-balancing legislation, the assumption is that Republicans are haggling over how much to cut taxes: $350 billion, as the House wants, the Senate's $170 billion, or some other figure.
But their real problem lies in political arithmetic.


Wife Held in Man's Death
A Brooklyn woman was arrested early yesterday in the stabbing death of her husband, the police said.
The husband, Terry Duckett, 38, was stabbed in the heart during a "verbal dispute" at the couple's home, and his wife, Helen, 44, was taken into custody, said Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman.


Fire on East Side Kills 1 and Injures 3
Firefighters and neighbors say Robert Pearson is a hero for holding a bedsheet over the edge of his 11th- floor balcony so a downstairs neighbor could climb out of her burning apartment in midtown Manhattan yesterday.
But Mr.
Pearson does not see it that way.
He is overwhelmed, instead, by what he could not do -- that he could not help another neighbor who lost his grip on the sheet and tumbled 11 stories into the building's courtyard.


Dividend Meetings


For Once, Mets Stick To Their Blueprint
This was the kind of baseball the Mets envisioned themselves playing when the season was in its infancy.
They would play aggressive baseball where runs are manufactured with bunts and steals and not just one swing of the bat.
There would be good defense, solid offensive execution and great pitching.
But putting that blueprint into practice had been an almost unattainable quest for the Mets, until it all came together yesterday afternoon at a steamy Shea Stadium.


Denver Ensemble Reaches Back For a Look at Black Themes
The American Dance Festival is always up to date.
Every year it brings to the campus of Duke University here an array of premieres that attest to the diversity of modern dance.
Yet even as it shows where modern dance is and hints at where it may be going, it is also concerned with where it has been.
On Saturday night at Page Auditorium, the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble, a company from Denver, showed some of the ways in which choreographers have treated black American themes by offering works from the 1930's, 40's and 50's.


Correction
An article in Business Day on Friday about the computer maker Gateway 2000's decision to endorse a new kind of computer compact disk system misstated a rival system's compatibility with existing compact disks.
The Super Compact Disk, or SD, technology made by the Toshiba Corporation and Time Warner Inc., uses a CD player that can play the CD-ROM disks currently used by many computers as well as the new disks that hold far more data.


In Darcey Bussell's 'Swan Lake,' Time Is Savored
George Balanchine once said that the 1895 four-act version of "Swan Lake" was essentially a suite of dances to Tchaikovsky's music.
The narrative may have been unimportant to him, but it helps to know what the ballet's plot is about, as Darcey Bussell proved so persuasively in Balanchine's one-act staging on Saturday afternoon.
Returning for her third season as a guest artist with the New York City Ballet, Ms.
Bussell, a 25-year-old ballerina with Britain's Royal Ballet, triumphed as her golden-girl self.
She stayed within the confines of the City Ballet production at the New York State Theater, yet tempered its glacial formality with the emotional warmth that is more common to standard full-length versions.


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing International, Beijing, part of the Miller Brewing Co. unit of the Philip Morris Cos., to Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam Hong Kong, a joint venture of Dentsu Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., as the first agency to handle its Miller beer brand in China.
The billings were not disclosed.
Y.&amp; R. is the agency of record for the international business of Miller Brewing Co.
Also, Dentsu, Y.&amp; R. was named as the first agency to handle advertising for Five Star, a brewery in Beijing, with which Miller has a licensing agreement.
The billings were not disclosed.


Mayor and Cortines: Issue Is Control
YES, the Mayor and the Schools Chancellor of New York City do not get along, which the whole world must know by now.
But underlying the personal feud that led to Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's resignation last week is a much more fundamental problem, and it will not go away when Mr.
Cortines does.
It's that the school system in New York is this odd duck -- independent from the Mayor, but reliant on him for its money.
Since we are talking about $8 billion a year -- a quarter of the city budget -- this makes Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani unhappy.
He wants more control, as did mayors before him.
In Mr.
Giuliani's view, if he had more authority over the schools, he could be held responsible for public education in New York City.
Today, everyone is, and no one.


Congressional Memo; Usually United, Republicans Find Trouble in Numbers on Issue of Tax Cut
As the House and Senate try for a third week to combine their separate budget-balancing proposals, the presumption is that Republicans are haggling over how much to cut taxes: $350 billion, as the House wants, the Senate's $170 billion bid, or some other figure.
That is true, but those numbers are not their real problem.
The troubling numbers are 51 and 218 -- that is, the minimum of senators and representatives needed to approve a compromise budget blueprint.
The Republicans do not seem to have them in hand yet, largely because their party, so united on virtually every other fiscal matter, is all over the map on taxes.
And there is no reason to believe the task gets easier with time.


MOSCOW ACCEPTS CHECHNYA TALKS
After the failure of two attempts to storm the hospital where Chechen commandos still held as many as 1,000 hostages, Russia's Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, ordered a cease-fire throughout Chechnya today during negotiations by telephone with the commando leader and sent a high-level team to the Chechen capital for peace talks with rebel leaders.
Mr.
Chernomyrdin's forceful intervention was an astonishing reversal of tactics for the Russian Government.
For months, it has refused Western entreaties to halt the fighting in Chechnya and begin serious negotiations with Chechen leaders.
But it agreed to do so today in response to an extraordinary act of terrorism on Russian soil.


Equity Offerings Expected for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ABC Rail Products Corp., Chicago, 2.35 million shares. Paine Webber Inc.


Glimmer of Hope in U.S.-Japan Auto Talks
With the imposition of tariffs on Japanese luxury cars 10 days away, a glimmer of hope for a settlement of the automobile trade dispute between the United States and Japan has begun to emerge, some Government and industry officials from both nations say.
Still, the two sides are sufficiently far apart that it will be hard to reach agreement before June 28, when the tariffs take effect.
"I have been for the first time in 20 months a little more optimistic," an American official, explaining that there is now "a will on both sides" to reach an agreement, even if it means departing somewhat from hard-line positions.
"We can step down from the religious pedestal and try to fashion a solution by giving and taking."


Pavin Triumphs


In Performance; DANCE
A Balanchine Challenge With 3 Dancers in New Roles  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
George Balanchine took his dancers and the audience on a dizzying trip from swooping Romantic near-excess to fiendishly difficult ballet classicism when he created "Tchaikovsky Suite No. 3." And three dancers who recently took on new roles in the piece gave the dance a run for its money in a performance by the New York City Ballet on Friday night.


In Performance; DANCE
A Whale's Innards (Not Your Usual Venue)  Sumie Yonei and Dancers Dance Theater Workshop
Sumie Yonei trapped people inside the belly of a whale in "Minuet in the Box," which her Tokyo-based troupe presented on Thursday night.


Gay Pride Celebration Week Begins
Beginning a week of celebrations that will culminate on Sunday in a march down Fifth Avenue, hundreds of gay and lesbian New Yorkers filled Union Square Park yesterday for what was billed as a rally but looked more like an enormous summertime family picnic.
One family stepped on stage to make a point about Father's Day.
"Being heterosexual doesn't make you a good parent," said Doug Robinson, who was joined by his partner, Michael Elsasser, and their adopted sons, Justin and Zachary.
"A good parent is someone who is willing to go the distance with their child."


Harry Tisch, 68, Former Leader Of East German Labor Unions
Harry Tisch, who headed the Communist labor unions in East Germany and was a member of its ruling Politburo, died yesterday in Berlin.
He was 68.
Friends said the cause was cancer, according to The Associated Press.


Panel Backs Shift in Board Members' Pay
A report to be released today will fortify the campaign to make corporate boards independent of management by paying their members largely in stock.
A panel of shareholder advocates, pay consultants, executives and academics brought together by the National Association of Corporate Directors recommends that companies switch from paying directors mostly in cash and require the directors to buy more shares with their own money.


A Hostage's Ordeal in Russia: Fear of Death, Guilt at Living
Svetlana Aleksandrovna was visiting her parents near Budyonnovsk with her 3-year-old son, Filip, and her younger sister, Larisa, 23, when Chechen militants seized the town on Wednesday.
The three were taken hostage, and all she could think of was "how my parents would bury us -- three coffins in the courtyard here -- and I wondered which of my photographs they would choose for my headstone."
Her husband, in St.
Petersburg, still does not know that she and Filip were taken hostage, she said in a long interview in her parents' house in this village a few miles east of Budyonnovsk.
Her parents did not want to worry him, she said, unrolling a much-creased telegram he sent here that starts, "So, how's life?"


Israel and P.L.O. to Miss Target Date for New Accord
With time running out, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told his Cabinet today that Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization would miss a July 1 target date for a full agreement on expansion of Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank.
Mr.
Rabin reported at the weekly Cabinet meeting that it would not be possible to resolve all differences over an Israeli Army pullback and security arrangements for Jewish settlements by the target date, Cabinet Secretary Shmuel Hollander said.
Mr.
Rabin set no new timetable for an accord.


Sci-Fi Channel Allows 'Chats' While a Show Is in Progress
We know that science-fiction pioneers -- at least since "Star Trek" -- have a mission to boldly go where none have gone before.
That's what the Sci-Fi Channel is trying to do by letting computer users "chat" about a television program in progress and watch their comments scroll along the bottom of the TV screen almost simultaneously as the program unfolds.


Strawberry's Status Remains Unresolved
Much debated, discussed and drawn out, Darryl Strawberry's possible future with the Yankees might not be determined until Monday.
Strawberry, executives from the San Francisco Giants and witnesses for both sides were traveling to New York today for an arbitration hearing that could cement his immediate future with his former team, an element that added intrigue and uncertainty regarding his status.
Bill Goodstein, Strawberry's agent, indicated he did not expect to complete a deal with the Yankees tonight because some issues remained unresolved.
But the time to sign Strawberry, the owner George Steinbrenner's personal project recently, is dwindling for the Yankees.


Adapting 60's Sensibilities to the Internet
For all its growth in recent years, the personal computer industry has a dominant culture -- a curious blend of frontier capitalism and the social values of the 1960's.
Perhaps no one personifies that culture as much as David Bunnell, a veteran both of Students for a Democratic Society, the radical organization of the 60's, and of the New Mexico company that developed the first personal computer in 1975.


Patents; New Cartridges For Videocassettes Offer Fewer Parts and A Plastic That Can Be Recyled
IT might be a long time before videotape cassettes can be recycled, but Global Zero Inc. says that is not because of the cartridges themselves.
The tiny company in Sanford, Me., won its ninth and tenth patents last week for empty videocassette cartridges made with recyclable polypropelene plastic and far fewer parts than the Chinese-made cartridges that dominate sales in the United States.
Now, apparently, the trick is to get recycling centers interested in taking the cartridges.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
May  Wednesday  Balance of Trade . . .
April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
May


Mitch Williams Retires; He Never Overcame '93
Reliever MITCH WILLIAMS walked out of the Angels' clubhouse and into retirement Saturday night after being released.
"This is it," he said.
"I'm going home to Texas, and that's where I'm going to stay."


A Rivalry in Rabble-Rousing As Letter Writers Keep Count
Louis Jay Herman has an opinion on everything. And he is eager to prove it.
With little encouragement Mr.
Herman, who lives on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, pulls out his master list detailing the 859 letters he has written to The New York Times since 1987.
Another list synopsizes the 123 letters that have made it into print -- including the one bashing Pete Rose, another defending Italian Fascists against charges of anti-Semitism, a third making his argument against the need to floss daily.
On a third list, he tracks the success of others whose great passion is writing letters to editors.


Dole Wants to Talk to Nominee For Surgeon General's Position
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, said today that he hoped to meet this week with Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., President Clinton's nominee to be Surgeon General.
Mr.
Dole, a Kansas Republican, said on May 7 that he wanted to meet with Dr.
Foster before the Senate took up the nomination, but the meeting has not occurred.


Pavin's Best Shot Sheds Both Pressure and Label
It was at least a two-fold triumph for Corey Pavin this afternoon at the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club as one of the smallest but cleverest players on the tour whipped the biting wind and the ungenerous course as well as the usual passel of great players.
Pavin, charitably listed at 5 feet 9 inches and weighing 150 pounds, gained a title that he has long cherished -- the United States Open -- and he lost a title that he abhored.
For the last several years, Pavin was known as the Greatest Golfer in the World Never to Win a Major Tournament.
"I'm happy that I'll not hear that phrase directed at me anymore," he said after the tournament.
"It bothered me more than anything else on the planet."


Mother Teresa Talks to Faithful
With her head bowed and her hands clasped in prayer, Mother Teresa of Calcutta was the reluctant center of attention yesterday.
As she entered St.
Mary's Cathedral, and throughout the two-hour Mass, people craned their necks to see the tiny nun, widely regarded as a heroine of the Roman Catholic faith.


George Stafford Is Dead at 80; Headed Commerce Commission
George M. Stafford, a Kansas Republican who was chairman of the Interstate Commerce Commission from 1970 to 1977, died on Friday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 80 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was kidney failure, said his son, Bill.


More Misery for Vietnamese Detainees
Only a few weeks ago, it looked as if the sad saga of the tens of thousands of Vietnamese stuck in squalid detention camps across Southeast Asia was finally heading toward a tolerable conclusion.
Those who did not qualify as political refugees were headed back, under U.N. monitoring, to a Vietnam that was, if no paradise, at least less impoverished and repressive than the one they fled.
Then House Republicans attached an amendment to the foreign aid bill that calls for reconsidering the asylum claims of those already found ineligible and cutting off funding to monitor and assist returned refugees in Vietnam.
This clumsy political gesture touched off riots in the detention camps against any further repatriations and halted the return flow.


Container Tax Repeal Means Jobs for New York
To the Editor:
Your June 12 news article on lobbying in Albany for repeal of the soft drink container tax makes interesting reading but fails to emphasize significant points justifying the industry's position and that of Gov.
George E. Pataki and the Legislature.


Captives Free, U.N. Gives Up Effort to Shield Sarajevo
In a tradeoff that secured the release of the last 26 peacekeepers held hostage by the Bosnian Serbs, the United Nations today abandoned its attempt to protect Sarajevo from bombardment by heavy artillery.
As the peacekeepers were set free, United Nations forces withdrew from the weapons-collection sites where, during the last 16 months, they have attempted to police and control the Serbian guns that were long used to bombard the besieged Bosnian capital.


Anti-Jobs Policy
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration is ready to blame the Federal Reserve Board if the economy shows more signs of dipping into recession (Business Day, June 13).
The Fed has been raising interest rates to slow down the economy, but the Administration now hints the rates should be lowered.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Norway Women Win
Norway scored two first-half goals within three minutes to defeat Germany, 2-0, yesterday and win the women's World Cup championship in Stockholm.


Reyna Makes His Move, Takes U.S. Team With Him
Claudio Reyna moved to forward and had a breakout game.
Kasey Keller did not let a ball by him.
And the interim coach, Steve Sampson, continued to do his best to make himself hard to replace.
The United States dominated Mexico, 4-0, today in a U.S.
Cup match before 38,615 fans with split affections at R.F.K.
Stadium.
It was the most lopsided American victory over Mexico in the countries' 43-match history dating from 1934.
It was also only the seventh United States victory and two of the previous six were awarded via forfeits.


Russia Allows Rebels to Leave With Hostages
In a severe humiliation for Russia's military and Government, a Chechen commando leader who terrorized this small Russian town and took up to 2,000 hostages was allowed to leave freely today for Chechnya after nearly all his demands had been met.
He took with him his fighters and about 150 hostages.
After nine hours of intense negotiations, as the people of Budyonnovsk waited on street corners in the broiling sun to discover the fate of their loved ones, the Chechen commando leader, Shamil Basayev, and his entourage sped out of the gates of the hospital complex they had seized in a daring raid on Wednesday, leaving most of their hostages behind them.


A Way Out of Chechnya
Russians and Chechens keep finding new ways to kill and torment each other.
Their violent confrontation over the weekend in the southern Russian city of Budyonnovsk, where Chechen fighters held 2,000 residents hostage, may have left both sides ready to talk peace.
But like the Chechen war itself, the battle was a senseless conflict in which civilians paid dearly for the military and political miscalculations of Russian and Chechen leaders.
If any further evidence was needed why the war should be ended promptly, the vicious fighting in Budyonnovsk surely supplied it.
The crisis began when a force of about 75 Chechen fighters, seeking to bring the war closer to Russians, attacked the small city located about 70 miles from the Chechen border.
After killing dozens of civilians and terrorizing the city, they herded hostages into a hospital complex, demanding that Moscow withdraw its troops from Chechnya.
The Kremlin initially responded by ordering soldiers from the elite Alpha Division to storm the hospital.
Two assaults were repulsed by the Chechens, who used female hostages as shields.


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.(VRES,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 14


Prudential Settles Broker Case With U.S.
Another problem from its troubled past has emerged to haunt Prudential Securities.
Government regulators announced yesterday that the firm had settled charges, without admitting or denying guilt, that it failed to supervise properly a former broker who engaged in a fraudulent trading involving energy futures.


DICKSTEIN PROPOSAL FOR HILLS STORES WINS BACKING
Institutional Shareholders Services Inc., which advises large institutional shareholders on issues of corporate governance, has recommended that its clients vote for a change of control at the Hills Stores Company, according to people who have seen the report.
The recommendation is likely to aid Dickstein Partners Inc., an investment group with a 14.3 percent stake in Hills, in its bid to elect four directors to the regional discount chain's board as a precursor to auctioning off the company to the highest bidder.
The recommendation by Institutional Shareholders may win broader support for Dickstein's proposal.
Dickstein has offered to buy the company for $27 a share in cash and new debt, but Hills has rejected the offer.
Yesterday, Hills shares fell 25 cents, to $24.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Mission Possible; Reviving a Dying Public School
For six long years, Public School 165 in Manhattan dwelled in the wasteland of New York City's lowest performing schools.
Miserable test scores were only a sliver of the problems that it faced.
Teachers came to school burned out and bitter.
Students and parents ducked for cover during shootouts on the school's street, drug-infested West 109th Street.
Roaches climbed children's legs in the lunchroom.
An asbestos cleanup crew stole half the computers in the sagging, 1890's building.
And a parade of state and city investigators wrote incessant reports on the school's failures.


For Mets, Phils Prove Bitter Pill To Digest
This was a chance for the Mets to show they weren't just going through the motions, but could perhaps be a factor before that thought became laughable.
Achieving some success in a four-game series with the National League East-leading Phillies would give some credibility to their sputtering season.
But the Phillies weren't about to be the Mets' get-well elixir.
So by the time the first game of their series was complete last night at Shea Stadium, the Phillies had earned an efficient 6-3 victory and given the Mets a lesson about what it takes to be a real contender.


Price Climb Is Resumed By Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities resumed their climb to higher levels yesterday, as market optimism of a Fed easing increased because of recent remarks by Fed officials.
Even as market participants remain divided over whether the economy is running out of steam or not, they expect an interest rate cut soon, traders said.


Marquette Electronics Inc.(MARQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Israel's Russians Organize to Win Respect
As Anatoly Shcharansky, he was one of the best-known "refuseniks" in the Soviet Union, until he was freed in 1986 as part of an East-West prisoner exchange.
Now, after nine years in Israel, the same amount of time that he spent in Soviet prisons and work camps, Natan Sharansky is taking on the Israeli authorities with similar fervor.


CHRONICLE
Just 15 months after an operation to replace her left hip, ELIZABETH TAYLOR underwent surgery yesterday to have her right hip replaced.
The Associated Press, quoting Chen Sam, Miss Taylor's publicity agent, reported that the actress, who is 63, entered Century City Hospital in Los Angeles on Sunday and that the operation was performed early yesterday.


Elusive Sunburn Index
To the Editor:
Re Jane E. Brody's June 14 Personal Health column on safety in the sun:


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Manhattan Project Set to Music
The woman in "The Woman at Otowi Crossing" -- Stephen Paulus's new piece for the Opera Theater of Saint Louis -- serves as a fulcrum.
On it the newly invented atomic bomb and the mystical powers of New Mexico's Pueblo people teeter back and forth.
At Helen Chalmers's tearoom in the desert, Manhattan Project scientists dine and agonize.
Around them, the magic of the countryside is in operation.
What a loaded subject.
The ambition of Messiaen or the wildness of Scriabin might have provided it suitable scale.
Mr.
Paulus is more a domesticator.
So is Joan Vail Thorne, whose adaptation of a Frank Waters novel based on fact reduces big ideas to little ones and adds homey ornament to bare circumstance.
What was apparently a lonely yet exultant life now roils with fictional family conflict: ambivalence over an insistent suitor, a visit by a disaffected daughter.
The cosmic has been shrunk to parlor size.
What's a mother to do? becomes as critical a question as human survival.


Chess
Gary Kasparov of Russia took no chances in winning the Professional Chess Association's Super Classic Tournament in Novgorod, Russia, in early June.
He pointedly avoided being lured into the type of unclear attack that had failed him three weeks before in an event in Amsterdam.
In tallying 6 1/2-2 1/2 in Novgorod, he quickly took the lead and sat back with four conservative draws in a row at the end, watching his opponents' fruitless attempts to overtake him.
Sharing second place were: Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine, Nigel Short of England, Veselin Topalov of Bulgaria and Jan Ehlvest of Estonia.
Each scored 5 1/2-3 1/2.


Growls From Barracks Echo in Peru and Chile
There were no coups or crackdowns in the streets, but the military forces of Peru and Chile demonstrated last week how reluctant they are to give up their influence in two of Latin America's struggling democracies.
Pressed by the military, Peru's Government approved a broad amnesty law absolving the military of human rights abuses committed during its 15-year war with leftist guerrillas.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new campaign will spread the word that QVC is much more than cubic zirconia jewelry.
THE initials QVC in the name of the cable television home shopping network stand for quality, value and convenience.
But beginning in a couple of weeks, viewers will be excused for believing they mean Quite a Voluble Channel.
QVC, owned since February by Comcast Inc., is undertaking an elaborate integrated communications campaign that includes its first sponsorship agreement, with the country singing star Clint Black; plans to introduce interactive shopping as part of the on-line service being developed by the Microsoft Corporation, and the largest budget for advertising since the network began operations in 1986.
The campaign begins in July and runs through the end of the year, timed to peak during the important holiday shopping season.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Bad Host in Fact, Good in Fiction
It is the consensus in Hollywood that Alan Thicke is not the most talented television personality in North America.
But could he be the most persistent?
The most resilient?
The luckiest?
He could.
Although the 48-year-old Mr.
Thicke is still widely remembered as the grievously miscast host of "Thicke of the Night," a misbegotten mid-1980's effort to dethrone Johnny Carson, he has in fact enjoyed a lucrative and extraordinarily failure-free career over the last decade.


High Court, Changing Recent Course, Makes It Harder for Prisoners to Sue
The Supreme Court today repudiated the approach of its recent prisoners-rights cases and made it substantially more difficult for prisoners to bring constitutional lawsuits challenging prison management.
Only actions by prison officials that impose "atypical and significant hardship on the inmate" should be treated by Federal judges as even potential violations of an inmate's constitutional right to due process of law, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist said in his 5-to-4 majority opinion.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(AGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bosnia Mission: Can U.N. Learn From Its Failures?
On a freezing day in February 1994, as NATO planes waited to strike, the United Nations mission to Bosnia muddled its way to a fateful decision: Instead of collecting Serbian guns ringing Sarajevo, peacekeepers went to the Serbian gun positions to watch over them.
The decision, which followed a mortar attack on Sarajevo's central market that had killed 68 people, was made to avoid further violence.
It averted, at the very last minute, the NATO bombing threatened under the terms of an ultimatum calling for all guns to be removed beyond 12.5 miles from Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or be handed over to United Nations control.


Jury Indicts Florida Mayor on Bribery Charges
The Mayor of Key West, Fla., was indicted here today on Federal bribery charges of taking money in exchange for his votes.
Along with the Mayor, Dennis J. Wardlow, a grand jury also indicted the Key West lawyer who is accused of paying him off, as well as a city commissioner who has been charged with taking bribes in an unrelated scheme to obtain a business license for a company that planned to use pink Cadillacs to give tours of the island.


Big Merger to Create Bank Giant in East
In a deal that will create a banking giant from Connecticut to Florida, the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., plans to buy First Fidelity Bancorp of New Jersey for $5.4 billion in stock.
The combination would be the nation's sixth-largest banking company.
The takeover of First Fidelity, New Jersey's largest independent bank, could be the first shot in a new battle for Northeast institutions, which have been preoccupied with recovering from bad real estate loans and have not been actively buying smaller banks.


N.B.A. Players Send Message Of Displeasure To Union
Negotiators for National Basketball Association owners and players continued trying to complete a new labor agreement yesterday, but players and agents made their job potentially more difficult by escalating their dispute with the union's leader.
According to agents, a steady stream of players signed their names to notices saying they no longer wanted the union to represent them in collective bargaining.
The list, the agents said, included Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, Reggie Miller, Scottie Pippen, Horace Grant, Moses Malone and Alonzo Mourning.


A Modern 'Rigoletto,' With Drugs and Titles
For the last 11 seasons, the Opera Festival of New Jersey has had a policy of performing foreign-language operas in English translation, a practice much maligned by opera purists but a defensible and valuable option.
But the new season opened on Saturday with a modern-dress production of Verdi's "Rigoletto" performed in Italian with English supertitles.
The trend toward supertitles is proving impossible to buck.
The staging concept was the work of the director, Edward Berkeley.
The Duke is a cocaine-snorting creep; his courtiers are a motley crew of slicked-down sycophants.
But for all the show of hipness, the staging was confused.
Ron Kadri's set was a jumble of marble ruins and chain-link fences.
Amid all the roughnecks at the Duke's place, two cute young guys make out in the background.
But soon they drift into the arms of two scantily clad molls, where the fellows seemed distinctly uncomfortable.
And when the Duke's men sing Verdi's choruses, they moved with standardized operatic gestures that could fit into any production of "Rigoletto" anywhere.


Cuba Tells U.S. It Will Not Extradite Fugitive Financier
The Cuban Government told American diplomats today that it does not plan to extradite Robert L. Vesco to the United States even though Cuba hinted after arresting him in Havana two weeks ago that it would hand him over, Administration officials said today.
State Department officials said they were disappointed by the decision, which came after the Clinton Administration told Cuban officials that it wanted Mr.
Vesco returned so that he could be tried on embezzlement and narcotics charges.


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


By Design; Jellies: In With the Tide
Remember jellies?
Those fishermen's sandals with clear vinyl straps that resemble jellyfish?
Every 10 years or so they creep back into fashion, and they've arrived in a tidal wave.
Sometimes the vinyl is colorless and nearly invisible; sometimes it's dyed a color like pink or blue.
Sometimes the soles are also of clear vinyl, and other times they're made of a heavier material.
Jellies are a neat beach sandal but can finish off any casual summer outfit in town, in the country or wherever.


Teekay Shipping Corp. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


For Nonprogrammers
PROGRAMMING is not for most of us.
It requires both excruciating attention to detail and a creative bent.
Both left brain and right brain work hard.
But programming does not require vast knowledge of mathematics, at least beyond the grade-school-to-early-college levels.
Basic arithmetic helps, as it does in the rest of life, and algebra and a touch of symbolic logic can reward a programmer, but Godel's theorem is not required reading.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Darryl Strawberry, outfielder, on a one-year contract.


Sizzler International Inc.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Hibernians See Vindication In Emphasis on Free Speech
By upholding the exclusion of a gay, lesbian and bisexual group from the St.
Patrick's Day Parade in Boston, the Supreme Court vindicated the Ancient Order of Hibernians in its long-running efforts to keep a gay contingent out of the line of march in New York City, lawyers for the Hibernians said yesterday.
For their part, gay and lesbian organizations in New York were disappointed and angered by the Supreme Court decision, but several said they took comfort that the Justices had strongly supported the right of free speech while avoiding a broad ruling on gay civil rights.
One group, the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, said the decision might be helpful to its challenge of the military's policy on homosexual service members.


Report on S.&amp; L. Supervision Draws Criticism by Officials
A dozen current and former Government officials today questioned the accuracy of a report last year by Treasury Department officials that concluded the Government had done enough to recover money from wrongdoers at savings and loans that failed in Texas.
Testifying before a House banking oversight subcommittee, investigators and lawyers who worked at the Dallas office of the agency that supervised the savings and loans after they failed all criticized the agency for not aggressively pursuing misconduct by Texas savings executives.
Many also said the review by Treasury Department officials of complaints in Texas about the agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, was a whitewash.


Gilberto Gil's Melange Of Styles and Messages
For decades in countries outside Europe and North America, the most socially and politically galvanizing musicians to emerge have been those with one ear tuned to influences beyond their borders and another sensitive to the musical needs of their home region.
On Sunday afternoon, during the opening weekend of the Central Park Summerstage series, Gilberto Gil and Chico Science, two Brazilian musicians of different generations and from different areas, combined a gift for marrying musical styles with a talent for writing smart, socially conscious songs.
The result was a satisfying and rewarding double bill.
Mr.
Gil (pronounced ZHEEL), who headlined the show, is one of Brazil's leading musical and political visionaries.
But he wasn't always.
Along with Caetano Veloso, another musician from his home state of Bahia, Mr.
Gil was exiled in the 1960's for corrupting Brazilian culture and youth with the rock-tinged hybrid he and Mr.
Veloso created, called tropicalismo.
Today, partly as a result of his education in exile in England, Mr.
Gil has become a first-class songwriter, writing dense and meaningful metaphors, smoothly mixing electric guitar and acoustic instruments and gracefully combining Jamaican reggae, African rhythms, English and American pop and an array of Brazilian styles from samba to the more languid music of the northeast.


For Haytaian, Feisty Preview Of His Tone As Chairman
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman wanted more forceful leadership for the New Jersey Republican Party when she chose Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian to lead the party last Thursday, and in his first appearance as chairman-designate today, Mr.
Haytaian delivered.
Mr.
Haytaian came to Rider University here to debate his Democratic Party counterpart, Brendan (Tom) Byrne, and the Speaker rarely missed a chance to deploy the rhetorical arsenal that has helped make him the most powerful political figure in the state after his patron, the Governor.


Patterson Dental Co.(PDCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


In Lightness and Other States, the Glare of Graham's Legacy
David Wood was one of Martha Graham's most memorable solo dancers.
And it was no surprise to see the high quality of performing by his Bay Area Repertory Dance/East, a group of former students, on Saturday night at Kaye Playhouse.
The evening began on a very high note with Mr.
Wood's 1985 "Duad," a duet performed to an evocative score by Douglas Johnson that propelled the dancers through what sometimes seemed like a journey into an unthreatening unknown.
Whether they were pulling close or separating, Christopher Dolder and Anne Westwick looked as if they were moving through a sacred space for dancing, an effect enhanced by the clear light designed by Louise Guthman.
Open and direct, the two had the invigorating freshness of new paint.


Violinist and Scholar Named Dean at Mannes
The Mannes College of Music has appointed Joel Lester to succeed Charles Kaufman as dean when Mr.
Kaufman leaves the post in January 1996.
Mr.
Lester, the head of the doctoral program in music performance at City College and the Graduate School of the City University of New York, was a founding member of the Da Capo Chamber Players.


Heat Says It Wants Riley, But Ball's in Knicks' Corner
The Miami Heat wants Pat Riley.
Whether Riley wants Miami, or whether the Knicks will let Riley out of the final year of his contract, remains to be seen.
Dave Wohl, Miami's executive vice president, confirmed at a news conference yesterday that he wanted Riley to coach the Heat.
But Wohl said he had not spoken to Riley, nor had he asked the Knicks for permission to speak with their former coach.
Riley resigned last week with one year remaining on his contract, which prevents Riley from coaching elsewhere in the 1995-96 season unless the Knicks give him permission.
However, Wohl sounded willing to wait a year if he had to, even if it meant that Wohl would coach the Heat himself next season.


State-Mandate Bill Approved
Voters will be asked this November whether they want to change the New Jersey Constitution to make the state pay for programs it requires local governments and schools to carry out.
The Assembly gave final approval yesterday to the proposed "state mandate, state pay" amendment by a vote of 77 to 0.
Supporters acknowledged that even if the measure passes, lawmakers will have to decide exactly what constitutes a state mandate.
TERRY PRISTIN


COMPANY NEWS;
The Alliance Gaming Corporation, a Las Vegas-based operator of gambling machines and the owner of casinos in Mississippi and Nevada, said yesterday that it had offered to acquire Bally Gaming International, the nation's second-largest slot machine maker after International Game Technology of Reno, for more than $134 million, or $12.50 a share, in cash and stock.
The unsolicited bid came two months after WMS Industries, a Chicago-based manufacturer of gambling machines and coin-operated amusement equipment, said it had agreed in principle to acquire Bally Gaming in a cash and stock deal valued at $127 million, or about $11.85 a share.


Indians Continue Late-Inning Heroics
Indians 4, Red Sox 3
Manny Ramirez led off the 10th inning with a home run, Cleveland's third of the game, giving the Indians a 4-3 victory over Boston last night at Jacobs Field.


Prejudice Exists Even at Greenwich High School; Our Justified Anger
To the Editor:
That five supposedly educated young men indulged in a planned racial insult at Greenwich High School raises a question that is all too frequent in today's confrontational, in-your-face society: How does one of us or the community as a whole combat language that is crude, offensive and intentionally hurtful?


Biggest German Banks Seeking Wealth Abroad
Few developments in the German banking world say more about the evolution of finance in this country than the news last week that Dresdner Bank A.G. was talking to the British merchant banking group Kleinwort Benson about a $1.5 billion takeover.
Here is the bank that many describe as culturally the most German of the big institutions -- one known for focusing on the conservative, risk-averse domestic market -- deciding to step off its home turf into the cutthroat world of London investment banking.


Judge Orders State to Provide Special Help to Deaf Prisoners
Ruling that New York State had violated the constitutional rights of deaf prison inmates, a Federal judge in Manhattan ordered the state yesterday to provide deaf prisoners with sign-language interpreters, typewriterlike devices for communicating by telephone, closed-caption televisions and other services.
The ruling by Judge Robert W. Sweet came in a class-action lawsuit filed four years ago by six deaf prisoners.
The inmates contended that their inability to communicate had effectively isolated them from the world and had made it impossible for them to understand disciplinary, grievance and parole hearings, much less go to educational classes.


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Patterson in Line for Post
The former heavyweight champion FLOYD PATTERSON was nominated by Gov.
GEORGE E. PATAKI yesterday to be chairman of the New York State Athletic Commission.
Patterson "exemplifies the hard work and determination our state needs to once again make New York the world's boxing capital," the Governor said.


Harry Loomer, 86, Psychiatrist, Dies
Dr.
Harry B. Loomer, a psychiatrist whose pioneering research into drug treatment for depression was recognized after court litigation, died on Thursday at Columbia Memorial Hospital in Hudson, N.Y.
He was 86 and lived in Taghkanic, N.Y.
As a senior psychiatrist at the Rockland Psychiatric Center in Orangeburg, N.Y., in 1957, he and a colleague, Dr.
John C. Saunders, described the successful use of iproniazid as a "psychic energizer" for 17 chronic hospital patients.
When the research resulted in a $10,000 scientific prize for their superior, Dr.
Nathan S. Kline, the two men separately filed suits.
Although Dr.
Loomer dropped out of the litigation, a jury ruled compensation was due and the New York State Court of Appeals upheld the decision in 1981.


Award for Rutgers President
Rutgers University's president, Francis L. Lawrence, the target of protests earlier this year over remarks he made about blacks, was honored by a Hispanic group at the university yesterday.
Mr.
Lawrence received the Hispanic Women Leadership Institute's Eagle award for his contributions to multiculturalism and leadership development.
Protesters had demanded Mr.
Lawrence's resignation because he said that blacks lack the "genetic, hereditary background" to score higher on standardized tests.


New York, New York, It's Strawberry's Town
Darryl Strawberry wearing Yankee pinstripes might have seemed unthinkable, but at least one native of the Bronx thinks it won't be a strange sight.
"Even Yankee people went to see him play," Bobby Bonilla said of Strawberry's eight-year career with the Mets.
"He was a love-hate guy, and regardless of whether you loved or hated him, you came to see him. And that's what's important. I don't think they've ever really gotten over Strawberry here in New York. It's a great opportunity for him."


Corrections
Because of editing errors, an article on Sunday about a mutiny by Iraqi Army units against President Saddam Hussein referred incorrectly to the date when he came to power and to the period when he began to tighten his circle of supporters.
He came to power in 1968, not 1969 or 1979.
His base of support narrowed after the Persian Gulf war, not shortly after he came to power.


Newspaper Reviewed
The editor of New York Newsday said yesterday that an examination of the newspaper's "viability" is under way by its owner, Times Mirror Company, and that one option under consideration would be to close the New York City edition.
It was the first public confirmation that Times Mirror is reviewing its commitment to the edition.
Article, page B3.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Prized Lab Shifts to More Mundane Tasks
ON Jan. 10, Dr.
Robert W. Wilson, a co-winner of the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physics and a former astronomy wizard at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories, observed his 59th birthday at the South Pole, where he and other exiles from Bell Labs were using a radiotelescope to probe the structure of interstellar gas clouds.
His colleagues at the celebration, for which the South Pole Station cook had used a high-altitude recipe to bake a cake, included Dr.
Antony A. Stark, who, like Dr.
Wilson, now works for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge, Mass., and Dr.
John Bally of the University of Colorado.
All three had been caught in the squeeze created by the laboratory's termination of many of its basic research programs.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Gay Spirit in the Fight Against the Axis
"Coming Out Under Fire" is an account of the United States military's policy toward homosexuals in World War II, as experienced by several of those who suffered for being who they are.
Based on Alan Berube's book of the same title, this hourlong offering from the Independent Television Service is a reminder of a time when psychiatrists viewed homosexuals as mentally ill and the military viewed them as dangerous to morale, not to mention morality.


In Harlem, the Women Send a Message


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Stocks Keep Setting Highs; Nasdaq Jumps
Led by technology companies and bank issues, the stock market rose to record levels yesterday as the Nasdaq composite index posted its biggest one-day leap in 14 months.
Sharply rising bond prices gave equities an additional lift.
The Dow Jones industrial average hit a record 4,553.68 yesterday, up 42.89 points.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks rose 5.39 points, to 545.22, also a record.
But the top performer for the day was the Nasdaq composite, rich with technology stocks, which rose 13.44 points, to a record level of 922.09.


METRO DIGEST
HISTORY OF ILLS AT IMMIGRATION JAILS
James F. Slattery started small, managing a hotel on the edge of Kennedy Airport.
He kept the Riviera hotel filled through a contract with the Government to absorb the overflow from immigration jails, which convinced him that the future of the lodging industry lay not with tourists but with inmates.
In six years, Mr.
Slattery and his partners built the fifth largest prison business in the country.  [ Page A1. ]
The Union County Prosecutor's office and the Elizabeth Police Department have called for the closing of the Esmor detention center.  [ B4. ] NEW YORK CITY  BIAS DEBATE DIVIDES A SCHOOL
The teachers and students of Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan are spending the end of the school year divided, wrestling with the troubling issues of anti-Semitism and racism and what to do about both.
At an emotional meeting, most of the high school's 130 teachers voted to ask Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to bar from graduation ceremonies six seniors who wrote or knew of an anti-Semitic note given to a teacher.  [ B3. ] SUSPENSION OF GOTTI LAWYER IS UPHELD
A Federal appeals court chastised Bruce Cutler, John Gotti's lawyer, for defying a judge's order to curb his fist-waving remarks to the press on behalf of his client, and it affirmed his sentence of three months of house arrest and suspension from practice in some Federal courts for six months.  [ B3. ]
Mayor Giuliani presses his quest for veto power in the choice of a schools chancellor.  [ B2. ]
A fifth New York City police officer has been linked to a drunken rampage through several hotels in Washington, the police said.  [ B3. ]
In two accidents one hour apart, a 12-year-old youth and an 84-year-old man were struck and killed in Brooklyn by cars whose drivers did not stop, the police said.  [ B3. ] REGION  COMPROMISE ON BUDGET
State legislative leaders in New Jersey released a compromise version of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's budget for the coming fiscal year that preserves the Governor's 15 percent income tax cut for 1996 and eliminates several increases in taxes and fees.  [ B5. ]
Governor Whitman's choice of Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian to lead the state Republican Party delivers for his patron in his first appearance as chairman-designate.  [ B5. ] WHERE PIT BULLS ARE TREATED AS PETS
It is shaping up to be another pit bull summer.
The dogs are arriving at the Elmsford Animal Shelter in Westchester County at a steady pace, about one a day.
The pit bull fad seemed to reach its peak in the 1980's.
But people who work in animal shelters will tell you it has gotten worse.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B5. ] JUDGE RULES FOR DEAF PRISON INMATES
Ruling that New York State had violated the constitutional rights of deaf prison inmates, a Federal judge in Manhattan ordered the state to provide deaf prisoners with sign-language interpreters, devices for communicating by telephone and closed-caption televisions.  [ B2. ] POLICE OFFICER CLEARED IN KILLING AT MALL
A Suffolk County grand jury has refused to indict a police officer who fatally shot a 21-year-old college student at a Long Island mall.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B2


Police Haven't Demonstrated Fitness to Oversee School Safety
To the Editor:
Re "The School Violence Fight" (editorial, June 13): It defies belief that you say "Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is on solid ground in suggesting that the New York City Police Department should assume responsibility for safety in the schools" on the day you publish an article about charges of police brutality in Brooklyn.


Price/Costco Inc.(PCCW,NNM) reports earnings for 12wks to May 7


Sizzler International Inc.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Lift, Drag, Spin and Torque: Sending Toys Aloft
EACH summer, they fill the skies with aerobatic wonder.
Above beaches, parks, picnic areas and just about any open space, they are like flocks of oddly shaped birds feathered in plastic, metal, cloth or wood.
Whether soaring or diving, dashing or fluttering, zipping away or coming back, millions of throwing toys in diverse shapes, sizes and colors go aloft each day as testimony to human fascination with flight and competition.


What's in a File Name? Confusion
A YEAR ago Windows 95 was known as Chicago and expected late in 1994.
Since then a combination of curiosity, speculation, publicity and delay has made this operating system the cynosure of the computer business.
Countering industry japes that the long-delayed product might not arrive before its name became history, the Microsoft Corporation has announced that Windows 95 will be available on Aug. 24, the date when Mount Vesuvius erupted in A.D. 79.
Barring a similar cataclysm, it is safe to say that lots of people will be using Windows 95 before long.
But few programs are fully compliant with Windows 95, and until new versions arrive beginning right after the Vesuvius anniversary, using Windows 95 is unlikely to be the joyful experience Microsoft would have you believe.
Even when new programs do appear, mixing them with current models may produce confusion and possibly grief.


Regional Banking Giants on the Line
The decision that has long concerned smaller banks across the country -- whether to merge with a larger bank or remain independent -- is becoming a pressing issue for regional giants as well.
The willingness of the First Fidelity Bancorp of Newark, the nation's 25th-largest banking company, to merge into the 9th-ranked First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., is a sharp strategic departure for First Fidelity, whose recent practice has been to buy smaller banks.
But if First Fidelity -- whose chairman, Anthony P. Terracciano, is highly regarded in the banking industry -- now thinks it is too small to compete, then many investors and analysts expect other banking companies will come to a similar conclusion.


TV Offers a Melodrama in Real Time
Russian television viewers have a pretty high threshold for amazement.
That's understandable in a country that has watched a coup attempt, the death of an empire, an assault by the President on Parliament and a brutal war.
But even for Russia, the sight of the stolid, dour Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, negotiating live, on television, with the leader of a band of Chechen terrorists provoked amazement here today.


INSIDE
Cuba to Hold Vesco
The Cuban Government said it does not plan to extradits Robert L. Vesco, the fugitive financier, to the United States.
Page A8.
Gas Guzzlers in the Kitchen
Most of the 180,000 refrigerators in New York City public housing are to be replaced over the next nine years for more efficient ones.
Page B1.
Strawberry Joins Yanks
Five years after leaving New York and the Mets, Darryl Strawberry has agreed to a contract with the Yankees.
Page B11.


Yanks Give More Proof They Need A Pitcher
If Darryl Strawberry were the savior the Yankees desperately desire, he would be able to pitch competently every five days and do a capable imitation of Jimmy Key.
George Steinbrenner made noise today by signing Strawberry to hit, but ineffective pitching tonight continued to make the Yankees mediocre.
Cal Ripken Jr. also helped doom them.
Melido Perez's evening turned dreary in the first inning as the Orioles treated him like their favorite pitching machine, pelting him for three runs and five hits before he secured an out.
It was a damaging way to start the evening because the Yankees never recovered from a deficit that increased to four runs and succumbed to Baltimore, 5-4.


MFP Technology Services Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Taming the School Feud
Following Ramon Cortines's resignation as New York City Schools Chancellor, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani insists he has the right to approve Mr.
Cortines's successor.
The Board of Education president, Carol Gresser, says "no way." But Mr.
Cortines's departure should mark a fresh beginning rather than a new fight.
It will if everyone backs off and reviews some first principles of governance.
To begin with, the serial vacancies in the schools chancellor's job reflect a flaw in the makeup of the Board of Education.
This page has long supported giving the mayor a majority of appointees.
The present system of letting the borough presidents dominate the appointment process has produced nightmarish problems.
Gov.
George Pataki said yesterday that he was for legislation to give the mayor and City Council greater control over choosing board members.
That would be the reasonable channel for mayoral influence, and every New Yorker with influence in Albany should support such a change.


Micron Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 1


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, a unit of the Philip Morris Cos., to the Chicago office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., to introduce Big Sky and Big Sky Light beer in Wisconsin.
The brand is priced below premium brands like Miller Lite.
Billings were not disclosed. *
American Institute of Architects, Washington, to Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio, Baltimore, to handle its account, previously at the Martin Agency, Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.


Dole Relents on Surgeon General Vote
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, met today with Dr.
Henry W. Foster, President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General, and relented on his threat to block a confirmation vote on Dr.
Foster's nomination.
Mr.
Dole said he would meet on Tuesday with the minority leader, Senator Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota, to schedule a vote on Dr.
Foster, whose acknowledgment that he performed abortions has created widespread opposition in the Senate.


Operator of Immigration Jails Has a History of Troubles
James F. Slattery started small, managing a hotel on the edge of Kennedy International Airport.
He kept the Riviera hotel filled through a contract with the Federal Government to absorb the overflow from immigration jails, which convinced him that the future of the lodging industry lay not with tourists but with inmates.
In six years, Mr.
Slattery and other partners built the fifth largest prison business in the country, as Federal and local governments turned increasingly to private companies to handle the exploding inmate population.
As the company hired former high-ranking immigration officials for their expertise, it expanded and now runs 10 halfway houses, boot camps and detention centers from Seattle to Brooklyn.
Esmor Correctional Services, a publicly traded company based in Melville, L.I., projects earnings of more than $36 million this year.


Univar Corp.(UVX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Panel Sets Rules for a Prison
A special prison for sex offenders drew intense criticism last year after a man who had spent six years there was charged after his release with the sexual assault and killing of a 7-year-old girl, Megan Kanka.
A legislative task force has recommended keeping open the Adult Diagnostic and Treatment Center at Avenal but reducing its population.
The task force said sex offenders should be sent to Avenal for treatment only at the end of a prison sentence.
Under the proposed legislation, all sex offenders would have to appear before a parole board before being released.


Baseball Network Faces a Full Count
What's going on with The Baseball Network?
Not much, regarding its future.
The joint venture of Major League Baseball, ABC and NBC to air network games and sell advertising will not reach the $330 million in 1994-95 revenues needed to merit an automatic two-year renewal.


Topps Co.(TOPP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


ATP Hits Becker With Fine
BORIS BECKER has been fined $20,000 for insinuating after a defeat in the Monte Carlo Open final last month that the winner, Thomas Muster, had taken drugs, the ATP Tour announced yesterday.
Becker has appealed, the ATP said.
Muster, after complaining of dehydration in his semifinal victory over ANDREA GAUDENZI, rallied from two sets down in the final to defeat Becker in five sets on April 30.
It was part of a winning streak that reached 35 matches with Muster's recent triumph at the French Open.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Wait! Isn't This Backward?; Roles Reversed in U.S.-Japan Dispute on Airlines
In the automobile trade dispute with the United States, Japan has said it cannot accept Washington's demands, saying they add up to "managed trade." If American cars and car parts do not sell well in Tokyo, Japan says, it is simply because they are not competitive.
But in another long-running trade dispute that erupted today, Japan is seeking precisely such managed trade.
It wants to put a limit on the number of flights made by United States airlines to Japan, and beyond.
Washington opposes such limits, saying Japanese airlines are simply not competitive, and has now struck back against Japan's latest moves.


Reichstag Under Wraps


World News Briefs; Walesa Defends Priest After Anti-Semitic Slur
Under fire from Polish Jews for remaining silent about anti-Semitic remarks made by a prominent Roman Catholic priest in his presence, President Lech Walesa has defended the priest as his friend.
Pressed at a news conference on Sunday, Mr.
Walesa said he would not comment on the priest, the Rev.
Henryk Jankowski, who make his remarks during a Mass at the President's parish in Gdansk.
But Mr.
Walesa said he did not believe that Father Jankowski is anti-Semitic.


Norand Corp.(NRND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABBOTT LABORATORIES INC., Abbott Park, Ill., entered an alliance with Arqule Inc. to speed the development of the novel drug compounds.
Terms were not disclosed.
FIDELITY NATIONAL FINANCIAL INC., Irvine, Calif., a title insurance underwriter,, said it planned to buy National Title Inc., Overland Park, Kan., a unit of Nations Holding Group, for $30 million in cash and stock.
HOST MARRIOTT CORP., Bethesda, Md., announced the acquisition of the San Antonio Marriott Riverwalk Hotel for about $50 million.


How to Beat the Heat


Police Haven't Demonstrated Fitness to Oversee School Safety; Losing a Chancellor
To the Editor:
Shame on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for hounding out of office the person most able to diagnose the problem, design a solution and implement programs in New York City's school system (front page, June 16).
Shame on the Mayor for disparaging the city's most competent advocate for children.


Nabisco's Snackwell to Offer Yogurt
RJR Nabisco's successful Snackwell's line will soon branch out from the cookie and cracker aisle to the dairy case in the nation's supermarkets, when the company introduces a no-fat chocolate yogurt line this week.
Nabisco's Fleischmann's dairy division will roll out six different chocolate yogurt flavors this month in the Northeast and several Midwestern markets with a $14 million advertising campaign conducted by FCB/ Leber Katz Partners, New York, part of True North Communications, the trade magazine Brandweek reported yesterday.


A Spirited Woman Without Sight
Trying to shatter stereotypes with a portrait of a blind woman who refuses to be, in her words, "a goody-two-shoes," "Out of Sight" only ends up showing how the blind can be as tacky as anyone else.
Produced and directed by David R. Sutherland, whose previous credits include incisive portraits of the artists Jack Levine and Paul Cadmus, the documentary is to be presented tonight on "P.O.V," the gutsy forum for independent nonfiction films.
Diane Starin, now in her mid-thirties, lost both eyes to cancer of the optic nerve at the age of 18 months.
Her strong-willed mother decided, "You can make a neurotic mess out of this child, or you can make her a happy baby." From then on, she recalls, "Diane just took the ball and ran with it." Not always wisely.
Mr.
Sutherland takes pains to tell the story not of a blind person but of a spirited, vain woman named Diane.
The problem with that approach, for all its political correctness, is that there is no ignoring the formidable hurdles presented by blindness.


Dispute Erupts on Plans For Ancient Footprints
A PLAN to conserve the oldest known humanlike footprints in Africa by re-excavating them, treating the soil to eliminate encroaching root growth and other threats and then reburying the trackway has been attacked by an international group of scientists and Tanzanian Government officials.
In a resolution adopted at a meeting this month in Italy, the group disapproved of the proposal to expose the 3.5-million-year-old footprints at Laetoli, scheduled to begin in two weeks, because it might damage the trackway and was "incompatible with a long-term conservation strategy that involves displaying the footprints for educational purposes, tourism and future scientific use."


Sports of The Times; Darryl Must Keep His Eye on Ball
YEARS after departing New York, Darryl Strawberry has chosen to describe his experiences with the Mets as baseball's version of a Roman orgy.
Now Strawberry, once a Mets superstar and as of yesterday a Yankees reclamation project, is returning to the original scene of the crimes.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Bernard R. Ostrow, Food Executive, 76
Bernard R. Ostrow, the founder and former president of a large kosher-food processing business in Newark, died on Friday at his home in West Orange, N.J.
He was 76 and also lived in Delray Beach, Fla.
The cause was complications from congestive heart failure, his family said.


Scripps Award Recalls Two Pioneers
The presentation of the 1995 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award tonight honored the memory of two dance pioneers: Pearl Primus and Helen Tamiris.
The ceremonies at Page Auditorium on the campus of Duke University here acknowledged their achievements with words and dances.
The award of $25,000, presented annually since 1981, usually goes to distinguished living choreographers.
This is the second time that it has been given posthumously.
In 1989 it was presented as a memorial celebrating three other historically important choreographers: Doris Humphrey, Charles Weidman and Jose Limon.
As in 1989, the money will be used to provide scholarships for students at the festival's summer school.


WorthingtonIndustries(WTHG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Please Check All Baggage: Yanks Sign Strawberry
Start practicing your "Darryl, Darryl" chant and do not adjust the television when you see him wearing pinstripes because Darryl Strawberry finally and officially signed a one-year contract with the Yankees today.
The once unfathomable notion that Strawberry could return to play baseball in New York, or return to play at all, was obliterated because the principal owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner, vigorously pursued the former Met with the questionable past.


Court Allows Welfare Cuts In Connecticut
The state's highest court ruled today that Connecticut has no constitutional responsibility to care for its poorest citizens, upholding a 1992 law that allows cities and towns to cut off welfare benefits to able-bodied individuals after nine months.
The decision, which clears the way for other welfare cutbacks adopted this year, follows a national trend among states to scale back assistance programs for single adults.
The 144-page ruling pointed out that in only one state -- New York -- have state courts recognized a constitutional right to subsistence.


Hunt Manufacturing Co.(HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Where Tarnished Pit Bulls Tidy Up Their Image
It is shaping up to be another pit bull summer.
The dogs are arriving at the Elmsford Animal Shelter at a steady pace, about one a day.
As the dogfighting season reaches full swing, more and more will wind up here, battered, broken, all the worse for wear.
"Another one's coming in right now," said Dana Rocco, the shelter manager, as a stocky tan pit bull was ushered up the steps of the building first thing yesterday morning.


International Multifoods Corp.(IMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Those Troubled Marriages Out of Genesis
A concept opera is usually an invitation to trendy gimmickry.
In the case of "Hotel Eden," by the composer Henry Mollicone and the librettist Judith Fein, the concept, though not highly original, is refreshingly unpretentious.
Three stories of troubled marriages from the Book of Genesis are updated and given a feminist spin.
In Act I, Adam and Eve check into Hotel Eden and are confronted by Adam's avenging first wife, Lilith.
In Act II, Mr. and Mrs.
Noah also visit Hotel Eden, where Mr.
Noah goes on a drinking binge and his indignant missis sulks off for some fun with the angelic service staff.
In Act III, Abraham and Sarah, childless and aged, wearily return to the hotel, their favorite rest spot, where they learn that, miraculously, Sarah is pregnant.


Teekay Shipping Corp. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Ticket Sales Surprisingly Strong for Some Events
Demand for 1996 Olympic Games tickets has been unexpectedly strong for some often-overlooked events, while thousands of tickets remain for some glamour events, including track and field, Atlanta Olympic officials said yesterday.
Through the first six weeks of ticket sales, more than 160,000 orders have been received from Americans lining up for the estimated seven million tickets available to spectators in this country, according to Scott Anderson, managing director for Games Services of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.


Trial Period for Ticket Scalping
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman conditionally vetoed a bill yesterday that would have repealed the state's ban on ticket scalping.
But the Governor said she was willing to test eliminating the price cap on resold tickets for an 18- month trial period to see how consumers are affected.
Senator Robert W. Singer, a Republican from Ocean County, sponsor of the bill, said he would support the 18-month trial period.


Mayor May Invoke the Fifth
Mayor Sharpe James of Newark has often said that he is fully cooperating with investigators examining his financial dealings.
But now he has apparently decided to invoke the Fifth Amendment if he is called before a Federal grand jury.
That strategy is revealed in court papers filed in a civil lawsuit tied to the Federal investigation.


Lemieux Looking to Play
MARIO LEMIEUX will announce today that he plans to return to the Pittsburgh Penguins next season.
Lemieux, a four-time National Hockey League scoring leader, sat out the 1994-95 season to rest after five years of persistent back problems, a bout with Hodgkin's disease and anemia.
He laced up his skates only once all season, for a charity game in March.


On My Mind; Arianna, Go Home!
Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington, if that's how you feel, go home!
Love us or leave us!
And take some other immigrants with you -- the kind that, like you, talk about how America should be worried about allowing more immigrants in.
For instance, that British-born fellow, I forget his name, who is running around promoting his book about how he fears that in America his little son, the one he tells us has blue eyes and blond hair, will have to grow up among too many dark folk.


A Compromise Preserves Whitman's 15% Tax Cut
State legislative leaders today released a compromise version of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's budget for the coming fiscal year that preserves the Governor's 15 percent income tax cut for 1996 and eliminates several increases in taxes and fees that Mrs.
Whitman had sought.
It also adds $25 million in new spending on pet projects in powerful legislators' districts.
The compromise increases spending by $16 million over the budget proposal Mrs.
Whitman released in January, to a total of just more than $16 billion.
Deletion of items like a new tax on store coupons and a $5 fee for personal visits to motor vehicle offices were paid for by postponing for a year about $68 million in business tax cuts that the Governor had wanted.


Celtics Gamble on Carr
M.
L.
CARR has never coached before.
His boss does not know if he can.
Yet the Boston Celtics' director of basketball operations took the coaching job yesterday after a long search.
The enthusiastic Carr is devoted to changing the somber mood surrounding the once-proud franchise.
He is committed to installing a running game and will rely on his assistants to help him do it.
"It's an open question as to whether or not M. L. can coach," the Celtics' chairman of the board, PAUL GASTON, said yesterday at a news conference.
"I think we're all going to have fun finding out."


Corrections
Portions of Tracking the Markets, a group of graphs and tables, in Business Day yesterday were published in error.
The graphs for Stocks and Interest Rates reflected data for the week ending June 12, although the tables with them showed current figures, for the week ending June 19.
The graph and data for Currencies were from the previous week, as were the figures for Block Activity.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


MK Rail Corp.(MKRLE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critics See Humbler Origin of 'Dinosaur' DNA
THE dream of recovering DNA from preserved dinosaur tissue inspires serious research as well as science fiction, and last November a group of biologists reported that they had apparently hit pay dirt.
But a fresh assessment of their evidence by four independent scientific teams has concluded that hunters of dinosaur DNA have not yet captured their quarry and must go back to their cloning boards for another try.
The conclusion has cast cold water on a paper published Nov. 18 in the journal Science by Dr.
Scott R. Woodward, a microbiologist, and his colleagues at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah.
Dr.
Woodward's team reported that they had extracted genetic material from small, 80-million-year-old bone fragments embedded in a coal seam in eastern Utah.
Dr.
Woodward believes the fragments are dinosaur bone, but they are too small for positive identification.


Suspension of Gotti's Lawyer Is Upheld by Appeals Panel
A Federal appeals court yesterday chastised Bruce Cutler, John Gotti's lawyer, for defying a judge's order to curb his fist-waving remarks to reporters on behalf of his client, and it affirmed his sentence of three months of house arrest and suspension from practice in some Federal courts for six months.
And, pausing to take a general swipe at lawyers who turn their cases into news media events, Judge Joseph M. McLaughlin of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals wrote: "Trial practice, whether criminal or civil, is not a contact sport. And its tactics do not include eye-gouging or shin-kicking."


Ozite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


BellSouth Unit Reviewing Account
The BellSouth Telecommunications unit of the BellSouth Corporation, a longtime client of Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Company in Atlanta, said yesterday that it had placed its account in review.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $45 million to $50 million.


Mark IV Industries(IV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Thoughts Uplifting And Folksy
John Denver has always been the most Presidential-sounding American pop singer.
Performing his folk-pop anthems exalting the rugged Western landscape, Mr.
Denver paints a picture-postcard vision of rustic life that is tinged with the rhetoric of the human potential movement.
In concert, Mr.
Denver suggests a grown-up John-Boy Walton, alternately ministerial and folksy as he imparts his messages of spiritual uplift, humanitarianism and care for the environment.
Those inspirational thoughts are couched in tidy verses that are vague enough to have a broad populist appeal but pointed enough to have political overtones.
If Mr.
Denver decided to ride into Washington on a white horse for one of his causes, he would know exactly what tone to take.


Fifth Officer Tied to Melee In Washington
A fifth New York City police officer has been linked to a drunken rampage through several hotels in Washington last month, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday.
The officer, Kevin Catalina, 28, who is assigned to the 103d Precinct covering the Jamaica section of Queens, was placed on modified assignment Friday, meaning that he was assigned to administrative duty and his gun and badge confiscated.


Excerpts From Court Opinion Barring Homosexuals From Boston Parade
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's opinion today that the privately sponsored St.
Patrick's Day parade in Boston has a constitutional right to exclude marchers who seek to identify themselves as gay.
Justice David H. Souter wrote the opinion in Hurley v.
Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, which was unanimous.
There were no separate opinions.
BY JUSTICE SOUTER, For the Court
The issue in this case is whether Massachusetts may require private citizens who organize a parade to include among the marchers a group imparting a message the organizers do not wish to convey.
We hold that such a mandate violates the First Amendment.
March 17 is set aside for two celebrations in South Boston.
As early as 1737, some people in Boston observed the feast of the apostle to Ireland, and since 1776 the day has marked the evacuation of royal troops and Loyalists from the city. . . .
The tradition of formal sponsorship by the city came to an end in 1947, however, when Mayor James Michael Curley himself granted authority to organize and conduct the St.
Patrick's Day-Evacuation Day Parade to the petitioner South Boston Allied War Veterans Council. . . .
1992 was the year that a number of gay, lesbian, and bisexual descendants of the Irish immigrants joined together with other supporters to form the respondent organization, GLIB, to march in the parade as a way to express pride in their Irish heritage as openly gay, lesbian and bisexual individuals, to demonstrate that there are such men and women among those so descended, and to express their solidarity with like individuals who sought to march in New York's St.
Patrick's Day Parade. . . .
If there were no reason for a group of people to march from here to there except to reach a destination, they could make the trip without expressing any message beyond the fact of the march itself. . . .
We use the word "parade" to indicate marchers who are making some sort of collective point, not just to each other but to bystanders along the way. . . .
Parades are thus a form of expression, not just motion. . . .
The protected expression that inheres in a parade is not limited to its banners and songs, however, for the Constitution looks beyond written or spoken words as mediums of expression.
Noting that "symbolism is a primitive but effective way of communicating ideas," our cases have recognized that the First Amendment shields such acts as saluting a flag (and refusing to do so), wearing an arm band to protest a war, displaying a red flag, and even "marching, walking or parading" in uniforms displaying the swastika.
As some of these examples show, a narrow, succinctly articulable message is not a condition of constitutional protection, which if confined to expressions conveying a particularized message, would never reach the unquestionably shielded painting of Jackson Pollock, music of Arnold Schonberg, or Jabberwocky verse of Lewis Carroll. . . .
To be sure, we agree with the state courts that in spite of excluding some applicants, the council is rather lenient in admitting participants.
But a private speaker does not forfeit constitutional protection simply by combining multifarious voices, or by failing to edit their themes to isolate an exact message as the exclusive subject matter of the speech. . . .
Respondents' participation as a unit in the parade was equally expressive.
GLIB was formed for the very purpose of marching in it, as the trial court found, in order to celebrate its members identity. . . .
The petitions disclaim any intent to exclude homosexuals as such, and no individual member of GLIB claims to have been excluded from parading as a member of any group that the council has approved to march.
Instead, the disagreement goes to the admission of GLIB as its own parade unit carrying its own banner.
Since every participating unit affects the message conveyed by the private organizers, the state courts' application of the statute produced an order essentially requiring petitions to alter the expressive content of their parade.
Although the state courts spoke of the parade as a place of public accommodation, once the expressive character of both the parade and the marching GLIB contingent is understood, it becomes apparent that the state courts' application of the statute had the effect of declaring the sponsors' speech itself to be the public accommodation.
Under this approach any contingent of protected individuals with a message would have the right to participate in petitioners' speech, so that the communication produced by the private organizers would be shaped by all those protected by the law who wished to join in with some expressive demonstration of their own.
But this use of the state's power violates the fundamental rule of protection under the First Amendment, that a speaker has the autonomy to choose the content of his own message.
"Since all speech inherently involves choices of what to say and what to leave unsaid," one important manifestation of the principle of free speech is that one who chooses to speak may also decide "what not to say." . . .
The council clearly decided to exclude a message it did not like from the communication it chose to make, and that is enough to invoke its right as a private speaker to shape its expression by speaking on one subject while remaining silent on another. . . .
Whatever the reason, it boils down to the choice of a speaker not to propound a particular point of view, and that choice is presumed to lie beyond the government's own power to control. . . .
The statute is a piece of protective legislation that announces no purpose beyond the object both expressed and apparent in its provisions, which is to prevent any denial of access to (or discriminatory treatment in) public accommodations on proscribed grounds, including sexual orientation.
On its face, the object of the law is to insure by statute for gays and lesbians desiring to make use of public accommodations what the old common law promised to any member of the public wanting a meal at the inn, that accepting the usual terms of service, they will not be turned away merely on the proprietor's exercise of personal preference.
When the law is applied to expressive activity in the way it was done here, its apparent object is simply to require speakers to modify the content of their expression to whatever extent beneficiaries of the law choose to alter it with messages of their own.
But in the absence of some further, legitimate end, this object is merely to allow exactly what the general rule of speaker's autonomy forbids.
It might, of course, have been argued that a broader objective is apparent: that the ultimate point of forbidding acts of discrimination toward certain classes is to produce a society free of the corresponding biases.
Requiring access to a speaker's message would thus be not an end in itself, but a means to produce speakers free of the biases, whose expressive conduct would be at least neutral toward the particular classes, obviating any future need for correction.
But if this is indeed the point of applying the state law to expressive conduct, it is a decidedly fatal objective. . . .
Our tradition of free speech commands that a speaker who takes to the street corner to express his views in this way should be free from interference by the state based on the content of what he says. . . .
The very idea that a noncommercial speech restriction be used to produce thoughts and statements acceptable to some groups or, indeed, all people, grates on the First Amendment, for it amounts to nothing less than a proposal to limit speech in the service of orthodox expression.
The speech clause has no more certain antithesis. . . .
While the law is free to promote all sorts of conduct in place of harmful behavior, it is not free to interfere with speech for no better reason than promoting an approved message or discouraging a disfavored one, however enlightened either purpose may strike the government. . . .
Our holding today rests not on any particular view about the council's message but on the nation's commitment to protect freedom of speech.
Disapproval of a private speaker's statement does not legitimize use of the Commonwealth's power to compel the speaker to alter the message by including one more acceptable to others.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $75 million of debentures due in 1998 through First Tennessee Bank.
The debentures, which are callable in one year, have an interest rate of 6.34 percent and are priced at par. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1998 through Smith Barney Inc.
The notes, which are callable in six months, have an interest rate of 6.51 percent and are priced at par.


Does Testosterone Equal Aggression? Maybe Not
Tired of hormone as cultural myth, as shorthand for swagger and machismo, ferocity and obnoxiousness, the bearskin beneath the three-piece suit?


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pavin Permitted to Wear Giant Stamp of Approval
Corey Pavin knows now.
When he woke up this morning, the full weight of his accomplishment hit him.
Winning the United States Open on Sunday at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club did a whole lot more than fatten his bank account and clutter his trophy case.
It did more than make him a hot commodity for TV chat shows and raise his appearance fee for outings.
Quite simply, it validated his career.


Sports of The Times; N.B.A. Stars Get Heads Out of the Clouds
THE first victory for professional basketball players in the arena of collective bargaining came in 1964, when Larry Fleisher organized a boycott of the National Basketball Association All-Star Game and the principals fell right into line.
Their attention-starved league was preparing for a rare appearance on national television, but Fleisher, on the prowl for a pension plan, had other ideas.


Public Housing Efficiency Plan, Step 1: Get New Refrigerators
The New York Power Authority has persuaded housing officials to throw away most of the 180,000 refrigerators in New York City's public housing units over the next nine years -- even if they are working fine.
The authority will recruit manufacturers to build more efficient ones, and will provide them free to the New York City Housing Authority.
This, power officials say, is the way to make money in the energy business these days.


First Union Buying First Fidelity to Form Big Eastern Bank
In a deal that would create an Eastern banking giant stretching from Connecticut to Florida, the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., said yesterday that it would buy First Fidelity Bancorp of Newark for $5.4 billion in stock.
The deal is expected to increase the pace of bank consolidation as banking companies with national aspirations like First Union press the growing regional giants to merge.
The Northeast, in particular, is seen by analysts as ripe for a wave of mergers because the big New York City banks have been preoccupied with recovering from their bad real estate loans and have not been actively buying smaller banks.  [ Page D4. ]


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Garrison Keeps Going
Zina Garrison-Jackson followed her victory in the DFS Classic at Birmingham, England, by beating Wiltrud Prost of Germany, 6-0, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the $430,000 Eastbourne women's grass-court tennis championship.


Charles Elmer Martin, or CEM, New Yorker Artist, Dies at 85
Charles Elmer Martin, an artist whose work was seen in galleries and museums, in national magazines and in books, died on Sunday at the Seaside nursing home in Portland, Me.
He was 85 and lived in Queens until several years ago when he moved to Portland.
For many years Mr.
Martin, who was self-taught, worked as a painter, illustrator and designer.
He contributed hundreds of cartoons and covers to The New Yorker, signing his work CEM.


Giuliani Steps Up Criticism of School Board
Even as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is asking the Board of Education to give him a role in selecting the next schools chancellor, he stepped up his criticism of the board members yesterday, saying that they had failed to fight for change in the schools.
Over the weekend, five of the seven board members rebuffed the Mayor's request for a veto over a successor to Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who submitted his resignation last week.
Yesterday, the Mayor said that he hoped that the five board members now appointed by borough presidents would one day be selected by the City Council.


Madrid Journal; To Join Europe and Africa, Will a Tunnel Suffice?
Myth holds that Hercules pushed apart great rocks and pried open the passage between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean.
Now a modern engineering project aims to reconnect Europe and Africa.
At the request of the Kings of Spain and Morocco, engineers have drawn up a plan to link the two nations -- and the two continents -- by building a tunnel under the Strait of Gibraltar.


Let Children Be the Judge of 'Pocahontas'
To the Editor:
Simon Schama, in "The Princess of Eco-Kitsch" (Op-Ed, June 14) quotes extensively from "Pocahontas," but did he experience the wonderful fellowship among the 100,000 at the screening?


Forstmann &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Ashe Joining Dixie Heroes
After checking to be sure no cannons would be pointed at the statue, Richmond officials voted today to memorialize the tennis champion Arthur Ashe on an avenue dominated by monuments to Confederate heroes.
A bronze figure of Mr.
Ashe, who was the first black man to win Wimbledon, will stand on Monument Avenue, which is studded by statues of Gen.
Robert E. Lee and four other heroes of Dixie.
The sculpture, which will be the westernmost on the avenue, shows Mr.
Ashe's serving hand holding three books aloft, while his left hand grips a racquet.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc.(ROBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
It's a boy!
CONNIE CHUNG and MAURY POVICH have adopted a newborn boy, the couple announced yesterday.


GTC Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Price/Costco Inc.(PCCW,NNM) reports earnings for 12wks to May 7


No Headline


Finding Relief on the Hottest Day of the Year


How French Right Broke From Margins
To the Editor:
Dreux, the subject of "Rightists Play Immigrant Card in French Town" (news article, June 16) has had a special role in the development of the National Front in France.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CHECHEN MILITANTS LEAVE  A Chechen commando leader who terrorized a Russian town and took up to 2,000 hostages was allowed to leave for Chechnya with his fighters and some 150 hostages.
A1


A Flawed Communications Bill
Forty million dollars' worth of lobbying bought telecommunications companies a piece of Senate legislation they could relish last week.
But consumers may have less to celebrate.
The bill starts off right by knocking down barriers that keep telephone, cable and electrical utility companies from competing for each other's customers.
But its anti-regulatory zeal goes too far, endangering the very competition the bill is supposed to create.
The bill would allow cable operators and electric utilities to sell local phone service.
In return it would allow the local phone company to provide cable television and long-distance phone service.
Before long, the sponsors say, families who are angered by high fees or poor service from cable and phone monopolists will be able to switch rather than scowl.


Simpson's Shoe Size Fits Bloody Prints Left at the Crime Scene, an F.B.I. Expert Says
An expert from the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today at O. J. Simpson's trial that the person who left a trail of bloody shoe prints along the walkway in front of Nicole Brown Simpson's home last June wore size 12 shoes, the same size worn by Mr.
Simpson.
The witness, William J. Bodziak, an authority on shoe prints and tire treads, retraced his quest to track down the model of the shoes that left the prints, which took him to two factories in eastern Italy.
He said the make, distributed only in 1991 or 1992, was Bruno Magli, a model he described as "high-end" -- that is, costing roughly $160 a pair.


McCormick &amp; Co.  (MCCRK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


No Charges Against Officer Who Killed Student in Scuffle at Mall
A Suffolk County grand jury has refused to indict a 31-year old police officer who fatally shot a 21-year-old student at the Smith Haven Mall in Lake Grove in December.
The student, Eneea Moldovan, of Ridgewood, Queens, a junior at the State University at Stony Brook, died of a single bullet wound to the head in the mall parking lot as he was being arrested by Officer Thomas Tatarian after a dispute over a credit card that had been reported stolen.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about the expansion of a hotel franchise company, Hospitality Franchise Systems, misstated the given name of the chairman of the company.
He is Henry R. Silverman, not Harry.


Inmates Set Back
The Supreme Court made it substantially more difficult for prisoners to bring constitutional lawsuits challenging prison management.
Article, page B7.


TransTexas Gas Corp.(TTXG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the What Is Jazz? series, which opened last night at the Knitting Factory, misstated the starting time for events in the series.
It is 7 P.M., not 8 P.M.


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(WSAU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Awards Given For Print and Radio
The New York Festivals has named six grand Best of Show winners in its 37th annual international print and radio competition.


R.G. Bernreuter, 93, Psychology Teacher
Robert G. Bernreuter, a psychologist and university administrator who designed an early personality test and helped create one of the first laws in the nation to require psychological testing in public schools, died on Thursday at Centre Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
He was 93 and lived in State College.
Dr.
Bernreuter worked at Pennsylvania State University from 1931 to 1966 as a teacher and an administrator.


WTD Industries (WTDI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Observer; Bliss for the Barbecued
Unnoticed by the public and mostly unreported by a press and television besotted with the sound-bite fun of the budget story, a radical rewrite of telecommunications law is now under way in Congress.
The immediate result, reports The New York Times, is likely to be "chaos." But then -- ah! -- benefits galore!
I am bracing for another of those great leaps forward that happen when we shake off the shackles of the past.
Believe me, braced is the position to be in when these great leaps occur.


Los Angeles Official Seeks To Close a Major Hospital
Facing a budget deficit of more than $1 billion, the chief administrative officer of Los Angeles County touched off a storm today by proposing broad cuts that include closing of one of the largest hospitals in the nation, the Los Angeles County-University of California Medical Center.
Saying this may be the last chance to bring the county's spending into line, the administrative officer, Sally R. Reed, warned that profligate spending and short-term fixes had brought Los Angeles face to face with bankruptcy.


House of Fabrics Inc(HF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


HIGH COURT LETS PARADE IN BOSTON BAR HOMOSEXUALS
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the private sponsors of Boston's St.
Patrick's Day parade had a constitutional right to exclude marchers whose message they reject, including those who seek to identify themselves as gay, lesbian, and bisexual Irish-Americans.
Justice David H. Souter said in his opinion for the Court that a parade was a form of expression with which the government may not interfere, even for the "enlightened" purpose of preventing discrimination.
"One important manifestation of the principle of free speech is that one who chooses to speak may also decide what not to say," he said.  [ Excerpts, page B6. ]


Payless Cashways Inc.(PCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


I.B.M. Takes Step to Offer Apple's Software
The International Business Machines Corporation took a step yesterday toward offering the software that underlies Apple Computer Inc.'s popular Macintosh, but I.B.M. executives were vague about how closely they would embrace their rival and partner.
The statements, which were made during the announcement of I.B.M.'s new Power Series computers, confused many analysts, illustrating the difficulty the company has had articulating its strategy for the new line.


Artists With AIDS Race Time To Preserve Work for All Time
Working frantically in an East Village studio overflowing with his paintings, sketches and papers, Copy Berg is racing the clock, desperate to finish cataloguing his work before AIDS beats him to the deadline.
"My greatest fear," this 43-year-old artist said last week as volunteers photographed and videotaped his archive, "is that I'm going to drop dead and my work will just disappear into some basement or be thrown away."


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Laclede Gas (LG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In the Field With the Price Indexers
Her thick blue binder in hand, Diane Balaguer strides purposefully through the department store in the Concord Mall north of town.
She checks the price of a women's pullover (short sleeve, solid color, no design) eyes a Hastings &amp; Smith polo shirt, notes the seasonal absence of men's turtlenecks and then confronts the day's first challenge to statistical perfection.
Ms.
Balaguer shakes her head slightly as she regards a rack of Towne raincoats, a style in the London Fog line (tagged at the same $99.90 as the month before).
She considers Towne to be of slightly, almost imperceptibly, lesser quality than the Severn line (costing about twice as much) that they replaced this year.
It's a matter of things like stitching and buttons.


In Prose and in Verse, Stark Paeans to Hopper
EDWARD HOPPER AND THE AMERICAN IMAGINATION  Edited by Deborah Lyons, Adam D. Weinberg and Julie Grau  Illustrated. 252 pages.
Whitney Museum of American Art in association with W. W. Norton. $39.95
The paintings are instantly, viscerally recognizable, not only because they've been reproduced so many times, but also because their style -- their angle of looking at the world -- has been assimilated, appropriated or echoed by so many other American artists.


Q&amp;A
Laughing Gas
Q.  Why don't dentists use laughing gas any more?


Name-Calling a Talent In 'Mellow' North Korea
The latest big news is that "the U.S. imperialist war-maniacs" and the "South Korean puppets" are engaging in military maneuvers and plotting to attack North Korea, again.
The last time this happened was the Korean War, a "criminal war against Korea started by the United States," and America is now "shamelessly" planning a Korean War memorial.
This is "a foolish attempt to justify its provocation of the war of aggression and its murder of people."


Executive Changes
CITIZENS FINANCIAL CORP., Louisville, Ky., named its chairman, Darrell R. Wells, to the additional postions of chief executive and president.
SGI INTERNATIONAL INC., La Jolla, Calif., a developer of energy technologies, named Joseph Savoca president, co-chairman and chief executive.
TELE-TV, New York, a joint venture of Bell Atlantic Corp., Nynex Corp. and the Pacific Telesis Group, named Edward Grebow president.
UNITED DOMINION INDUSTRIES, Charlotte, N.C., an engineering services company, named Charles D. Houseman president and chief operating officer.
U S WEST INC., Englewood, Colo., named Sol Trujillo president and chief executive of its communications unit and Gary Ames president and chief executive of its international unit.
WOOLWORTH CORP., New York, appointed Paul T. Davies president and chief executive of its F. W. Woolworth Co. subsidiary, succeeding Edgar J. Swain, who retired on May 1.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the Addenda listing of the Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about the assignment of three advertising accounts, omitted part of a sentence about an account awarded by FX Networks.
The passage should have read:


Go Home? Torrence Gets Home in First
As she neared the finish line in the first round of the 100 meters, Gwen Torrence seemed to flash a grin.
No, she explained later, the smile was a grimace.
What appeared to be a celebration was instead the agony of victory.
Torrence, the Olympic champion at 200 meters, had strained a muscle behind her right knee in a bizarre fashion last month.
She hurt herself while jumping on a trampoline in a photo shoot with Michael Johnson, the world's other dominant sprinter.
She aggravated the injury in the 100-meter heats Thursday at the national championships, and her husband and coach, Manley Waller, suggested that she pack up and go home.


High School Is Struggling With 2 Cases Of Prejudice
One anti-Semitic note was tucked under a teacher's office door; another was left on a teacher's desk.
Now, at what was supposed to be a joyous time, the teachers and students of Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan are spending the end of the school year divided, wrestling with the troubling issues of anti-Semitism and racism and what to do about both.


Micron Technology Inc.(MU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 1


Grizzlies Name Winters
BRIAN WINTERS, an assistant with the Atlanta Hawks and once one of the National Basketball Association's top shooters, was hired yesterday as the first coach of the expansion Vancouver Grizzlies.


Victims' Kin Can Talk to Jurors
A bill allowing families of victims to speak to juries considering whether to recommend the death penalty was signed into law yesterday by Governor Whitman.
Prosecutors and advocates for victims' rights had lobbied for the legislation.
In the past, only relatives of the defendant were permitted to address jurors.


Blackhawks' Sutter Resigns
DARRYL SUTTER said yesterday that he is quitting as coach of the Chicago Blackhawks to devote more time to his family, saying it's the right thing to do.
"My responsibility is as a father, first and foremost," Sutter said at a news conference in the United Center, where the team plays.


Lemieux First in Goals and Complaints
Claude Lemieux irritates his coaches and teammates the same way he does opponents, but nobody around the Devils minds his attitude and temperament as long as the feisty right wing keeps producing in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Lemieux has been the best player for the Devils in the post-season.
He shadowed Cam Neely and also scored two goals in the elimination of Boston.
He paid attention to Jaromir Jagr and scored six goals against Pittsburgh.
In between his encounters with Eric Lindros, he found time to score three goals in the elimination of Philadelphia.


Trying to Get a Hold In a Sticky Situation
Clint Smith, a Ranger in 1940 when they won the Stanley Cup, spoke recently with Detroit Coach Scotty Bowman about what to do when an opponent restrains you by holding your stick.
The old-timers would take both their hands off their sticks, Smith said, and raise them to alert the referee.
Bowman demonstrated the technique yesterday at a news conference at Joe Louis Arena.


Jailers Come Under Scrutiny
In six years, James F. Slattery built Esmor Correctional Services into the nation's fifth largest prison business as Federal and local governments turned increasingly to privatization.
But after an uprising Sunday of the 300 immigrants detained at the company's Elizabeth center, Esmor has come under intense scrutiny.
The Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., mocked Esmor as "privatization at its worst" and has vowed to block any effort to reopen the center.  [ Page A1. ]


The Right to March in Bigotry
A unanimous Supreme Court has upheld the right of the private sponsors of a St.
Patrick's Day parade to decide who may march with them.
The South Boston Allied War Veterans Council, like the Ancient Order of Hibernians in New York City before them, may exclude a band of Irish who want to proclaim with banner and emblem that they are homosexuals and lesbians.
The Court has vindicated an important First Amendment right, the right of parade organizers to speak their own mind through the banners carried -- and their right not to speak what they do not want to say.
Gay rights groups, always free to conduct their own parade, have the same right.
They need not include units of gay-bashing organizations in their own march.


Dunkin' Donuts Begins a Review
Dunkin' Donuts said yesterday that it had placed its account, with billings estimated at $25 million, in review.
For the last 18 years the account has been handled by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
"We are trying to determine if we have the right partner to achieve our growth in the future," said Edward Binder, vice president for integrated marketing at Dunkin' Donuts, a unit of Allied Domecq, in Randolph, Mass.
He confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek, adding that the participants would include Ally and John Dough Advertising, the Dunkin' Donuts in-house agency.
Pile &amp; Company, a consultant in Boston, has been hired to help manage the review, Mr.
Binder said, adding that a decision is expected in early fall.


A Shelter With a Mission


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.
S.
Threatens Japan Over Air Rights The Clinton Administration threatened to bar Japanese airlines from some of their most profitable cargo routes to the United States in retaliation for Tokyo's refusal to allow Federal Express to broaden its operations.
Steps Closer to Apple  I.B.M. introduced computers based on the PowerPC computer chip and took a step toward offering the software that underlies Apple Computer's Macintosh.
But I.B.M. executives were vague about the companies' relationship.  [ D6. ] Cuba Will Not Extradite Vesco  The Cuban Government told American diplomats that it did not plan to extradite Robert L. Vesco, who is wanted on embezzlement and narcotics charges.  [ A8. ] More Than Faux Jewels  QVC plans a campaign to help dispel its image as the "cubic zirconia network." Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D11. ]


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Corrections
An article in The Living Section last Wednesday about Bob Keeshan, who created the CBS children's television program "Captain Kangaroo" and performed the title role from 1955 to 1985, misattributed the source of financing and programming for a series of shows that was rebroadcast from 1986 to 1992.
It was the American Program Service, not the Public Broadcasting Service.


Sewers and Clean Water a Must At Border Housing, Texas Says
Developers of colonias, the squalid settlements that line the Texan-Mexican border, will have to provide their new residents with sewers and clean running water under a bill Gov.
George Bush of Texas signed on Saturday.
The new rules close a large loophole in a 1989 law that allowed developers who had already established their colonias to continue expanding them, even without providing sanitary services.


CHRONICLE
It's not the Grammys, but this could be the start of something big.
SANDY HOWELL, 28, an amateur songwriter who lives in Los Angeles, won the Grand Prize last Wednesday in the Sixth Annual Billboard Song Contest, for a song she composed in 10 minutes.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(WILLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


50 Years of Catholic Talk: New Faces and New Ideas
Outside Ballroom C and D at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan, where the Catholic Theological Society of America was holding its 50th annual meeting earlier this month, hung a photograph of the group's first gathering, in late June 1946 at the same hotel, then called the Commodore.
All in the photo were men, all were priests, and all were dressed in black clerical garb.
Inside the room, those attending this year's plenary sessions looked very different.
About a third were women, and most of the men, whether priests or not, wore the standard attire for academic conventions: suits or blazers, ties or sports shirts.


Future of Newsday Edition In New York Is Weighed
The editor of New York Newsday said yesterday that an examination of the newspaper's "viability" is under way by its owner, the Times Mirror Company, and that one option under consideration would be to close the New York City edition.
The editor, Donald Forst, said in a telephone interview that the examination would explore three options.
He said one would be to continue to publish a newspaper in New York City, as it has since 1986.


Shut the Detention Center, Local Authorities Urge
The Union County Prosecutor's office and the Elizabeth Police Department have called for the closing of the Esmor immigration detention center here, saying the site is so poorly managed by a company hired by the Federal Government that it has become a threat to public safety.
The officials described a teeming prison that was ill prepared for an emergency like the five-hour uprising early Sunday by up to 300 detained immigrants.


Market Place; Orange County's woes are boon to municipal bond insurer.
IF bad news can make for good business at some companies, the financial crisis in Orange County, Calif., is a red-letter event for MBIA Inc., the nation's largest municipal bond insurer.
MBIA makes money by selling insurance protection for municipal bonds that could go bad, and its stock has been climbing since Orange County's problems began.
The Orange County situation is helping MBIA in two important ways.
For one, the bankruptcy of the wealthy county, once considered one of the nation's sterling credits, is expected to increase investor demand for insured municipal bonds in general.
Moreover, MBIA picked up a big-ticket premium of $10 million, or four times the going rate, for insuring the $295 million of "recovery" bonds that the county issued last week.


U.S. Threatens Aviation Curbs Against Japan
The Clinton Administration broadened its confrontation with Japan today, threatening to bar Japanese airlines from some of their most profitable cargo routes to the United States in retaliation for Tokyo's refusal to allow Federal Express to expand its operations there.
The threatened sanctions, which would go into effect next month, are separate from the Administration's June 28 deadline for imposing 100 percent tariffs on 13 models of Japanese luxury cars unless Japan agrees to open its markets wider to American autos and auto parts.


Free Speech Lost in Computer Smut Vote
To the Editor:
For the first time in my life, I am seriously worried about my Government.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Gramm, After a Torrid Start, Slips and Slides in 1996 Race
Nearly six months ago, when Phil Gramm was outhustling his competitors for the Republican Presidential nomination, the Texas Senator sipped an iced tea at a restaurant in Baton Rouge, La., and explained that his path to victory was based on two simple propositions.
"The key to success is to start early and know more than anyone else," he said with a confident smile.
"And that has not failed me."


Gencorp Inc.(GY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Battle To Protect A Shipyard From Cuts
In the basement of his house here, surrounded by pictures of submarines, William D. McDonough, a retired Navy captain, has been waging what may be his final battle: the fight to save the 195-year-old Portsmouth Naval Shipyard.
As the military tries to streamline operations in the post-cold war era, an independent commission in Washington will begin voting Thursday on a list of military installations to be closed, a list that includes Portsmouth, the country's oldest public shipyard.


No Headline
"I never expected to be at arm's length from Phil Gramm in the summer of '95. I thought I would be reinforcing his conservative message. I can assure you I do not do that now." -- GOV.
STEPHEN MERRILL of New Hampshire.  [ B8:4. ]


Patterns
The Rise of Asian Designers
For at least 20 years, Asians have provided some of the glue that holds fashion together, with nimble hands that sew in factories in the United States, Hong Kong and China.
Now, they are also an important force in design on Seventh Avenue.
Anna Sui, Josie Natori, Vivienne Tam, Yeohlee Teng, Vera Wang and Han Feng are at the vanguard of the group.
They were honored along with others last month by the Asian-American Federation of New York for their contributions to fashion.


Prejudice Exists Even at Greenwich High School
To the Editor:
Re your report on a racist incident at Greenwich High School in Connecticut (news article, June 15):


Iraq Reportedly Cracks Down On Clan That Tried a Coup
The Iraqi Government has begun a major purge of a rebellious army unit that attempted an uprising against President Saddam Hussein last week, arresting and executing as many as 150 soldiers and officers, say Iraqi opposition figures here and in London and Arab diplomats in Europe.
Opposition figures say Iraqi intelligence officials have also questioned hundreds of relatives of troops who served in Ar Ramadi region west of Baghdad and in Al Anbar region, which stretches to the Syrian and Jordanian borders.
These regions are part of Al Anbar province, the stronghold of tribe involved in the uprising.


Review/Fashion; Resort Wear With a Serious Air
Resort is a funny season on Seventh Avenue.
It used to mean beach clothes and bare little dresses to go on a Caribbean cruise or spend the winter in Florida.
But some designers have come to realize that few of their customers enjoy such a privileged way of life.
A week or two in the sun doesn't call for more than a few T-shirts and some white pants.
So, resort has come to mean different things to different designers.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc.(ROBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.02
4.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.47
4.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.45
4.55
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.13
6.19
7.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.57
6.62
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.59
8.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.22
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Fifth Officer Is Suspended in Beach Ruckus
A fifth New York City officer has been suspended from the force for his role in what officials described as a rowdy altercation with New Jersey police officers earlier this month.
The officer, Frank Knight, 25, was among 10 off-duty officers, all from the 123d Precinct on Staten Island, who became loud and disorderly in the lobby of a police station in the early-morning hours of June 10, according to an internal police report.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Powell Is a No-Show
Ivan Pedroso of Cuba had the year's best long jump to win the event at the Madrid International yesterday, but was overshadowed by the surprising absence of the world record-holder, Mike Powell.
Powell, who holds the long-jump record at 29 feet 4 1/2 inches, was scheduled to appear but failed to show.
Pedroso leaped 28-7 3/4 for the victory, and Russia's Stanislav Tarasenko was second at 27-10 1/4.


Steinbrenner Criticized For Signing Strawberry
One day after George Steinbrenner completed his personal mission by signing Darryl Strawberry to a contract with the Yankees, the debate about the wisdom of reaching out to a player with a history of substance abuse gravitated from baseball clubhouses to stadium luxury boxes and even to the White House.
The reaction to Steinbrenner's giving Strawberry a contract that could pay him $2.575 million for the remainder of 1995 and 1996 was mostly positive among the Yankees, except for the increasingly anxious Luis Polonia, who thinks he will lose playing time to Strawberry.
But it was criticized by people ranging from Lee Brown, the national drug policy director, to Tommy Lasorda, Strawberry's former manager with the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Gingrich Book Tour Could Violate Rules, Panel Warns
The House ethics committee warned Speaker Newt Gingrich today that his proposed nationwide tour to promote his book "To Renew America" could violate House rules about gifts and travel.
Mr.
Gingrich's lawyer, Jan Baran, said that the Speaker had received a letter with the committee's warning and added, "We welcome any guidance whatsoever from the committee," asserting that the tour would "satisfy not only the letter but the spirit of the rules."


Mistrial Bid Is Denied in Bomb-Plot Trial
Lawyers for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 other men charged with conspiring to bomb major buildings and commuter tunnels in New York unsuccessfully demanded a mistrial last night, contending that until Monday the prosecution had withheld important information from them that would have helped their case.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court in Manhattan denied the motion, saying that the information contained lies and contradictions and that the prosecution had not been not required to give it to the defense.


Executive Changes
ATG CYGNET INC., San Jose, Calif., a supplier of automated optical storage library systems, named Bruce J. Bergman president and chief executive.
AETNA INTERNATIONAL INC., Hartford, a unit of Aetna Life and Casualty, appointed Frederick C. Copeland Jr. president, succeeding Michael A. Stephen, who will assume new duties of chief of operations for Aetna's property-casualty businesses; Mr.
Stephen will continue as vice chairman of the international subsidiary.


Refugees Fled Woes of World Just to Be Jailed in New Jersey
By the time the 25-year-old Somali woman reached the United States last August, her young life was already in shreds.
The clan warfare that has plagued her homeland for years had destroyed her family.
Gunmen from a rival clan had killed her father and two brothers in their home.
She was imprisoned and tortured, her ear lobes badly torn when her earrings were ripped off.
She and her mother escaped to a refugee camp in Kenya, and then her mother died.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 16
June 9
June 17
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.7
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.4
Gasoline stocks
210.5
208.8
217.9
Distillate stocks
116.9
115.9
116.4
Crude imports, daily
8.8
6.9
8.7
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.3
1.7
Crude stocks
325.1
324.5
324.6
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.5
95.6
94.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Bills' Top Pick in the Fold
Offensive lineman RUBEN BROWN, the top draft pick for the Buffalo Bills, has agreed to a five-year contract worth $5.6 million, The Buffalo News reported yesterday.
Brown, the 14th pick over all out of the University of Pittsburgh, said he wanted to reach an agreement early.
The Bills open training camp July 14.


High-Tech Bank Plan at American Express
The American Express Company said yesterday that it had hired William Heron Jr., a former executive of Citibank, to lead an ambitious plan to offer banking and other financial services over the telephone and by personal computer.
Mr.
Heron will become president of a new unit to be called American Express Financial Services Direct.
It is the descendant of a year-old effort, initially known as the "virtual bank," that was started by Harvey Golub, the chairman of American Express.
Both banks and nonbanking companies are rapidly developing ways to take advantage of customers' increasing willingness to do banking business over the telephone rather than in branches.


CHRONICLE
SHARON STONE may have misspoken last Friday when she appeared in Washington to talk about cancer.
She said that she was told she had lymphoma four years ago, and that "with a lot of positive thinking and holistic healing" -- including giving up caffeine -- "I ended up testing negative several months later."
The actress said later that her condition had been misdiagnosed and that news organizations misunderstood her comments.
But the statement that she cured herself caused particular concern at the American Cancer Society.


Philip Morris Cites Inaccurate Statements in Its Cigarette Recall
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that the company had "erred" by making inaccurate statements about the cause of the company's unprecedented $100 million recall of more than seven billion cigarettes last month.
The company also said it had overstated the severity of any medical symptoms that might have been felt by people who smoked any of the recalled cigarettes.
The recall, which included the world's largest-selling cigarette brand, Marlboro, has been an embarrassment for Philip Morris and has prompted weeks of speculation by Wall Street and rival cigarette companies about the cause of the problem.
The recall also resulted in public finger-pointing between the company and its main supplier of cigarette filters.


Tyson Receives a Warm Welcome at a Harlem Rally
With the warmth reserved for a prodigal son, Harlem residents welcomed Mike Tyson back to New York yesterday, rallying in what was billed as a "Day of Redemption" to launch the former heavyweight champion's new life now that he has served his three-year prison term for rape.
Despite lingering controversy over whether a convicted rapist should be greeted as a hero, nearly 2,000 braved the summer's first heat wave to gather before the Apollo Theater and cheer Tyson's pledge of $1 million to a range of charities.


Prosecutors Plan to Cut Short Their Case Against Simpson
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case said today that they were shortening their case, in part by dropping plans for additional testimony on Mr.
Simpson's violent relationship with his former wife, and could present the rest of their evidence by the end of next week.
In theory, the prosecution can still call additional witnesses on that point, but only if the defense tries in its own case to show that Mr.
Simpson is a man of character who did not batter his former wife Nicole Brown Simpson.


Tyson Sparring in Training
More muscular than when he got out of prison three months ago, Mike Tyson was back in New York yesterday and, to hear him tell it, focused as he approaches the first fight in his comeback bid.
Asked at a Harlem news conference whether he ever thought about leaving boxing during his three-year prison term for rape, Tyson didn't hesitate: "I never considered anything else. The only thing I do is pray and fight. I don't know about anything else."


Grain by Grain, a Beach Grows
Island Beach State Park, an undeveloped 10-mile stretch of the barrier peninsula extending from South Seaside Park to the Barnegat Inlet, is gaining sand, though it has no jetties or groins to protect it, according to a New Jersey Geological Survey report.


Jury Finds for Wrestling Coach
Princeton University was ordered to pay its former wrestling coach $140,000 after a Mercer County jury found that he was dismissed because of his age and a back injury incurred on the job.
Chester Dalgewicz had worked for Princeton for 22 years when he was dismissed in 1990 at the age of 45.
He injured his back while wrestling a 250-pound student.
The university said Mr.
Dalgewicz was dismissed because of budget cuts.


Rite Aid Chooses Marc Advertising
The Rite Aid Corporation, the drugstore chain, said yesterday that it had selected Marc Advertising in Pittsburgh to handle its account.
The billings were estimated at $50 million.
Rite Aid, which is based in Camp Hill, Pa., plans to expand the account to include broadcast commercials in addition to newspaper advertisements, which had been created in-house.


Lemieux Is Ready to Return
MARIO LEMIEUX has decided to end his one-year medical sabbatical and return to the Pittsburgh Penguins and the sport he once dominated.
Lemieux, who led Pittsburgh to the 1991 and 1992 Stanley Cup championships, said today that he plans to play 60 to 70 games, skipping some long trips to prevent stress on his troublesome back.


Deal or Not, Players Get Ready to Dunk Union
Deal or no deal?
Some agents of National Basketball Association players and some players said yesterday that they have been told negotiators have reached agreement on a new labor contract.
David Stern, the commissioner, and Simon Gourdine, the union's executive director, strongly denied they have an agreement.
Deal or no deal, Gourdine has scheduled two conference calls today with player representatives to give them an update on negotiations and provide a "full detailed analysis of where we are."


COMPANY NEWS
UNISYS CORP., Blue Bell, Pa., a mainframe computer maker, was awarded a nine-year contract valued at $107 million from the Treasury Department to modernize existing Internal Revenue Service data storage capabilities.


S.E.C. Supports Repeal of Law That Restricts Some Big Utilities
The Securities and Exchange Commission recommended yesterday that Congress repeal a 60-year-old law that places severe limits on the ability of a small group of utility holding companies to diversify into fields outside their business and not in their geographic areas.
The companies, which own utilities in more than one state, contend that the 1935 law, called the Public Utility Holding Company Act, has left them at a legal disadvantage as the rest of the utility industry prepares for a more competitive future.


At the Nation's Table: Miami Beach; An Art Deco Jewel Resurfaces, With Food
In Florida's South Beach, the trendy Art Deco district of Miami Beach, restaurants come and go.
But Nemo, a new restaurant at the southernmost tip of South Beach, seems to have staying power.
With its boldly designed dining room and adventurous menu, Nemo has gained a loyal following since it opened in January.
Nemo, the brainchild of Myles Chefetz, a New York real estate lawyer turned restaurateur, and its chef, Michael Schwartz, is named not for a submarine captain, but for the old Nemo Hotel, an Art Deco gem built in 1920 as the first kosher hotel in Miami Beach.
In the 1980's, the building, long in decline, was a notorious crack house, and its rebound shows just how much the Art Deco district has returned to its former glory.


Tokyo Plans Retaliation on Air Sanctions
Reacting angrily to Washington's threat of sanctions on Japanese airlines, the Japanese Government has begun planning to retaliate by blocking some flights from the United States.
Japan is contemplating prohibiting certain cargo flights of Federal Express and Northwest Airlines that originate in the United States from continuing beyond Japan to other Asian nations, Japanese officials and aviation industry executives said today.


Business Travel; A new advisory service will give travelers information on precautions to take in 275 cities.
SAFETY and security are major concerns of all travelers, and starting today they will be able to have access to up-to-date information about precautions to take in more than 275 cities around the world.
The one-page advisories, which also contain basic health and medical care information, are free through travel agencies that use Sabre, the nation's biggest reservations system.
The Travel Watch advisories, as they are called, are the brainchild of Kroll Associates, the New York-based company that provides risk assessment information to multinational corporations on a daily basis.
"We'll be tapping into that large investigative network," said Alice T. McGillion, president of Travel Watch, an affiliate of Kroll Associates.
"Our advisories will tell travelers such things as the safest way to get from the airport to the city center, and what sections to avoid in town."


CHECHEN GUNMEN WHO RAIDED TOWN RELEASE HOSTAGES
Chechen gunmen who terrorized a Russian town for five days returned to their homeland in a bus convoy tonight and released their last hostages in a Chechen border town.
The Chechen rebels, who had held hundreds of Russians captive in a hospital in the Russian town of Budyonnovsk, traveled into central Chechnya tonight with two buses and a refrigerated truck that carried their own dead from fighting Russian troops who twice tried to storm the hospital.


A Giant Health Care Company Is Said to Be Looking for a Buyer
The Metrahealth Companies, the nation's largest health care company created last year as a joint venture by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Travelers Inc., is looking for a buyer, insurance executives and industry analysts said yesterday.
Negotiations for a merger with United Healthcare of Minnetonka, Minn., are far advanced, although no agreement has been completed, according to officials at United Healthcare and analysts who spoke on condition of anonymity.
United Healthcare is one of the country's largest owners and operators of health maintenance organizations, and is flush with $2.3 billion of cash from the sale of its pharmacy business last year.


Harnisch Picked Apart By Persistent Phillies
Joe McIlvaine gives his patience a little more than a week.
But after last night perhaps the Mets' general manager has run out of it.
"We are trying to look at these next 10 days very critically," McIlvaine said before watching his team drop 13 games below .500 with an 8-2 loss at Shea Stadium to the division-leading Philadelphia Phillies.
"If we don't see some significant improvement or some promise, then I think you will begin to see some more things done.


Miami Player Is Suspended
When Miami Hurricanes linebacker JAMES BURGESS was arrested following an altercation at a dance club, the new coach, BUTCH DAVIS, acted quickly.
Davis suspended Burgess yesterday for at least two games.
The police charged Burgess early Monday with battery on a police officer and resisting arrest without violence.
The Miami program was embarrassed by recent reports that players who failed the school's drug-testing program went unpunished under the former coach DENNIS ERICKSON.


Two Men Are Killed in Shootings in Chelsea
Two men were killed and a third was critically wounded in Chelsea yesterday as gunfire punctuated a sweltering afternoon in the Manhattan neighborhood of textile shops, sewing-machine businesses and antiques dealers.
The circumstances and motives behind the shootings were unclear last night.
But law enforcement officials said they were looking into the possibility that the gunfire was linked to several drug killings last January in Queens and that two of yesterday's victims were bystanders who strayed by chance into the fleeing gunman's path.


Adrift No More


Exempting Lawyers From Jury Duty Makes Good Legal Sense
To the Editor:
Re "Toward Democratic Jury Service" (editorial, June 14): Your advocacy of legislation in New York State that would abolish automatic exemptions from jury duty was unpersuasive with regard to two cited classes, lawyers and judges.
Contrary to your assertion, there are sound reasons to grant these two professions a blanket exemption from jury service.


House Committee Passes Anti-Terrorism Measure
The House Judiciary Committee today passed its anti-terrorism package, sending the legislation to the House floor for expected approval later this summer.
The Senate approved a similar bill this month by a vote of 91 to 8, and the Clinton Administration has been eager to sign such legislation.
Although the package had been in the works for several months, the April 19 bombing in Oklahoma City has given the bill added urgency.


Times Co. Deal Is Off
The Gannett Company said yesterday that it would not buy The Daily Commercial, a newspaper in Leesburg, Fla., from The New York Times Company.
Gannett said on May 8 that it had reached an agreement in principle to buy the paper, which in 1994 sold 31,700 copies a day during the week and 34,500 on Sundays.
But the companies said yesterday that they could not agree on the terms of the sale.
They declined to provide further details.
The Times Company, which bought The Daily Commercial in 1971, will continue to try to sell the paper, said Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for the company.


METRO DIGEST
NEW JERSEY FINANCIER GUILTY OF FRAUD
A Federal judge ruled that Robert E. Brennan, the New Jersey sports entrepreneur and financier, had used illegal price gouging and abusive sales practices to enrich himself and his brokers at his customers' expense.  [ Page A1. ]
NEW YORK CITY


Baptist Group Votes to Repent Stand on Slaves
Members of the Southern Baptist Convention, America's largest Protestant denomination and one founded in large part in defense of slavery, voted overwhelmingly in their annual meeting here today to "repent of racism of which we have been guilty" and to apologize to and ask forgiveness from "all African-Americans."
The statements were contained in a resolution on racial reconciliation passed on a show of hands among nearly 20,000 messengers, as Baptist delegates are called, attending the three-day convention at the Georgia Dome, an indoor sports arena in downtown Atlanta.


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: A small branch post office in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
After a long wait in line, a young woman with a large package approaches one of the windows.
Postal worker: How's it going?


Michael Greenberg Dies at 67; Gave Gloves to Poor in Winter
Meyer Michael Greenberg, known to the poor and homeless of New York City for a simple act of charity he performed for 30 years on its meanest street, died on Monday at Rivington House, a Manhattan nursing home.
He was 67 and had lived much of his life in Greenwich Village.
The cause was cancer, said a cousin, Russell Aaronson of Manhattan.


A Nonprofit Muppet Is Going To a Commercial TV Show
The makers of "Sesame Street" are producing another program for preschool children -- complete with a new Muppet character -- but it's not for public television.
This one is for the Cartoon Network.
The Children's Television Workshop in partnership with a Ted Turner-owned cable network?
That was the agreement announced yesterday, in what will be the first original programming effort by the Cartoon Network and yet another step out into the commercial world for the nonprofit production company.


Coffey Feels the Pain Of Two-Game Deficit
The red light behind the Detroit goal was glaring at the worst possible time in what was supposed to be a championship Red Wing season.
Paul Coffey, who had been brought here to help supply this city with a Stanley Cup after four decades of suffering, was bent in half, face down, hitting his helmet against the ice.
At that decisive moment, with the Red Wings facing the kind of deficit that has rarely been overcome in the history of the Stanley Cup finals, it was difficult to tell where the pain was worse.
The back of Coffey's leg, where he had blocked a shot just before Jim Dowd's goal that put New Jersey ahead, or in his heart.


Panel Backs Big Cuts in Plans For Environment and Safety
A House subcommittee approved deep cuts today in the main scientific and environmental programs at the Interior Department, slashing research money for programs including protection of endangered species and the safety of mines.
The panel, in one of several attacks on the agency's best-known programs, would forbid spending next year on listing additional species in danger of extermination unless the Endangered Species Act was rewritten and extended.


Successful and So Very Miserable
Eddie Vedder doesn't take things easy.
Soon after Pearl Jam started its set tonight at Red Rocks Amphitheater here, his voice started to strain; it grew dry and scratchy, then broke on some notes.
The altitude here, more than a mile above sea level, was taking a toll on his breathing: "You guys've got different air," he said.
Yet instead of conserving his voice, Mr.
Vedder pushed it harder.
After he finished all the lyrics of "Jeremy," he continued with rising, wordless howls that could have cracked at any moment.
Like the characters in many Pearl Jam songs, his voice was bruised and ragged but unbowed, and his battle with his own limits made the songs hit home.


Scuba Diving Student Drowns
A scuba diving practice session in the Shark River turned deadly when a student drowned and his instructor had to be rescued after being pulled under by the drowning man, the police said.
Four students and the instructor were 50 to 70 feet from shore when the incident occurred.
Mauricio Alfaro, 38, of Bound Brook, drowned.
A passing jet skier brought Mr.
Alfaro and the instructor, Martin Sandrow, to shore.
TERRY PRISTIN


Battered Face Offers Prelude To Testimony By Detective
It will be another week before Detective Sgt.
Louis Cosentino appears in a Brooklyn courtroom to testify against four of the nine young men accused of savagely beating him before dawn one day last October in an incident that began simply as a confrontation between a resident and a bunch of boisterous beer-drinking youths.
But his battered face -- now held together by 30 tiny titanium screws and 7 titanium plates -- has been a haunting presence during the first nine days of the trial in State Supreme Court, as seen through the words of prosecution witnesses.


Iverson Wins Vindication
ALLEN IVERSON, a star player for Georgetown, won a reversal yesterday on his conviction stemming from a 1993 brawl.
The Virginia Court of Appeals in Richmond set aside his convictions on three felony counts of maiming by mob.
The fight at a Hampton bowling alley involved about 40 people, and several were injured.
"We are thrilled to death," LISA O'DONNELL, Iverson's lawyer, said.


Soviet Artists Gave Rise to Modernism
To the Editor:
In reporting the performance of the emigre choreographer Bronislava Nijinska's 1923 ballet "Les Noces" for the first time in Russia by a Russian troupe (Arts pages, June 13), you write that "abstraction and modernism -- anything that helped create a new language of movement or thought -- were forbidden esthetics throughout the Communist era."


Mexico Judge In Union Case Is Shot Dead
A Mexico City judge who called President Ernesto Zedillo's promises of judicial reform into question by complaining that he was prodded to order the illegal arrests of union leaders was found shot to death here today.
City officials said tonight that the judge, Abraham Polo Uscanga, who had been shot once through the head, appeared to have been murdered.
His body was discovered this morning with a .38 caliber revolver beside it in an office he sometimes used.
Mr.
Polo had told recently of receiving anonymous threats and being briefly kidnapped by unidentified men, and his wife had reported him missing Monday afternoon.


In Search For a Coach, Knicks Talk With Nelson
Don Nelson spent much of the past two seasons as an embattled Warrior.
Today, he is contemplating spending the next few years of his life as an empowered Knickerbocker.
Team officials last night confirmed that the Knicks' general manager, Ernie Grunfeld, had met with Nelson in Milwaukee yesterday regarding the coaching job vacated by Pat Riley last week.


Mains Burst; Water to Be Tested
Residents are being asked to boil drinking water and avoid watering their lawns and washing their cars while tests are conducted to determine if the water supply was contaminated yesterday when two water mains ruptured.
The mains were installed more than 60 years ago.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new survey finds that responsibility for brand management sits on some surprising shoulders.
THE ISSUE of whether powerful brand names continue to be engines of sales growth remains one of paramount concern to consumer marketers.
A study now being released on the subject offers some surprising conclusions.
The survey, "Brands at the Crossroads," is jointly sponsored by Bozell Worldwide and the Fortune Marketing arm of Fortune magazine.


World News Briefs; Iran Finds Buyers For Embargoed Oil
A month after the United States ordered American companies to stop commercial dealings with Iran, Teheran has found other buyers for the 500,000 barrels of oil previously shipped to American clients, oil officials here say.
Officials of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and oil industry executives said that since President Clinton issued his executive order on March 15, independent oil traders and small oil companies had moved in to replace American buyers.
Until the order, American companies were permitted to buy oil in Iran for resale to other countries.


Chile's Armed Forces Allow Arrest of Convicted General
A standoff in Chile between the Government and the armed forces eased today when the military allowed civilian authorities to imprison a former secret police officer convicted in the murder of an opposition leader in 1976.
Chilean police arrested Brig.
Gen.
Pedro Espinoza Bravo at army barracks in Santiago at about 12:40 A.M., after the military stripped him of his rank for his participation in the car bombing that killed Orlando Letelier and an American colleague, Ronni Moffitt, in Washington, D.C.


Gooden to Meet Strawberry
When Darryl Strawberry's plane lands in Tampa, Fla., on Thursday, Dwight Gooden will be responsible for picking him up at the airport.
"Doc called me and told me he wanted to help Darryl out," said Bill Goodstein, the agent for both players.
"Darryl is also going to help Doc get ready to return to baseball."


L.I. Power Authority Makes $9.2 Billion Offer for Lilco
Officials of the Long Island Power Authority today renewed their campaign for a public takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company, offering to buy the utility for $9.2 billion and hire another private utility to manage it.
But the Pataki administration immediately denounced the plan as "irresponsible" and "an exercise in political irrelevancy." While Gov.
George E. Pataki does not have the statutory authority to block a takeover, Long Island officials say his support is crucial to obtaining financial backing from Wall Street for the buyout, which would be paid for with tax-exempt bonds.


Jets Keep Simpson as Coach
TERRY SIMPSON is staying on as coach of the Winnipeg Jets under a three-year contract, even though the National Hockey League team's future still is uncertain.
Simpson had the interim removed from his title yesterday.
He took over last April when JOHN PADDOCK gave up his coaching duties to concentrate on being general manager. (AP)


Peter Townsend Dies at 80; Princess Margaret's Love
Group Capt.
Peter Townsend, the divorced war hero forced 40 years ago by the royal family and the British Government to end his love affair with Princess Margaret, sister of Queen Elizabeth II, died in Paris on Monday night, the British Embassy said.
He was 80 years old and had been ill for some time.
Princess Margaret, 64, who is believed to have always considered Group Captain Townsend the great love of her life, was said by a spokesman at Buckingham Palace to be "sad" at the news of his death.
The Queen sent a private message of condolence to Group Captain Townsend's widow, Marie Luce, the palace said.


Jail Company Faults Immigration Service
Months before an Elizabeth, N.J., immigration jail exploded in violence, the company that runs it had warned immigration officials that tensions were building among the 300 detainees there, the company's chairman, James F. Slattery, said in his first interview since the uprising on Sunday.
Mr.
Slattery, chairman of Esmor Correctional Services, said immigrants were being held for months in a jail designed for much shorter stays, because it was taking the Immigration and Naturalization Service more than six months on average to process their cases.
The length of their incarceration, not the conditions, provoked the disturbance, he said.


Rebels Without a Cause Terrorize Uganda's Poor
About half of the 50,000-member Ugandan Army is based around this weather-beaten, potholed frontier town where soldiers constantly patrol the streets with assault rifles slung on their shoulders.
But outside in the sparsely populated countryside, many of the villages are so terrified of a roving rebel group that the peasants hide at night in the fields and in trees.


Sports of The Times; Who Profits From Tyson's Comeback?
ALL of a sudden, New York is the redemption capital of North America, what with the noted humanitarian George Steinbrenner giving Darryl Strawberry a second chance and the well-known altruist Don King giving Mike Tyson a new lease on life.
Both athletes have been found guilty of crimes -- as, come to think of it, have their benefactors.
And all of them, all four of them, deserve the right to earn a living again, or even a fortune.
It's the American way.


INSIDE
STANLEY CUP FINALS
New Jersey took a lead of two games to none in the N.H.L. championship series with its victory at Detroit.
Jim Dowd got the winning goal with 1 minute 24 seconds left.
Page B11. 2 Shot to Death in Chelsea
Two men were shot and killed and a third wounded in the middle of the afternoon in a bustling Manhattan neighborhood.
Page B1.
A Shift in Simpson Trial
Prosecutors in the O.J.
Simpson trial said they were shortening their case and could present the rest of their evidence next week.
Page A12.
Bosnians Imperil U.N. Troops
After many confrontations with Bosnian Serbs, peacekeepers faced threats from forces of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.
Page A10.


Strict Lobbying Rules Suggested For Nonprofit Organizations
After a second day of hearings on the business practices of the American Association of Retired Persons, senators from both parties suggested today that Congress tighten the standards for granting tax exemptions to nonprofit organizations that lobby on Capitol Hill.
Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, suggested that tax-exempt social welfare organizations should not be allowed to receive Federal grants.
Such groups should not be permitted to finance their operations entirely with commercial activities, he said, but should be required to raise some of their income from membership dues.


Graf Meets Another First-Round Menace
Steffi Graf seems to have cornered the market on first-round intrigue at Wimbledon.
Again.
Last year, Graf, a five-time champion there, performed a first-round nose dive that not only prevented her from collecting a historic fourth consecutive title, but made history of the most ignominious sort by anointing her the first defending champion to falter in the opening round.
It took 108 years, and a merciless performance by the underdog Lori McNeil, to dethrone a Wimbledon defender so prematurely.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  GUNMEN RETURN TO CHECHNYA  Chechen gunmen who terrorized a Russian town for five days returned to their homeland in a bus convoy and released their last 123 hostages in a Chechen border town.
A1  JAPAN AIRLINER HIJACKED  A Japanese plane with 365 passengers and crew was hijacked by man claiming to be a follower of the Aum Shinrikyo sect.
A1


Divining the Next Act Of the Playful Dead
When the psychedelic movement in San Francisco was at its artistic peak in the 1960's, the Grateful Dead and others tried to turn music making back into a folk activity.
At the "Acid Test" parties of the writer Ken Kesey, the line between performer and audience was erased, and both were on equal footing in one free-wheeling community.
But as the years wore on, optimism faded and psychedelic musicians became rock stars, the Grateful Dead soon rose to a top position in the community and a hierarchy took shape.
Today, the Dead are neither part of nor leaders of the Deadheads they play to; they are simply the axis around which that community revolves.
At the Grateful Dead concert on Monday night at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., (the second of two consecutive shows there with Bob Dylan as an opening act), the band was inscrutable, moving as little as possible onstage and speaking not a word to the audience.
The excitement came from never knowing what song the band was going to perform next, the possibility that a member was going to talk or make an uncharacteristic movement, the hope that the group would uncover a new song and the thrill of watching it make mistakes and false starts.
The stage was like a living room of the gods; the audience members were privileged voyeurs in search of the perfect show.


How Numbers Count, in Countering a Minority
In her no-frills documentary about the bitter fight over Oregon's 1992 anti-gay ballot initiative, Heather MacDonald examines the many faces of prejudice.
There is the schoolboy who declares, "Never liked them, never will," although he says he doesn't know any homosexuals.
There is the woman who frets that "they could persuade one of my grandchildren to become a homosexual." There is the authoritative-sounding man interviewed on television who says it is a fact that 28 percent of homosexuals have performed sodomy with more than 1,000 partners.
There is the grandmotherly lady who shakes her head and says, "It's just not human for people to act that way."
And there are the political organizers dedicated to capitalizing on such sentiments as fiercely as they can.
"Ballot Measure 9" witnesses the escalating battle between gay rights advocates, who were clearly caught off guard by the vehemence of their enemies, and the extremely well-organized forces of the religious right.
Lon Mabon, the chairman of the Oregon Citizens Alliance and a leader of the movement to prevent and revoke laws banning anti-gay discrimination, speaks with typical single-mindedness in describing the fight as "a simple battle between good and evil."


Seeking Quick Fixes, House Adopts System of Correction Days
The House of Representatives rang with words like "dumb," "stupid" and "silly" today as Speaker Newt Gingrich promised to undo some of the more inane regulations of the Federal bureaucracy by means of a legislative innovation he named Corrections Day.
He led his Republican majority to approval of this new type of legislative procedure, to be held twice a month to provide some quick-fix attention to harassed constituents.


Students in Bias Incident Can Attend Graduation
In a decision that drew immediate criticism and threats of graduation-day protests by teachers and Jewish groups, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that six seniors at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan who wrote or knew about an anti-Semitic note to a teacher would be permitted to attend the graduation ceremony.
Mr.
Cortines said that the six students -- who were suspended, barred from the school prom and arrested on charges of aggravated harassment -- would face "a sort of 'double jeopardy' " if they were also refused admission to the graduation.


AT LUNCH WITH: Andre Soltner; Life After Lutece Is Just Fine. Delicious, in Fact.
THE woman at the next table is insistent.
"Who is that?" she whines, tapping her table to summon my reply.
As the flashbulbs flare and Andre Soltner, the former owner and chef of Lutece, turns scarlet with embarrassment, I shake my head no, trying to silence her.
She is seated so close and he is nervous enough.
"Rude, rude, rude," she fumes, searching out the head waiter to stage a not-so-petit scene.
Hell hath no fury like a social climber scorned.
Especially at La Caravelle.


Audit Questions Billings by Law Firm
A Government audit has questioned $446,000 in billings by the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, almost a third of the Arkansas firm's expenses for its savings and loan industry work for the Resolution Trust Corporation, according to Government officials and the firm.
A draft audit by the R.T.C.'s inspector general recommends that about $242,000 of the firm's total billings of $1.4 million be disallowed or recovered, with R.T.C. lawyers reviewing the remaining $203,000 in expenses, according to the officials, who requested anonymity.
The $1.4 million represents both fees for work by the firm, whose alumni include Hillary Rodham Clinton, and reimbursement for its expenses.


DOLE ENDS DELAY, MOVING TO BLOCK HEALTH NOMINEE
After months of delay, the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, has decided to bring the question of considering the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General to the Senate floor on Wednesday, after concluding that he had the votes to block it.
Mr.
Dole, who had a long-delayed meeting with Dr.
Foster on Monday, announced today that he would bring the nomination to the floor on Wednesday for three hours of debate, followed by a vote on whether to cut off discussion and move on to a direct vote on confirmation.
If the measure to end discussion fails to get the required 60 votes, he said, it will be followed by another such vote on Thursday, and if that one fails, he will pull the nomination from consideration.


Breast Implant Story Remains Far From Over; Banned in France
To the Editor:
The French Government withdrew silicone breast implants from France and ordered the importation, manufacture, sale or use of these medical devices stopped.


U.N. Expert Raises Estimates Of Iraq's Biological Arsenal
The senior United Nations official monitoring the program for destroying weapons in Iraq told the Security Council today that Baghdad's clandestine biological warfare program is larger than previously assumed and that part of it remains unaccounted for.
Rolf Ekeus, the chairman of the special commission, reported in April that before Iraq was defeated in the Persian Gulf war in 1991, it had acquired 39 tons of a substance called complex growth media, which is required to cultivate germs for biological weapons.
The United Nations inspectors could account for only 22 tons, he said, which left a significant discrepancy of 17 tons.


Stocks Mixed, With Dow Slipping 3.12 and Nasdaq Index Up
The financial markets, with the exception of the hard-charging Nasdaq exchange, were on cruise control yesterday before last night's speech by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, that might give clues to whether the central bank will cut short-term interest rates soon.
Stocks were mixed, bonds were little changed and the dollar was steady in overseas and New York trading.
Unusually heavy trading volume -- some 384.3 million shares changed hands on the New York Stock Exchange -- indicated some confusion among traders, however.


Foreign Affairs; The Japan Contract Is Void
Imagine if someone came to you and said he had a novel idea for resolving the Bosnia crisis: Japanese intervention.
Think about it: The Japanese are neither Muslims nor Christians, so both sides would view them as neutral peacekeepers.
Japan is not a member of NATO, so it comes with no baggage of having bombed one side.
There is a distant connection between the Japanese and Hungarian languages, so they might be able to communicate with some of the parties.
Japan wants to be a member of the Security Council, so this would be the perfect test case.
And Japan's Trade Minister is without a doubt the toughest negotiator in the world today and thus the perfect person to go head-to-head with the Serbs.


A McEnroe-Carillo Duo
CBS hired JOHN McENROE yesterday to announce the United States Open Tennis Championships, a move that will pair him with the analyst MARY CARILLO.
The matchup of feuding former friends to call the men's semifinals and finals could be fiery because McEnroe has loudly voiced doubts over whether women, primarily Carillo, should call men's tennis because they are not men.


Japan's Trade Lightning Might Not Strike Twice
When Japan realized more than a decade ago that it needed a political strategy to deal with American demands to open its markets, its trade bureaucrats bought a giant map that showed the boundaries of every Congressional district in the United States.
They hung it in the Ministry of International Trade and Industry and used colored pins to show which districts had just received a new Japanese car factory or parts plant.
Investing in America turned out to be a brilliant strategy, both good politics and good business.
Now, a week from the sanctions that would cripple the sale of Japanese luxury cars in the United States, the Japanese Government is hoping to make lightning strike twice.
In return for getting the United States to drop its demands to open their market, Japanese officials and car makers are floating the idea of increasing annual production in the United States by 400,000 cars over the next three years, and raising the percentage of American-made parts in every model.


From Ordinary Day to Disaster Over Iraq
The worst "friendly fire" incident in recent American military history began as an ordinary morning in the skies over Iraq.
On April 14, 1994, Capt.
Jim Wang was seated behind a computer console in the belly of an Airborne Warning and Control System radar plane monitoring the allies' zone of restricted airspace over northern Iraq.


In America; Paradise Lost
Milton is a hamlet on the western shore of the Hudson River in rural upstate New York, about 90 minutes north of New York City.
It used to have a commercial strip, but that's gone now.
You need a functioning sewer system to support business development.
Milton got along for years with septic tanks, but they are no longer adequate and the sewage is backed up.
In some areas the problem was so severe that property had to be condemned and the owners forced to move.
The hamlet remains scenic, with wonderful views of the river, but jobs have vanished, property values have plummeted and Milton seems frozen in a time gone by.
Some political leaders have dubbed the hamlet "Sleeping Beauty on the Hudson."


U.N. Peacekeepers Are Endangered Again, Not by Serbs but by the Bosnian Army
After weeks of intense confrontations with separatist Bosnian Serbs, United Nations peacekeepers were threatened today by forces of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government, which is zealously trying to keep secret the details of its military offensive.
The Bosnian Army came close to direct confrontation with Canadian United Nations troops today, placing mines outside their camp in the central Bosnian town of Visoko and threatening to shell them if anybody attempted to leave.


Miami Tourism Gains As Crime Rate Drops
Barbara Meller Jensen had just arrived from Germany on vacation on the night of April 2, 1993, when she lost her way driving from Miami International Airport to her hotel in Miami Beach.
On a road that parallels Interstate 95 here, her rental car, a red Ford Tempo, was bumped by a blue Cadillac in which three men were stalking rental cars to rob tourists.
Mrs.
Jensen, whose mother, 6-year-old son and 2-year-old daughter were riding with her, pulled the car over.
Two of the men got out, took her purse and ran back to their car.
Mrs.
Jensen, 39, followed them to retrieve her purse.
After banging on their window and grabbing the door handle, she tripped and fell under the Cadillac as it sped off.
Her skull was crushed as her horrified mother, son and daughter looked on.


Senate Votes To Let States Set Car Speeds
The Senate today approved a measure that would repeal the 55-mile-an-hour speed limit for passenger vehicles, opening the way for each state to set its own limits again.
The vote was 65 to 35, despite objections from the White House.
Congress passed the speed-limit measure 21 years ago in response to the shortage of gasoline and the skyrocketing price of it, plus concerns about safety.


Hartford to Slow Company Role in Schools
After a rancorous public hearing about the future of Hartford's troubled public schools, the city's Board of Education voted late Monday to slow down a plan to give districtwide management authority to a private education company.
The company, Education Alternatives Inc., had planned to be in place in all 32 public schools in the city this fall with a network of computers and cost controls, but will instead focus on only five schools where most of the company's work is already completed.
The original plan, which drew national attention as the first districtwide private management contract in a major city, was scrapped after parents and teachers protested the hundreds of layoffs and the cost-cutting that would have accompanied a full deployment.


Simpson Jurors' Trial
To the Editor:
Stephen N. Ciraolo moralizes that the Simpson jurors "have been dishonest, greedy, uncivil to each other, immaturely incapable of self-discipline, and in the end heedless of the important civic work" that is their obligation (letter, June 15).


Ankles Up


Domingo's First Love
Hovering between operetta and grand opera, the Spanish musical form called zarzuela is revived periodically in this country by performers with requisite clout.
Tonight on PBS, "Great Performances" presents "El Gato Montes" ("The Wildcat"), written and composed in 1916 by Manuel Penella.
The star is the tenor Placido Domingo.
In a brief preface, Mr.
Domingo recalls how he grew up loving this music.
His parents were zarzuela stars, and he and his sister once played Gypsy children in "El Gato Montes." Returning to it, he says, "is a great pleasure for me." Unfortunately, this English-subtitled performance in a production imported by the Los Angeles Opera from the Teatro Lirico Nacional la Zarzuela in Madrid is something less than an unalloyed pleasure.


Giuliani Hears Of Shared Ideas For the Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will not return her telephone calls, so the Board of Education president, Carol A. Gresser, took the opportunity yesterday when he spoke to a civic group to tell him that they have some common goals.
At a breakfast meeting of the Association for a Better New York, Mr.
Giuliani once again criticized the management of the city's public school system.
If he were given more control, he said, he would make schools safer, streamline the special-education program and expand school-based management.


It's Almost Automatic as Angels' Smith Gets Record 18th Straight Save
Angels 3, Royals 2
Lee Smith pitched the ninth inning for a record 18th save in 18 appearances last night, preserving California's 3-2 victory over visiting Kansas City.
The right-hander broke his major league mark of 17 saves in 17 appearances set in 1993 with St.
Louis.


Vatican Will Champion Role of Mothers at a U.N. Parley
A year after its bruising battle over the abortion issue at the United Nations population conference in Cairo, the Roman Catholic Church is gearing up again, this time to defend motherhood at the United Nations conference on women.
Without identifying its foes by name, the Vatican clearly considers itself at odds with a strain of Western feminism that it asserts has imposed its views on the draft document prepared for the conference, to be held in September in Beijing.


CHRONICLE
"I thought the job was sufficiently impossible to make it interesting," ROBERT FITZPATRICK said of his appointment yesterday as dean of Columbia University's School of the Arts.
Mr.
Fitzpatrick, 55, seems to relish new challenges.
"I'm starting my eighth career and didn't want to do anything where I would be repeating myself," he said.
Mr.
Fitzpatrick's resume reads like a chapter from "Gulliver's Travels." He was born in Toronto, educated in the United States and France and became the director of the 1984 Olympic Arts Festival in Los Angeles, president of EuroDisney, a member of the Baltimore City Council, dean of students at Johns Hopkins University and president of the California Institute of the Arts.


Food Notes
Filling a Need in the East 50's
In the East 50's, a part of Manhattan that is amply outfitted with restaurants, good food shops are in short supply.
Now Pescatore, a restaurant at 955 Second Avenue (50th Street), has opened Casa del Pescatore next door at 957 Second Avenue.
It is an attractive shop selling decent-quality produce, cheeses, breads, pastry, fresh and smoked fish and groceries.
Highlighting the array of prepared foods are stuffed eggplant ($2 each), mushroom salad ($6.95 a pound), smoked-eggplant spread ($5.95 a pound) and roasted beet salad with shallots ($4.50 a pound).
Dancing and Dessert
For seven summers Lincoln Center has offered dancing under the stars.
Next Wednesday, from 8:15 to 11 P.M., along with the dancing, there will be a dessert buffet prepared by about 20 chefs.
Admission, $20 at the gate, includes dance lessons at 6:30.
A Taste of Romance
Planning that summer wedding at the beach?
A wedding cake decorated with edible seashells might be the very thing.
It's just one of more than 30 inventive, even exquisite designs in "Colette's Wedding Cakes" by Colette Peters (Little, Brown, $35).
Color photographs and step-by-step instructions for more than 30 cakes are given, including one shaped like a cottage in the country and a Japanese design in red, a traditional color for weddings in Asia.
Strawberries and Salsa
The Bronx Sunday Market in Joyce Kilmer Park, Grand Concourse at 162d Street, will start its season this weekend with a strawberry festival beginning at 1 P.M.
Salsa -- the music -- will accompany the strawberries.
Admission is free, with strawberry shortcake for tasting.
The produce and crafts market will be open every Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. through Oct. 29.
Off the Menu  Setting Sail to La Caravelle
Eric Maillard, who has been the chef at Mark's in the Mark Hotel for about a year, is moving on.
In August, he will take his toque to La Caravelle on West 55th Street, which is losing its executive chef, Tadashi Ono, who will pursue other projects.
Rita Jammet, an owner, said Mr.
Maillard, who is French, uses many American ingredients and techniques.
His menu will start in September.
A Room With a View
Tam Restaurant Group of Staten Island does nothing small these days.
This company provided more than 10,000 meals to Disney's workers for the "Pocahantas" premiere and expects to have Lundy's, a vast seafood restaurant in Sheepshead Bay, running by September.
Now, Tam has just signed a big new project in Battery Park.
The American Park Cafe, with 600 seats, will occupy a 1930's storage building.
Frank Cretella, who owns Tam, has hired Larry Bogdanow to design the two-story restaurant, which he hopes will be open by next spring.
The restaurant, which will have views of New York Harbor and the Statue of Liberty, will serve "progressive American" food, Mr.
Cretella said, in its second-floor dining room and a less formal cafe.
An Encore for Tito Puente
Tito Puente, the 71-year-old musician whose career began in the 1940's, is not ready to stop.
In July he and his partners will open Tito Puente's, a 250-seat restaurant featuring Latin jazz, at 64 City Island Avenue, on City Island in the Bronx.
Yvonne Ortiz, the executive chef, who is the author of "A Taste of Puerto Rico" (Dutton, 1994), has devised a Caribbean-Hispanic menu.
An Oil Change (Motor to Olive)
Garage Restaurant and Cafe, 99 Seventh Avenue South (Grove Street), has opened in (what else?) a garage decorated with automobilia.
The restaurant, most recently the home of the Circle Repertory Theater, serves American food.
Garage is owned by Bob and Mary Jo Rinaolo, who previously owned the Caliente Cab Company.


At the Nation's Table: Seattle; A Melting-Pot Garden Where 'Organic' Is King
For urbanites who want to grow their own organic produce, Seattle may have the solution with its Seattle P-Patch community gardening program.
Begun in 1973 to teach children how to garden, P-Patch is, according to the American Community Gardening Association, the country's largest all-organic municipal community gardening program.
Through the program, administered by the Seattle Department of Housing and Human Services, more than 3,000 people grow organic produce at 33 sites in the city.
Any Seattleite with a yearning to get down and dirty can apply for a plot, pay a fee when given a space and grow anything that's legal.
P-Patch gardens are sold by the square foot: $20 for 100 square feet, $32 for 200 square feet and $50 for 400 square feet.


Customers Right or Wrong
To The Living Section:
Jeremy Dorosin is not my idea of a consumer hero  [ "Customer Is Always Right, Right?" June 14 ] .
Although I can understand his outrage at being sold used or malfunctioning appliances, Mr.
Dorosin's demands far outweigh his problems.
I fail to see the relationship between a faulty espresso machine and a center for runaway children.


Racist Message Reveals Town's Rift
With a main street reminiscent of Rodeo Drive and mansions evocative of Newport, R.I., this town has earned a reputation as a haven of the rich and famous, luring residents like Kathie Lee Gifford, Leona Helmsley, Diana Ross and Pat Riley.
But the suspension last week of five white, Greenwich High School seniors for slipping a racist message into their yearbook has cast a spotlight on Greenwich's lesser-known neighborhoods: the working class streets of Cos Cob and Byram, where most of the suspended students live, and the town's three main public housing projects, whose residents are primarily members of minority groups.


New Oyster Bars Thrive in the 'Off Season'
IT'S summer. And it's time for oysters.
Oysters?


BUSINESS DIGEST
Greenspan Reluctant To Cut Interest Rates
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said he was reluctant to reduce short-term interest rates right away despite an increased risk of a mild recession.


Air Force Officer Is Acquitted In Downing of Army Aircraft
The only person to face a court-martial in the accidental shooting of two Army helicopters over Iraq last year was acquitted on all counts today, a finding that further clouded rather than resolved the question of who was responsible for an incident that killed 26 people.
The verdict, issued by a 10-officer Air Force tribunal here, left both the 29-year-old defendant, Capt.
Jim Wang of the Air Force, and distraught relatives of the victims calling for an intensive Congressional investigation into the shooting.


Regent Softens Stance on Affirmative Action
Ward Connerly, the University of California regent who touched off a statewide debate early this year by calling for an end to affirmative action in college admissions, now says he sees merit in some cases of preferential treatment for black and Hispanic students.
"In January, I would have favored a total academic meritocracy," Mr.
Connerly said last week, with students who had the best S.A.T. scores and grade point averages admitted to the university system.


Son Charged in Rest Home Theft
For years, Mark Lefcovich was a familiar figure in the Madison nursing home owned by his mother, running errands for residents, taking them on social outings, even helping with their banking.
But Morris County prosecutors say Mr.
Lefcovich's real interest lay in taking residents of Mrs.
L's Rest Home to the cleaners.
He was charged in a 94-count indictment yesterday with stealing $494,000 between 1990 and 1993, more than $340,000 from one resident and most of the rest from his own mother.


U.S. Ruling May Undercut Brennan's Other Projects
For years, Robert E. Brennan's troubles in the securities industry have had little effect on his other business ventures or his philanthropic efforts.
All that could change following yesterday's ruling by Federal District Judge Richard Owen that Mr.
Brennan and First Jersey Securities, the penny-stock brokerage he founded, conducted "a massive and continuing fraud on its customers." Judge Owen issued a $71.5 million civil fraud judgment against them.


Breast Implant Story Remains Far From Over; Lost Medical Materials
To the Editor:
Re "A Case of Justice, or a Total Travesty?" (Business Day, June 13): Advocates for "injured" silicone breast implant recipients can be acting as major adversaries to large groups of seriously ill people.
Fearing unfair litigation, many manufacturers of excellent raw materials have withdrawn their products from medical device manufacturers and researchers.
A typical example is Biomer (more commonly known as Lycra), one of the most successful implant materials for long-term cardiac use.
Du Pont has invested enormous resources in refinement of Lycra.
The extremely high level of consistency and purity that Du Pont has achieved with Lycra could only be financed by a "deep-pockets" organization.


E. Bronson Ingram, Who Built Family Concern Into Giant, 63
E.
Bronson Ingram, who built his family's troubled barge operation into one of the largest private companies in the country with diversified interests, died last Thursday at his home in Nashville.
He was 63.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Accounts
*
Mott's Inc., Stamford, Conn., a unit of Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., to J. Walter Thompson New York, part of the WPP Group, to introduce in the Northeast Mott's In-a-Minute Unfrozen Concentrate, concentrated juice in cans.
Thompson New York already handles advertising for Mott's apple juice and apple sauce.
The billings were estimated at more than $3 million.


Arts for Our Sake
This is an ominous time for those of us who care deeply about the arts in America.
A misguided, misinformed effort to eliminate public support for the arts not only threatens irrevocable damage to our cultural institutions but also to our sense of ourselves and what we stand for as a people.
One of the great successes of the arts in America is that they are not the preserve of any "cultural elite." Through museums, libraries, schools, dance companies and concerts, the arts are truly part of the public domain, accessible to all and capable of encouraging every person's artistic expression and sensibility.


Sylvia Horwitz, 83, an Author Who Founded a School in Rome
Sylvia Laibman Horwitz, a world traveler, an author and a founder of two schools, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83.
The cause was cancer, said her son, Paul Horwitz.


The Owner Says Price Of Pitching Is Too High
George Steinbrenner has seen the future of the Yankees, and he does not want to lose any of its elements.
The owner, who can influence the immediate future by adding another pitcher, claimed he does not envision trading for a starter.
Not while the asking price is so extravagant.
Not while teams are lusting after New York's prospects.
Steinbrenner is actually preaching patience.
But that was a few hours before tonight's game with the Orioles and before Sterling Hitchcock, one of those valued prospects, produced an abominable performance in transforming a comfortable five-run advantage into a tense one-run affair that the Yankees eventually lost, 8-7, at Camden Yards.
Bob Wickman followed Hitchcock's weak effort by quickly floundering and absorbing the loss.


Bikers' Helmets Don't Protect Against Death
To the Editor:
Re Dick Teresi's "Case for No Helmets" (Op-Ed, June 17):


X-Ray Technician Pleads Guilty
A Coast Guard petty officer has pleaded guilty to using his position as an X-ray technician to molest a dozen female recruits during medical exams.
Petty Officer Franciscus M. Madigar II, who worked at a clinic at the Coast Guard Training Center, admitted at a court-martial hearing that he had fondled the women after taking unnecessary X-rays.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times yesterday about research on testosterone referred incorrectly in some editions to the relationship between low levels of the hormone and irritability.
The low levels were associated with greater irritability.


AIDS Panel Lacks Drug Abuse Experts
To the Editor:
The flap over Secret Service agents wearing rubber gloves while escorting a delegation of gay elected officials at the White House overshadows a more glaring oversight in President Clinton's AIDS agenda (news article, June 16).
In creating a new AIDS council, the President has again managed to exclude experts who represent substance-using populations.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Charles Bennett, a screenwriter, misidentified the director of the 1937 movie "King Solomon's Mines," for which Mr.
Bennett shared screen writing credit.
The director was Robert Stevenson, not Alfred Hitchcock.


Treasury Securities Prices Flat in Subdued Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were flat yesterday in subdued trading, as investors and dealers waited for more evidence of a slowing economy and for signals from the Fed.
Traders said light selling pressures hit nearly all maturities ahead of a scheduled speech by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, to the Economic Club of New York last night.


Ending the Foster Nomination
Senator Bob Dole made the right call in agreeing to bring the nomination of Dr.
Henry Foster Jr. as surgeon general to the floor for debate in the Senate today.
After four months of argument, posturing and examination of his record, it is time to bring this bungled nomination to a final verdict.
The candidate and the nation deserve no less.
It is dismaying that Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, in a desperate bid to revive his floundering Presidential campaign, threatened to filibuster the nomination, a tactic designed to let a minority of senators prevent the rest from holding a vote on the merits of the candidate.
It is also dismaying that Mr.
Dole has taken advantage of the threat to engineer rules that require a vote that amounts to defeating a filibuster.
The Senate will debate for three hours and then vote on whether to cut off discussion.
If the vote fails today, another will take place tomorrow.
Failure to close debate then will lead to removal of the nomination from the floor, probably dooming it for good.


Recalling a Friendship and a Five-Borough Search for Eden
EVER since Harvey Horowitz was murdered in his own apartment, Ariel Berlin has known that he had to present the work of the man he still regards as his closest friend.
Eight years later, he has accomplished the task, mounting an exhibition of riveting photographs that attest both to the slain man's search for Eden within the five boroughs and to the power of friendship.
Harvey Horowitz, who was 39 years old when he was strangled in his apartment on Montgomery Street, was not a photographer.
He made his living as a social worker for the city.
He had grown up on the Lower East Side and was proud that he never left the neighborhood.
He had gone to Jewish religious schools in the area and then Yeshiva University.
Whoever killed him has never been caught.
When Mr.
Berlin found his body, the apartment had been ransacked and a VCR was missing.


Light Vegetable Menu to Highlight Summer's Tomatoes
TOMATOES are becoming less expensive and better in quality at this time of year, and I like to use them in special tomato soups.
I serve a tomato chowder as a combined first and main course in this light menu, which is vegetarian except for the chicken stock used in the soup.
To make the dish vegetarian, replace the chicken stock with vegetable stock or water.
The chowder base is a harmonious blend of vegetables -- carrots, onions, scallions and garlic.
Then I add fresh cherry tomatoes, which are often cheaper and more flavorful than regular tomatoes early in the season, and canned plum tomatoes, which are usually tasty.
If you have access to a lot of fresh, ripe tomatoes, eliminate the canned ones.


The Lessons of Esmor
The Immigration and Naturalization Service was not set up as a penal institution.
But as more people seek asylum in the United States, as illegal immigration increases and as Congress creates more laws categorizing people as criminal aliens, the I.N.S. has found itself playing jailer.
It lacks the experience and the expertise to do this.
The result is that would-be immigrants all over the country are detained in facilities ranging from office buildings to converted warehouses to county jails.
Conditions vary widely, and detainees, many of them legitimate asylum-seekers who have already endured horrific persecution, are often subjected to cruelly inhumane conditions.
The I.N.S. needs to move quickly to formulate a civilized national policy for detaining would-be immigrants.


Disney Announces Plans For a Wildlife Theme Park
The Walt Disney Company today announced plans to build its largest theme park yet, one that would combine rides with real wildlife for what the company's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, called "an entirely new experience for our guests."
The Wild Animal Kingdom is to open in the spring of 1998 as the fourth theme park at Walt Disney World Resort in Florida.
Five times the size of the Magic Kingdom, it would take up 500 acres of Disney-owned property in Orange County near Orlando and devote nearly a fourth of it to creating a habitat for more than 1,000 animals, some of them endangered.


Water of Peace


Despite a Few Doubters, Gay Pride Unfurls on TV
Pretending that homophobia in this country is disappearing, or even declining, would be folly.
When Secret Service personnel at the White House wear insulting rubber gloves while an invited gay and lesbian delegation visits, and it takes President Clinton a week or so to apologize publicly, things obviously remain precarious.
But it would also be foolish to deny that gay and lesbian visibility, the positive kind, can claim extraordinary advances in books, magazines, films, theater and perhaps most striking of all in television.
A decade ago, homosexuals would be hard-pressed to find much about themselves or their worlds on the small screen.
The AIDS epidemic greatly changed that as gay groups, disgusted with neglect, aggressively demanded attention and recognition.
Some straights reacted with hostility, but many offered compassion and, more important, genuine interest and curiosity.
One upshot: The current Gay Pride Week is being recognized with considerable special programming, at least on public television and some cable services.


Colombia Marvels at Drug Kingpin: A Chain-Saw Killer, Too?
With his blazer, blue jeans, designer tie and engaging smile, Henry Loaiza Ceballos appeared on television today as if he were on his way to a summer cocktail party.
Only one accessory -- silver handcuffs -- hinted at his underworld nickname, the Scorpion.
His new chaperones, Colombia's police, said today that behind the tortoise-shell eyeglasses was a ruthless cocaine trafficker who once directed his men to cut up 107 of his enemies with chain saws.


Kirov Brings 3 Fokine Landmarks to U.S.
Michel Fokine's ballets are hardly unknown in the United States.
Born in 1880 in St.
Petersburg, Russia, Fokine became 20th-century ballet's earliest reformer, and his choreography was the mainstay of Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes from 1909 to 1914.
Three of his landmark works -- "Chopiniana," "Scheherazade" and "The Firebird" -- made up the program with which the Kirov Ballet from St.
Petersburg opened a two-week season at the Metropolitan Opera House on Monday night.


Trump Tries to Convert 50's Style Into 90's Gold; Makeover Starts on Columbus Circle Hotel
It is not reliably recorded that Midas ever touched a building.
But Donald J. Trump, the developer, has made a successful grab for an aging glass skyscraper on Columbus Circle, and today construction officially begins on his plan to turn the walls of the old Gulf and Western Building into gold.
Gold-tinted glass, anyhow.
Mr.
Trump's well-publicized financial difficulties may have tarnished the lustrous image he enjoyed a decade ago, but his new project seems designed to prove that esthetically at least, he has not lost the tycoon's touch.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Jose Canseco, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Rich Rowland, catcher, for assignment.


Kobe Journal; Laid Low by Quake, a City Quickly Picks Itself Up
Perhaps the best indication of Kobe's progress in recovering from the earthquake in January is that Shizuko Hirajima can hear again.
When the earthquake struck, Mrs.
Hirajima did not have time to rescue a neighbor who was trapped in the rubble.
A fire swept through, and from the edge of the blaze she listened to his screams as he burned to death.
Haunted by her failure to rescue him, she coped by going deaf: the screams went away, but so did all other sounds.


Get the Money to the Schools
New York City's school system desperately needs reform.
With every day of delay, our children are deprived of a sound education.
I have a vision of how to provide the best possible education for them while safeguarding them in school and insuring that more dollars go to the classroom instead of into administration and bureaucracy.
I hope that the Board of Education, which meets today to begin the search for a new schools chancellor, will work closely with City Hall to find the right successor -- one with the strengths, courage and skills to make the school system the pride of our city.


Arsenal Signs Bergkamp
The Dutch forward DENNIS BERGKAMP signed a four-year contract with the London team Arsenal yesterday in a $12 million transfer from Internazionale of Milan.
Details of the four-year deal weren't announced, but newspapers have reported that Bergkamp will be paid $40,000 a week.
Bergkamp, 26, is the club's first major signing under Coach BRUCE RIOCH, hired this month to reverse the team's disappointing Premier League record over the last two years.
Bergkamp's first game for Arsenal will be an exhibition match against Inter in London on Aug. 10.


'92 Study Found Problems With Subway Stop Signals
It is a chart among dozens of charts scattered throughout a three-year-old report.
But suddenly, the numbers in its columns and rows have gone from drab data to perhaps the keenest insight so far into a danger that transit officials believe allowed one subway train to hurtle into another on the Williamsburg Bridge on June 5.
In 1992, a consulting firm hired by the Transit Authority produced the report, well over 100 pages long, on the subway derailment near Union Square that killed five people the year before.
Among the mass of data is a table comparing the amount of stopping room provided by each of the 16 signal lights on the Lexington Avenue IRT express track from Grand Central to Union Square with the distance that a train moving at top speed would actually need to stop.


A Legacy of Basics
When educators talk about what Ramon C. Cortines accomplished for New York City's schools during his stormy two years as Chancellor, they use two words so obvious that they hardly seem worth mentioning: teaching and learning.
What else are schools supposed to do, after all?
But what the educators are trying to say is that Mr.
Cortines, in largely symbolic ways, refocused the system on fundamentals after years in which the schools seemed preoccupied with relatively peripheral issues, like condoms and AIDS.


Financier Must Pay $71 Million
A Federal judge in Manhattan imposed damages of at least $71.5 million on Robert E. Brennan, the New Jersey sports entrepreneur and financier, and his former flagship, First Jersey Securities, after finding he had used illegal price-gouging and abusive sales practices to enrich himself at his customers' expense.  [ Page A1. ]


Cultist Hijacks Japanese Jetliner, Demanding the Release of Leader
A member of the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect hijacked an airplane with 365 people aboard today and demanded the release of the imprisoned sect leader, official reports said.
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama did not flatly reject the demand, but gave no indication that he would release Shoko Asahara, the sect leader who was arrested and jailed last month in connection with the subway gas attack here on March 20 that killed 12 people and injured 5,500 more.


Breast Implant Story Remains Far From Over
To the Editor:
"A Case of Justice, or a Total Travesty?" (Business Day, June 13) notes that seven epidemiological studies (some financed by industry sponsors) have failed to find a definitive link between silicone breast implants and autoimmune diseases.
Other published studies that you have not cited do suggest a link.


New Jersey Financier Used Fraud at Firm, Judge Rules
A Federal judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday that Robert E. Brennan, the New Jersey sports entrepreneur and financier, had used illegal price gouging and abusive sales practices to enrich himself and his brokers at his customers' expense.
Mr.
Brennan, boyishly handsome and articulate, came to prominence in the early 80's through television ads inviting customers to "come grow with us" by investing in the small, unseasoned companies he was promoting.
Deftly parrying regulatory attacks on his sales practices, he reaped a fortune, spending generously on the political and philanthropic contributions that turned him into a powerful and colorful figure in New Jersey.


Yesterday in Washington
SURGEON GENERAL NOMINEE: Senator Bob Dole said the Senate would vote at noon today on limiting debate on the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General.
Mr.
Dole said that if the motion to limit debate failed to get the 60 votes needed for approval, a second vote would be held on Thursday.
If both votes fail, Mr.
Dole said, Dr.
Foster's nomination will be shelved.
SPEED LIMIT: The Senate voted, 51 to 49, to repeal the nationwide speed limit for cars of 65 miles an hour in rural areas and 55 near cities, but to keep it in effect for trucks and other commercial vehicles.
Under the provisions of an amendment to the National Highway System bill, each state would be allowed to set its own speed limits for cars.
The measure has yet to be considered by the House.


Jail Official Blames Revolt On Agency
Months before an immigration jail in Elizabeth, N.J., exploded in violence, the company that runs it told immigration officials that tensions were building among the 300 detainees there, the company's chairman, James F. Slattery, said yesterday in his first interview since the uprising on Sunday.
The immigrants were being held for months on end in a jail intended for much shorter stays because it was taking the Immigration and Naturalization Service more than six months, on average, to process their cases, Mr.
Slattery said.
The length and not the conditions of their jailing had provoked the disturbance, he said.


How a Woman Ended Up Homeless
So you've wondered how that apparently homeless person who catches your eye got that way, but you've never had the nerve to ask?
Well, Michel Negroponte had the nerve, and, since he is also a documentary maker, you can accompany him tonight on his journey of discovery.
Maggie, who prefers to be known as "Jupiter's Wife," caught Mr.
Negroponte's eye in Central Park, where she regularly walked her many dogs and, incidentally, slept, brushed her teeth and so forth.
He struck up an acquaintance and had no trouble learning from the well-spoken, often wryly witty woman ("Our clothes come from reliable Upper East Side garbage") that the radio frequency into which she was plugged brought messages from her husband along with many other extrasensory communications.


Fairfax County, Va., Gets 4 New Office Buildings
Four large office development projects are under construction in Fairfax County, ending a five-year drought in new office construction in the county.
Fairfax County, which wraps around the western and southern edges of Washington, Arlington County and Alexandria, Va., saw explosive growth in the 1980's, when about 50 million square feet of office space was created, according to the county Economic Development Authority.
But the market collapsed at the end of the decade, and developers forfeited to lenders on many unbuilt sites.


The One-Two Punch Of Cherries for Lamb
WHILE traditional dried fruits like raisins, prunes and apricots add a great deal of sweetness to an otherwise savory dish, dried cherries add something much more interesting -- a tart-sweet flavor.
They are perfect in this lamb dish, and they are also a good complement to beef, pork and poultry.
If dried cherries are difficult to find, they can be ordered from American Spoon Foods in Petoskey, Mich., (800) 222-5886.


Cookouts a la Carte
Les Halles, at 411 Park Avenue South (28th Street), is offering several assortments of grill-ready meat -- sausages, brochettes, marinated chicken breasts, steaks, chops and the like -- for delivery in Manhattan.
The assortments are $20 to $33 and serve at least six.
The meat is packed on ice so it can withstand several hours of travel.
A day's notice is required, and delivery is free for orders of $50 or more (for smaller amounts the charge is $10).
To order: (212) 679-4111.


'Virtual Reality' Conquers Fear of Heights
CHRIS KLOCK remembers the first time he was paralyzed with a fear of heights.
He was just 10 years old and was climbing the stairs to the top of the Statue of Liberty.
"Halfway up there's a place to look out," said Mr.
Klock.
"It just terrified me. I turned around and walked right down the steps."
But now Mr.
Klock, a junior at Georgia Institute of Technology, has managed to stand without fear while peering from a 20-story-high balcony, ride up 49 floors in a glass-walled elevator overlooking a vast atrium and clamber across a narrow bridge suspended high above a rushing river.


No Children, Please
To The Living Section:
In regard to "The Wedding Reception That's Chilly to Children"  [ June 14 ] , when my husband and I became engaged four years ago, I promptly asked his cousins' three young daughters to be our flower girls, knowing full well they would look adorable and steal the show.
A wedding should be a celebration of the marriage of two individuals and their families.
It's sad to see that for many brides the emphasis is on being the center of attention.


Dowd's Winner Makes Lemaire Look Psychic
Jacques Lemaire is a master of using the Devils' depth to the fullest extent.
Despite his team's victory in the opening game of the Stanley Cup finals against the Red Wings, he used two new players tonight in Game 2.
Without hesitation, Lemaire added Jim Dowd and Brian Rolston to the lineup and the strategy paid off.
Dowd, the only native of New Jersey to play for the Devils, made his coach look like a genius.


Personal Health
ALTHOUGH most Americans work indoors, they spend much of their leisure time outdoors -- running, walking, cycling, swimming, skating, skiing, playing golf and tennis, going to ball games and, of course, sunbathing.
In the process many expose their skin and eyes to a heavy dose of harmful ultraviolet radiation.
If any other environmental agent caused one million cases of cancer a year, there would be an unprecedented hue and cry to get rid of it immediately.
But it has been very hard to convince Americans that sunshine can be unhealthy.
Just as people are admired for being thin even when they are too thin, those who sport a tan are congratulated for looking "healthy," even though tanning results from injury to the skin.
Some sun worshipers may wonder how anything that feels as good as sunshine can be harmful.
Others may decide they simply do not care, opting to enjoy the sun now and take their chances on the consequences.
Unfortunately, some of those consequences are unpleasant and unattractive and do not occur decades later.
Skin Cancer
Overexposure to the sun has caused a dramatic rise in all kinds of skin cancer.
One in six Americans will develop skin cancer.
The superficial skin cancers -- basal and squamous cell carcinomas -- are the most common of all cancers, with more than one million new cases a year, according to new data from the American Academy of Dermatology.
And the more serious and potentially deadly form of skin cancer, melanoma, is now the fastest growing cancer in the United States.
Last year, the academy reported a 500 percent increase in the incidence of malignant melanoma in the 35 years from 1950 to 1985.
This year, the American Cancer Society estimates that 34,100 cases of melanoma will be diagnosed and that 7,200 people will die of it.
However, in a newly published survey, dermatologists estimated that 80,000 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed in 1992 and that the incidence has been increasing by 4.2 percent a year.


Of the Mafia's Stranglehold on Italy
Excellent Cadavers The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic
By Alexander Stille  467 pages. Pantheon. $27.50.
Over a recent decade, the Sicilian Mafia murdered, among others, the president of the Sicilian region, four judges, the local head of the Communist Party, an army general who was serving as the anti-crime prefect of Sicily's capital, Palermo, the Palermo district's chief prosecutor, and its deputy chief of police.
They are some of the "excellent cadavers" of Alexander Stille's title.
The Mafia also killed off Salvatore Lima, Sicily's leading national politician and an ally of the Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, as punishment when Lima was unable to fix some anti-Mafia trials.
Other victims included numerous local businessmen and larger numbers of less-than-excellent cadavers, other mafiosi caught on the losing sides of sanguinary turf wars.


C. K. Tholl, 69; Helped Save Historic Houses
Claire K. Tholl, whose recommendation to preserve more than 200 stone houses led New Jersey and the Federal Government to include many of them on a list of protected historic buildings, died on Monday at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
She was 69 and lived in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
She suffered a lengthy illness, her family said.


Another Road Victory Puts Devils Halfway Home
The Devils have stunned the Red Wings, most hockey fans and maybe even themselves by surging to a two-games-to-none lead in the Stanley Cup finals.
Few favored them to win the cup and now it is altogether reasonable to ask a once preposterous question: Can the Devils sweep the powerful Wings?


In 1950's, U.S. Collected Human Tissue to Monitor Atomic Tests
In the 1950's, the Federal Government established a worldwide network to collect tissue secretly to monitor the effects of radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons tests, according to documents uncovered by a Presidential panel.
The President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments today released documents from the old Atomic Energy Commission that outlined efforts to collect tissue, primarily bone, from cadavers without obtaining the permission of the next of kin.
The documents show the commission members were aware of the dubious legal and ethical grounds for the research.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.05
4.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.48
5.46
4.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.42
4.58
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.13
7.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.57
7.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.56
7.55
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.21
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gossip Reporter Arrested in Wiretapping for a Royal Scoop
A Spanish journalist was arrested yesterday and charged with illegally tapping the telephone of an Upper West Side woman to find out for his Madrid gossip magazine whether she was dating the Crown Prince of Spain, the Manhattan District Attorney's office said.
The office also charged two private detectives the journalist had hired.
It said the three were caught yesterday afternoon while they were lurking outside the woman's apartment on 79th Street between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues.


Doubts Voiced By Greenspan On a Rate Cut
In the strongest statement of his intentions since economic growth began to stall earlier this year, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, indicated last night that he was reluctant to cut short-term interest rates right away despite an increased risk of a mild recession.
Speaking to the Economic Club of New York, Mr.
Greenspan said it was uncertain whether the country would slip into a recession in the next few months.
But in an open acknowledgment of the new constraints imposed by currency markets, he said it would be a mistake to stimulate business activity by lowering rates if that led investors to pull money out of the United States, weakening an already shaky dollar.


Yankee Prospect Honored
Andy Fox, a top Yankee prospect, has been selected the International League hitter of the week.
The 24-year-old Fox, who plays both infield and outfield for Class AAA Columbus, batted .350 with three home runs, six runs scored and nine runs batted in.
In 11 games this season, Fox is hitting .371 with a .800 slugging percentage.


Cheese, Again and Again and . . .


Share Shakespeare? London Isn't Sure It Should
When the Royal Shakespeare Company's artistic director, Adrian Noble, announced earlier this month that he intended to move the company out of London and take it on tour for six months of each year, he argued that his decision would provide a long-overdue boost to regional theater in Britain.
But here in the capital, where theater is a huge, unforgiving and jealously conducted business, people are focusing on the flip side of Mr.
Noble's equation.
Never mind the region, they're saying: what will the move do to theater in London?


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Yankees, Phone Home!; GTE Role in Venezuela Is Warning on Privatization
In the three years since Venezuela's creaky state telephone company was privatized, the new American managers have increased the number of lines by 50 percent, doubled international circuits and quadrupled the number of working pay phones.
So, Venezuelans have been heaping praise and honor on the country's largest single foreign investment, right?


Market Place; A judge says First Jersey 'was the market' for its stocks.
"COME Grow With Us," proclaimed one of the slickest advertising campaigns in the history of the brokerage business.
That ad campaign certainly helped First Jersey Securities to grow, but the purpose of the business was never to benefit its customers.
It was operated, a Federal judge ruled yesterday, "as a pervasive fraud on First Jersey's hundreds of thousands of retail customers."
How was that fraud accomplished?
Evidence at the trial of First Jersey and its owner and TV pitchman, Robert E. Brennan, showed that the firm would, simultaneously, buy from one customer and then sell to another at double or triple the price.


Wine Talk
LE Meilleur Pot -- literally, the Best Pot -- is an award given annually in Paris to the bistro with the most highly acclaimed Beaujolais.
Now, the award is also given in New York.
Here, it bears the painfully awkward name Best Beaujolais Bistro Cup 95.
The French name isn't awkward, but it is misleading.
"Pot" is pronounced POE, as in Edgar Allan, and it refers not to a mundane pot but to a special wine bottle often used in the Beaujolais region.


CHRONICLE
As a former singer with a big band, GINNY MANCINI, the widow of the composer Henry Mancini, remembers the days when singers were paid $25 a recording.
Although the pay has improved, the plight of many singers has not, says Mrs.
Mancini, a former member of the Mellolarks vocal group.
In 1985, she founded the Society of Singers, a nonprofit organization that provides financial assistance and counseling to professional singers.


Corrections
A picture in Science Times yesterday showing two researchers at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories and the equipment they used to detect radiation left over from the Big Bang was printed in mirror image in some editions, and the caption reversed their identities.
Dr.
Arno A. Penzias was shown at left, with glasses; the bearded man is Dr.
Robert W. Wilson.


Nine Wounded, Including Children, in Ambush in Newark
The shouts of children playing on a hot summer night turned to screams early today when bullets, apparently from a gang ambush, pelted down from a second-story garage, wounding nine people, the police said.
One 12-year-old youth was shot through the back during the 1:15 A.M. outburst and was in critical condition at University Hospital, said Detective Daniel Collins, a spokesman for the Newark Police Department.
Another victim was grazed by a bullet, and the rest suffered wounds from shotgun pellets or ricochets that were not considered serious, the police said.


Tokyo's Trade Hypocrisy
President Clinton's decision to impose sanctions on Japan for keeping out American cars and car parts has deflected attention from two other trade disputes in which Tokyo is in the wrong.
One involves Federal Express, the other Kodak.
In the Kodak case, recently disclosed Japanese documents show in detail how Tokyo helped block the American company in violation of its own laws and policies.
Japan has also violated a 1952 aviation accord with the United States by denying an application by Federal Express to fly cargo through Japan to its new hub at Subic Bay, the former American naval base in the Philippines.
The Clinton Administration announced this week that it was preparing to impose sanctions against Japanese carriers if Japan did not back down.
Japan, in turn, threatened to retaliate if America levied sanctions.


Corrections
Because of a technical error, the Personal Computers column in Science Times yesterday gave incorrect examples of file names that might be created using the Windows 95 operating system.
The tilde should have stood alone in each case, not been attached to the next character.
For example: FUNGUS 2.DOC.


Orioles Keep Yankees in a Slide


C.I.A. Pulls No Punches on Bosnia Report
To the Editor:
In "Break the Siege" (column, June 15), William Safire suggests I might take a "see-no-evil" attitude to intelligence collection and reporting on Bosnia.
His charge is dead wrong.


Diet-Aid Pair to Lose $100,000
The makers of two widely advertised diet aids agreed yesterday to pay more than $100,000 to reimburse customers who were defrauded into ordering useless products, according to the United States Attorney's office.
Hanover Labs Inc., distributor of LIPO-trim pills, and Livingston Labs Inc., distributor of ChewLites gum, both of Livingston, did not admit wrongdoing in settling the case, but authorities said the companies duped dieters into believing they could shed pounds while eating fattening foods.
Consumers seeking refunds should write to the Better Business Bureau-Refund, P.O.
Box 767, Madison Square Station, New York, N.Y. 10010-0767.


Laurence McKinley Gould, a Polar Explorer And Innovative College President, Dies at 98
Laurence McKinley Gould, a polar explorer who led American efforts in Antarctica for many years and was also an innovative college president, died on Tuesday at a home for the elderly in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 98.
He was second in command of Adm.
Richard E. Byrd's first expedition to Antarctica from 1928 to 1930.
In 1930 he and his companions claimed an unexplored sector of Antarctica for the United States, but 25 years later Dr.
Gould led the American effort to make that continent international.


House G.O.P. Moves to Cut Immigration
Congress today began an ambitious effort to rewrite American immigration policy as House Republicans offered legislation to reduce the numbers of aliens, legal and illegal alike, who settle in the United States.
The chief sponsor of the bill, Representative Lamar Smith of Texas, said at a news conference that generations of immigrants had contributed "work, creativity and vibrancy" to the nation.
But, he said, it is time to "put the interests of America first: the interests of the American worker, the American taxpayer and the American family."


Treasuries Rise in Price After Talk By Greenspan
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday as traders put their own interpretations on complex and somewhat ambiguous comments by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Greenspan indicated that he was reluctant to cut short-term rates right away, despite the increased risk of a mild recession.
But he did leave open the possibility of a cut later this year if more signs emerged that the economy was heading into worse trouble or if Congress passed a budget that would significantly narrow the Federal deficit.


Lone Star Steakhouse &amp; Saloon Inc.(STAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 13


Eliot's Journey Toward Putting Words to Thought
GEORGE ELIOT Voice of a Century: A Biography  By Frederick R. Karl  Illustrated. 708 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $30.
At the peak of her achievement as a novelist, George Eliot "was one of the three most famous women in England, along with Queen Victoria and Florence Nightingale," Frederick R. Karl writes at the end of his monumental new biography, "George Eliot: Voice of a Century." He continues, "Victoria gave her name to the century and Nightingale to the Crimean war, but Eliot gave the era its intellectual sweep, offered it moral stability and gave voice to the huge forces contesting one another."


Japanese Police Storm Airliner, Ending Hijacking


Senate Blocks a Surgeon General Vote; Supporters Fall 3 Votes Shy of 60 Needed
The Senate refused today to bring the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster, Jr. as Surgeon General to a vote, as a combination of Republican Presidential politics and intense opposition to abortion all but killed the nomination.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, scored a major political victory, showing conservative Republicans and anti-abortion groups that he could quash the nomination they vehemently opposed.
In the process, he outfoxed one of his principal rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, who had sought to lead the anti-Foster effort by announcing he would stage a filibuster.  [ Page A24. ]


Heinz (H.J.) Co.(HNZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


COMPANY BRIEFS
HUGHES MISSILE SYSTEM CO., Tucson, Ariz., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp., was awarded a $154 million contract to design and develop the Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile for the Navy.
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY INC., Scotts Valley, Calif., agreed to acquire Creative Interaction Technologies, Chapel Hill, N.C., which makes products for the networking computer market.
Terms were not disclosed.


E. M. Cioran, 84, Novelist And Philosopher of Despair
E.
M.
Cioran, a Romanian-born writer known for his essays on philosophy and culture and his emphasis on despair, emptiness and death, died on Tuesday in the Broca Hospital in Paris.
He was 84 and had lived in Paris since 1937.
Mr.
Cioran (pronounced TCHAW-rahn) has been widely read by modern writers and thinkers.
Susan Sontag called him a practitioner of "a new kind of philosophizing: personal, aphoristic, lyrical, anti-systematic." And Edmund White, writing in The New York Times Book Review in 1991, said that Mr.
Cioran "has contemplated suicide for decades, esteems extremists, fanatics and eccentrics of all sorts and has instituted vertigo into his daily life."


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT CLINTON has nominated MARK GEARAN, the White House communications director, to be the new director of the Peace Corps.
If the nomination is approved by the Senate, Mr.
Gearan will replace CAROL BELLAMY, the former president of the New York City Council, who was recently named the executive director of Unicef.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a preschool program to be created by the Children's Television Workshop for Cartoon Network Worldwide, which is owned by Turner Broadcasting, misstated the date of the network's debut.
It was Oct. 1, 1992, not 1982.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  American General Corp., Houston, is selling $150 million of notes due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes carry an interest rate of 6.75 percent and are priced at par.
The issue is rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service, AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Consolidated Edison Co. of New York Inc. is selling $100 million of debentures due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch.
The debentures are priced at 99.674 to yield 6.67 percent.
The issue is rated A1 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


New Gloves A Snug Fit For Simpson
O.
J.
Simpson had little trouble fitting into another pair of extra-large leather gloves today, a mint version of the bloodied, wrinkled Aris Isotoners he struggled to put on last week.
But even before Mr.
Simpson eased into the brand new gloves, his chief lawyer called the demonstration "bogus," noting that 995 out of every 1,000 American men could wear the same gloves.
After a prolonged debate over where the defendant would stand, what he could say and whether he would make faces, Mr.
Simpson, a sardonic smile on his face, hunkered over to the jury.
Then, in contrast to last week, when he wrestled to don the gloves the police found shortly after his former wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were killed, he slipped into the new pair, sent overnight from a factory in the Philippines, flexing his fingers freely.


Don't Rush to Repatriate Vietnam Refugees
To the Editor:
"More Misery for Vietnamese Detainees" (editorial, June 19) correctly states that what we ought to look for is a "tolerable conclusion" to the painful story of the Vietnamese refugees.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Rubin Beats Fernandez
Chanda Rubin, seeded 13th, advanced to the quarterfinals of the Eastbourne championships in England yesterday by beating No. 5 Gigi Fernandez, 6-4, 3-6, 6-1, in the Wimbledon warm-up event.
Top-seeded Kimiko Date beat Pam Shriver, 7-5, 6-2, while No. 2 Natasha Zvereva was a 6-1, 6-4 winner over Mana Endo.
But in other upsets, unseeded Christina Singer eliminated No. 3 Brenda Schultz-McCarthy, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, and Lori McNeil, seeded 10th, eliminated No. 4 Helena Sukova, 7-5, 6-3. (AP)


Rail Project to Get $75 Million
A House subcommittee voted yesterday to spend $75 million on a project linking mass transit lines in northern New Jersey.
Representative Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, Republican of Harding, noted that the proposed appropriation was included in a bill that reduces transportation financing overall by $1.2 billion.
The New Jersey "urban core" plan includes links of rail lines to Amtrak's Northeast Corridor, a rail line connecting Newark International Airport with the Newark-Elizabeth corridor and a mass transit system along the Hudson River waterfront.
TERRY PRISTIN


10 Days Later, Walesa Rebukes Anti-Semitism, but Not Priest
Under pressure too persistent to ignore, President Lech Walesa has issued a statement condemning anti-Semitism, but he stood fast in refusing to criticize a friend, a Roman Catholic priest, who delivered an anti-Semitic sermon in the President's presence.
The statement, issued on Tuesday night, followed an uproar in Israel and telephone calls from Israeli and American officials to Mr.
Walesa urging him to break a silence that was seen in the United States and Israel as approval of the anti-Semitic remarks made 10 days ago.


3Com Corp.(COMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Essay; Made Under Duress
The promise you make with a gun to your head is devoid of moral or legal force.
Nobody is obligated in any way to keep a pledge extracted under duress.
That bedrock principle is worth restating in a week when concern for the lives of hostages caused governments to make promises to terrorists in Chechnya and Bosnia.


C.I.A. REPORT SAYS CHINESE SENT IRAN ARMS COMPONENTS
The Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that China has recently delivered important components for missile systems to Iran and Pakistan.
Senior Administration officials said today that the shipments could violate an international missile accord and require the United States to impose punitive economic sanctions against China.
The report comes when diplomatic relations with China are deeply strained because of disputes over human rights, trade and the recent unofficial visit of Taiwan's President to the United States.


Summer, Already Here; Homesick
Here I am in Sarasota, Florida, homesick as I was my first morning in sleep-away camp.
On top of a bunk bed my eyes opened on an unfamiliar knotty pine ceiling, which seemed to cave in like something out of Edgar Allan Poe.
That same heavy-hearted dread of the foreign unknown.
All the first day's optimism, camp songs, anticipation of happy times drops dead.
What's eating you?
I ask myself, and with no adult around to answer the question, I keep rubbing my heart to make it go on beating.
I'm consumed by the bird-voices of my husband and son, so far away.
I am like the mad poet Holderlin, holed up in his tower, watching how into the familiar drifts the unknown.
It's this uprootedness, like an orchid dangling its roots out of an open box, grasping for air -- this freedom I desired.
But my only company is a terrified child.
There, there, I tell myself, petting her stringy hair.
Where? she asks, eyes panicky.
We are both such a long way from home.


Simon &amp; Schuster Shift
Simon &amp; Schuster, the publishing division of Viacom Inc., announced the appointment yesterday of Michael Jacobs as vice president and publisher of the Free Press, a publishing house that often specializes in conservative books.
The company also said that the Free Press would become a publishing unit of Simon &amp; Schuster's trade division.


It's time for pencils and erasers: The names are changing on a variety of agency scorecards.
MARKETERS of everything from juices to video games to computer on-line services are making or mulling over changes in their agency rosters.
The Seagram Beverage Group, a unit of the Seagram Company in New York, said yesterday that it would end its decade-long relationship with the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago.
Seagram will select another agency to handle worldwide advertising for its Tropicana juices, Ellen R. Marram, president of the beverage group, said, because Burnett has become the worldwide agency for the Fruitopia line of juice and tea drinks sold by the Coca-Cola Company.


Way Is Found for Seniors to Erase Yearbook Blot
The five white Greenwich High School seniors who encoded a racist message in their yearbook will take part in a summer civil rights program under an agreement with the Board of Education that will allow them to take their final exams and receive their diplomas.
But because they could still face charges under the state's hate-crimes law, the students' lawyers said, they could not offer apologies or admissions of guilt.


With $1 Billion Deficit, Los Angeles County Begins Facing Painful Cuts
In a noisy conference room punctuated by cheers and boos, the five Los Angeles County supervisors began to wrestle urgently this week with a fiscal problem they say has been threatening the stability of the nation's most populous county for 17 years.
Faced with a budget deficit of more than $1 billion -- the cumulative result, in part, of years of reduced revenues that began with the adoption in 1978 of an anti-tax ballot measure -- the county must cut nearly $1 from every $10 it intends to spend in the coming year.


Mets Need More Than A Shakeup It Seems
It is possible that the Philadelphia Phillies are really this good.
Not to take anything away from the Phils, though, what's more probable is that the Mets are simply that bad.
Dallas Green shook up his lineup last night at Shea Stadium with the former Met left-hander David West on the mound for the Phillies.
Ryan Thompson was inserted into the leadoff slot for only the second time this year, and the right-handed-hitting reserves Chris Jones, Kelly Stinnett and Tim Bogar were all in the lineup.


Market Place; Wall St. firms are recovering, but stock analysts are hesitant.
IT'S beginning to look like the fortunes of Wall Street's brokerage firms are reversing after a year of abysmal results.
Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. yesterday became the latest brokerage house to post solid results, reporting that net income jumped to $58 million, or 43 cents a share, in its fiscal second quarter from $20 million, or 11 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
Net income in the quarter a year earlier was reduced by a charge; operating income in that quarter was $32 million.


Profanity's Purpose
To the Editor:
Re "Welcome to New York, Capital of Profanities" (news article, June 19):


Mets' Owners Divided On Future Playing Site
Although the Mets have not played like thoroughbreds since 1988, Nelson Doubleday, the team's co-owner, is enamored of an embryonic proposal to build a privately financed stadium on Belmont Park's six-furlong pony track.
"It's still very preliminary," said David Howard, the Mets' vice president of business affairs.
He added that a much more advanced plan conceived by Fred Wilpon, the other co-owner and an experienced developer, to replace Shea Stadium with a retractable dome ball park and construct an adjacent futuristic entertainment complex remained the team's most viable option.


After 20 Years, a Mosque Opens in Catholicism's Back Yard
A grand mosque on the scale of some of Islam's most holy shrines formally opened its doors today in a multinational, multilingual ceremony that ended on a note of challenge.
If the mosque -- the first to be built in the home of the Roman Catholic Church -- has a message, it is one of religious tolerance.
And that was the message that Pope John Paul II threw back at the Islamic world today as he hailed the mosque's opening at his weekly general audience in St.
Peter's Square.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CHINA SAID TO BREAK MISSILE PACT  The C.I.A. said that China has delivered important parts for missile systems to Iran and Pakistan in what U.S. officials said could be a violation of an international accord and might require the U.S. to impose sanctions on China.
A1


MDS Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Furniture Designs With Presence
THE designer John Stefanidis has been known for his originality and international flair for more than 20 years.
Born in Egypt and educated at Oxford University, he holds a Greek passport and lives in London -- when he is not on the Greek island of Patmos, where many of his designs were born.
The designer's made-in-England furniture, including the Cut-Out Range collection of chairs, tables and consoles, is being introduced in the United States.
Many of the bold and fanciful pieces have table tops of waxed European oak, and chair legs and table bases of tulip wood.
The 58-inch-wide hexagonal hall table in oak (above) has a list price of $6,000.
The Baby Spoonback upholstered dining chair, above right, based on a traditional English design with an unusual trimming detail, is $1,200.
The Malcontenta chair, right, made of North African iroko wood, presents a striking silhouette ($2,100).


Many Violate Clean Water Act
Nearly one-fourth of the state's major industrial and municipal plants seriously violated the Clean Water Act during an 18-month period ending last December, the Public Interest Research Group Citizen Lobby said yesterday.
But the group also pointed out that the number of violators has been cut in half since a similar report was issued in 1991.
Curtis Fisher, the group's environmental advocate, said that the findings, based on data gathered by the Environmental Protection Agency, should not be used to justify efforts to weaken clean water enforcement standards.


City Police Still Need a Monitor
The Mollen commission report on police corruption recommended two kinds of reform: internal reform, to improve the quality of police recruits and make the anti-corruption effort a shared responsibility at all levels of the department; and external reform, with an independent panel to monitor and investigate corruption and serve as a hedge when the department's vigilance flags.
The Giuliani administration's new anti-corruption measures mark only a partial compliance with the report.
The administration's pledge to expand anti-corruption efforts to include precinct-level managers and to seek more mature, better-educated recruits is welcome.
What is troublesome is City Hall's continued resistance to the commission's central recommendation: a strong, independent agency to investigate police corruption.


Red Wings Can Count: Odds Are Against Them
Their voices are different and the names have changed, but the sounds, the sensations and the explanations are so familiar.
The Detroit Red Wings could calmly dissect their two disappointing Stanley Cup losses to the Devils, just as the Philadelphia Flyers did one round ago.
From Coach Scotty Bowman on down, the Red Wings recited the need for patience against the Devils' cautious approach.
They cited their improvement in potentially decisive areas.
They considered their breakdowns to be correctable.
They noted the booing in the stands at Joe Louis Arena at the end of a memorable season.
"It's almost like when the game is tied, we're behind," Dino Ciccarelli observed.


A Warning on Oil Rigs
The battle over disposal of the oil platform Brent Spar sounds a warning for the petroleum industry and for the international community.
After a bruising campaign by the environmental group Greenpeace, Royal Dutch Shell backed away this week from its plan to sink the obsolete storage platform in the North Atlantic.
But the issue will grow in importance as other such structures wear out around the globe.
Greenpeace and European environmentalists argued that the oil platform contained significant amounts of toxic waste and would endanger the marine environment if it were sunk.
Heads of European governments wrote to the British Government protesting the plan.


Calendar: Calder Show, Garden Tours and Talks
Jewelry by Calder  A/D Gallery, 560 Broadway (Prince Street); (212) 966-5154.
In a re-creation of a 1940 exhibition, 18 pieces of whimsical bent-wire jewelry by Alexander Calder will be on display through July 28.
Open Tuesday through Saturday (after July 1, Monday through Friday), 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
No charge.


The Baby Boomerang: Hometown Bound
JESSICA LANGE, religiously private, has always warmed to inquisitors familiar with Main Street in her tiny hometown of Cloquet, Minn.
Indeed, days before she won her second Oscar, in April, she told The Minneapolis Star Tribune that she would soon be moving back to Minnesota for good.
Though she refused to say whether she'd be returning with her longtime companion, Sam Shepard, reporters ferreted out that the actress had just spent $415,000 for a four-bedroom, four-bath farmhouse in Stillwater, population 13,800, located on the Minnesota-Wisconsin border.
Ms.
Lange evinced the enthusiasm of a homecoming queen as she spoke of bringing her three children to native soil from the madding crowd.
"Most of my extended family still lives back there," she said, adding that moving home "is something I've been looking forward to for a long, long time."





Officers Selected For Three Groups
Three organizations have named officers.
The Promotion Marketing Association of America in New York has selected John A. Kalemkerian, a vice president of the Agency-Company Organization for Research and Development in Pearl River, N.Y., as executive director.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A First: Federal-State Lawsuit Against Abortion Protesters
The state and Federal governments jointly filed suit today against three abortion protesters accused of harassing the patients and employees of a Bridgeport abortion clinic.
Using a 1994 Federal law intended to assure access to women's health clinics, officials asked a Federal judge to bar the protesters from coming within 15 feet of the entrance to the clinic and within 5 feet of patients.


GTech Holdings Corp.(GTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


The Republican Assault on Meat Safety
After years of dawdling, the Agriculture Department is finally moving to create the sort of modern meat inspection system that the National Academy of Sciences first called for a decade ago to combat harmful bacterial contamination.
But an amendment up for consideration by the House Appropriations Committee today could block this essential overhaul from taking place anytime soon.
The amendment, sponsored by Representative James Walsh, an upstate New York Republican, comes as the department is preparing regulations for a sensible new inspection system.
The new system would upgrade the current reliance on visual inspections by setting standards limiting the contamination of raw products by dangerous but invisible microorganisms, and by adding advanced scientific tests and monitoring requirements.


The Art of the Hostile Deal
In his 30-year corporate career, Louis V. Gerstner Jr. had rarely made an acquisition, and never a hostile one.
But I.B.M.'s $3.5 billion purchase of Lotus -- sealed in less than a week earlier this month -- could well go down in history as a textbook example of how to do an unfriendly deal.
"It was like clockwork, they did it just right," said Harvey J. Goldschmid, a takeover expert at Columbia University Law School.


Standard Commercial Corp.(STW,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Zee Lady Wins in a Romp
Linda Rice has enjoyed a great deal of success with young thoroughbreds who run fast and win early.
So it shouldn't have surprised anyone that the season's first 2-year-old stakes in New York would be won by one of the trainer's precocious stars.
Zee Lady, who broke her maiden for Rice at Aqueduct in April, sprinted away from four other 2-year-old fillies to take yesterday's $64,200 Astoria Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park in a 7 1/2-length romp.
Following her under the wire were Not Brite Brilliant, the favored Dynasty, Stormy Krissy and Sweetheart Slew.


Arguments Weighed In Tobacco Lawsuit
After hearing arguments from lawyers for tobacco companies and for the plaintiffs who oppose them, a Federal district judge in New Orleans reserved a decision yesterday on whether a giant class-action lawsuit against American tobacco companies could proceed to the discovery process.
During yesterday's hearing, Judge Okla B. Jones 2d closely questioned attorneys for both sides, asking why there was an immediate need to begin discovery, the process of gathering millions of documents from the tobacco companies and taking depositions from witnesses.


NatWest Plans to Retain 1,000 Workers at Melville Data Center
The National Westminster Bank, which provoked angry protests last year when it transferred 700 jobs from Long Island to Pennsylvania, announced today that it would retain 1,000 workers at its technical operations and data center in Melville.
The bank also said it would spend $66 million to refurbish the building, which it bought in 1991, and update its equipment there.


Journal; In The Tank
Like many of the 60 million people who had nothing better to do last Wednesday night than watch Diane Sawyer's interview with America's most adorable newlyweds, I'd just as soon forget the whole thing.
But I can't, and neither can anyone at the other end of my phone.
People are angry about this curious hour of network television, though not for the reason you'd expect.
In retrospect what's most appalling is not that Michael Jackson wrote a song wielding the words "Jew" and "kike" as verbs, but that the best news organization in television, ABC, could be so easily enlisted in merchandising this product to a mass audience.


Sprint Alliance With Europeans Ready
The Sprint Corporation, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom A.G. will announce today that their long-delayed global alliance will proceed, with the two European state-owned phone companies investing almost $4.2 billion for 20 percent of the American long-distance carrier, according to a person familiar with the transaction.
The alliance, which has been delayed for a year by disagreements over the pricing of the deal as well as regulatory concerns, would create another huge global telecommunications venture to compete with behemoths like British Telecommunications P.L.C., which last year bought 20 percent of MCI Communications, and the AT&amp;T Corporation.


B-2 Bombers Won't Feed the Hungry
To the Editor:
Re "The Planes the Generals Don't Want" (editorial, June 18): The House attempt to give the Pentagon more B-2 bombers than it asked for is "depressing" indeed.


Economic Scene; In Mexico-style crises, the I.M.F. could be a bankruptcy court.
BETWEEN quarrels over Bosnia, leaders of the seven economic powers meeting at Halifax last weekend made some progress on coping with the next Mexico-style financial crisis.
What they did not do was make the conceptual leap toward transforming the International Monetary Fund from a rich (and occasionally wise) uncle for the developing world into a global bankruptcy judge for nations in trouble.
What a pity.


Schnitzer Steel Industries(SCHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Measurex Corp.(MX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 4


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies yesterday about a suit filed by a wrestling coach who was dismissed by Princeton University misstated the ruling of a Mercer County jury.
While the jury found that the coach, Chester Dalgewicz, had been wrongfully terminated because of a back injury suffered on the job, it did not find that age discrimination was a factor in the dismissal.


Lobo Goes Jogging With the President
After missing a University of Connecticut team visit to the White House, REBECCA LOBO yesterday pounded the pavement with PRESIDENT CLINTON.
Lobo, in Washington for a school alumni association event, jogged about three miles with Clinton near the Potomac River.
But after a runaway basketball season that saw the Southwick, Mass., athlete named to the United States national team, Lobo said she knows when to slow down.
"He was setting the pace," she said later from the Storrs, Conn., campus.
"I wasn't about to run away from the President."


Barclays to Acquire a Unit Of Wells Fargo and Nikko
After a courtship lasting several years, Barclays P.L.C. agreed yesterday to acquire Wells Fargo Nikko Investment Advisers for about $440 million.
Wells Fargo Nikko, a joint venture of the Wells Fargo Bank and the Nikko Securities Company of Japan, is the largest quantitative fund management business in the world.
Quantitative fund management caters to pension funds and other big institutional investors.
Wells Fargo Nikko, based in San Francisco, had about $171 billion under management at March 31, of which about $150 billion is invested in the United States.
The company earned $45 million before taxes last year.


Patient Is Sought After He Escapes From Creedmoor
A patient charged with pushing a person off a subway platform walked away from the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens on Monday and is believed to be at large in New York City, the police said yesterday.
The patient, Burt Harry, had been confined to Creedmoor since 1993, when he was charged with attempted murder for pushing a person off the subway platform at the IND East 53d Street Station in Manhattan.


Big Shareholders In Talks With WPP
WPP Group, the London agency company whose holdings include Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide and the J. Walter Thompson Company, said yesterday that it was continuing negotiations with dissident institutional shareholders representing about 10 percent of the company's stock.
They are unhappy with a compensation plan for Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of WPP.
Mr.
Sorrell's pay package, which faces a vote at a special meeting on Monday, has an estimated value of $39 million over five years; it links salary and stock bonuses to the performance of WPP and its shares.
Bud Morton, chairman of the WPP remuneration committee, said WPP was considering three areas of modification, including a reduction in the plan's overall value, Reuters reported.


Director to Leave Royal Danish Ballet
The Royal Danish Ballet has announced that Peter Schaufuss will leave his position as director of the company at the end of June.
Johnny Eliasen, the associate director, has been named acting director, effective July 1.
Mr.
Schaufuss, who took the job in July 1994, will remain to stage new productions he had planned for the 1995-96 season, including "Hamlet," with music by the Danish rock band Sort Sol (Black Sun).


A Performing Art in Which Age Can Be an Asset
Once a jazz musician has mastered the basics of swing and harmony, the doors open and rhythmic and harmonic exploration can fill the rest of a lifetime.
In the right hands, jazz becomes an intellectual quest, which explains why age and maturity are so important.
Tomorrow night Milt Hinton -- the dean of jazz bassists -- will celebrate his 85th birthday on the receiving end of a tribute at the New School for Social Research.
In the audience will be the saxophonist, trumpeter, trombonist, band leader and composer Benny Carter, soon to be 88, who is performing through June 24 at Iridium.
On Sunday, the 90-year-old trumpeter Doc Cheatham, who in the last five or so years has blossomed into one of jazz's finest improvisers, will perform his regular brunch job at Sweet Basil.
He'll also be appearing on Wednesday at an 80th-birthday tribute, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, for the saxophonist Flip Phillips.
All this a week after the singer Herb Jeffries, who is 83, played a series of stunning sets at the Village Vanguard.


Ex-Convict's Murder Odyssey: 7 People are slain in 2 States
In five days of cold-blooded mayhem, an ex-convict from Atlantic City killed seven people and injured three others, two critically, before being shot and killed yesterday morning by the police under a highway bridge in Nutley, N.J., the authorities said.
In a meandering odyssey through New Jersey and New York, Darnell Collins, 33 years old, who was on parole, killed three people on Saturday in New Jersey, three more on Tuesday in the Chelsea section of Manhattan and a seventh early yesterday in Harlem, officials said.


METRO DIGEST
TRAIL OF MURDER: DRUGS, CRIME AND DEATH In five days of cold-blooded mayhem, an ex-convict from Atlantic City killed seven people and injured three others before being shot and killed by the police beneath a highway bridge in Nutley, N.J., the authorities said.  [ Page A1. ] For some of his victims, Darnell Collins was a known threat -- a spurned boyfriend, an addicted acquaintance.
For others, he was the horrifying incarnation of random violence.  [ B5. ]


Bombing Victim Heads Home


F.C.C. May Cut Plan To Help Minorities
The Federal Communications Commission may scale back a program that gives preference to women and members of minority groups in awarding valuable wireless licenses.
If the agency goes ahead, it would represent the first casualty of a recent Supreme Court decision sharply restricting the use of affirmative action programs.
Article, page D1.


Days Inns Selects Rotando Partners
The Days Inns of America hotel chain, a unit of Hospitality Franchise Systems in Parsippany, N.J., has selected Rotando Partners in Stamford, Conn., to handle the bulk of its account, which has been at Bright House in Atlanta, formerly the Joey Reiman Agency, for the last seven years.
The billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
Rotando was awarded the account after a two-and-a-half-month review that included two other, undisclosed agencies.
Grey Advertising in New York continues to handle media buying.


Accounts
Time Out New York, owned by Time Out Group, London, and a group of private investors in New York, to DeVito/Verdi, New York, to handle advertising for the weekly listings magazine, which plans to begin publishing in the fall.
The billings were not disclosed.


Sheik's Lawyer Trying to Get Reno and D'Amato on Stand
The chief lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the militant Muslim cleric on trial on bombing-conspiracy charges, said yesterday that she had begun steps to have Attorney General Janet Reno and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato testify as defense witnesses.
The lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, said she wanted to elicit information from them that could bolster the defense argument that Mr.
Abdel Rahman had been framed and was being prosecuted for "political reasons."


Corrections
An article on Monday about Congressional proposals to restrict abortion misidentified a United Nations population agency and misstated the services it offers.
It is the United Nations Population Fund; it offers family planning programs but does not finance or provide abortions.


Salisbury Journal; Stonehenge at Solstice: 100 Sheep and One Druid
Dawn came here just after 4 o'clock today, the longest day of the year and a time when Druids and others of their ilk like to watch the sun (if there is any) rise across Stonehenge's sacred stones.
But because of Government regulations, now stricter than ever, making it illegal to gather in groups at Stonehenge as the summer solstice approaches, this year's worshiping contingent consisted solely of Dylan Ap Thuin, a Druid who runs a New Age shop in Portsmouth.


Heilig-Meyers Co.(HMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Switch, Cortines Bars 3 in Bias Case From a Graduation
In an about-face demanded by a Board of Education angry about "an appalling and offensive crime," Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that he would bar three Manhattan high school students from their graduation ceremony as punishment for their involvement in sending a teacher an anti-Semitic note.
Mr.
Cortines reversed his decision after an hourlong closed-door meeting with board members who felt that insufficient punishment had been meted out to the students from Norman Thomas High School, at 101 East 33d Street, near Park Avenue.


Franklin Quest Co.(FNQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; In Brief
Atag Holding N. V. of the Netherlands said yesterday that it was in talks to acquire Nurnberger Hercules Werke, a German bicycle maker with annual sales of about 85 million guilders ($54.6 million).
The company manufactures about 150,000 bicycles a year. (Bloomberg Business News)


All Eyes Follow Her In Flea Markets
SHE'S the striking woman whom most people who have shopped at the flea markets in New England for nearly a decade know on sight: tall, imposing, wearing colorful tentlike chenille outfits with coordinated turbanlike hats, day-glo feather-covered totes and extravagant makeup.
She is Elaine Rush, an antiques dealer, and there is nothing understated about her.


Of Women And Men, Stylized And Sassy
Arms waved from the audience at the performers as the curtain rose for the evening's last bows on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, where Philadanco had just opened a weeklong 25th-anniversary season.
There were also cheers and a standing ovation, but the company generally gets those.
Those waves, however, suggested how much the Philadelphia-based troupe has grown.
The program was about as high-tech as you can get in dance terms, choreography filled with sleek, propulsive movement and (to coin a word) multiculturality.
And yet the performers, many of whom seem new to Philadanco, have somehow retained the ingratiating warmth of early company members.


From S.R.O. to Full-Service Hotel
THE century-old Beaux-Arts brownstone at 27 West 11th Street, once an apartment building, has been a single room occupancy hotel since the late 1940's.
But St.
Claire Builders and Contractors, which has owned the building since 1948, has spent the last two years renovating it into a 77-room full-service hotel, the Larchmont.
Grace Keating, the interior designer, said the rooms were furnished with rattan furniture, good lighting, books, potpourri and other special touches to make guests feel at home.


Censorship on the Internet
On its way to passing a major telecommunications bill, the Senate has adopted an intolerably restrictive amendment called the Communications Decency Act.
Fortunately, its flaws are recognized by no less a power in the House of Representatives than Speaker Newt Gingrich, who signals the need for a more serious, sophisticated way to deal with a complicated problem.
That problem, as Mr.
Gingrich said the other evening on his cable television program, is "How do you maintain the right of free speech for adults while also protecting children in a medium which is available to both?"
Senator Jim Exon of Nebraska, the principal sponsor, either ignores or cannot grasp the important question framed by Mr.
Gingrich.
The Senator advertises his measure as a weapon in the struggle against obscenity and indecency on the electronic highway.
As a ban on obscenity, it is superfluous.
As a ban on indecency, it is unconstitutional.


End of 5-Day Killing Spree
A former convict from Atlantic City who killed seven people and critically injured three others during five days of cold-blooded mayhem was fatally shot yesterday by the police beneath a highway bridge after a high-speed car chase, the authorities said.


Devils Earn More Than Nets On Suites
The Devils received $1.2 million in luxury-suite revenues at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in 1994, 64 percent more than the Nets' $737,115, according to figures released during a court hearing yesterday.
For 1995, the Devils are estimated to get $1.26 million and the Nets $769,316.
The disparity between the teams' suite revenues reflects the Devils' lease renegotiation in 1991.
Since then, the Devils have received 34.2 percent of the gross suite revenues and the Nets have gotten 25 percent, after expenses.


Africans View Circumcision as Rite
To the Editor:
Re "The Possible Dream" (column, June 13): A. M. Rosenthal's dream of eliminating female circumcision is one unlikely to be fulfilled as long as Euro-Americans insist on defining it in terms of male power and sexual repression.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Mike Knapp, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Reassigned Carmine Cappuccio, outfielder, from Birmingham of the Southern League to Nashville of the American Association.


M.T.A. Postpones the Demise Of Its Express Bus Routes
Transportation officials seem to be having second thoughts about eliminating express bus service in Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan, an idea that drew a storm of protest this spring.
The final vote to do away with the 11 bus routes, used by 2,500 people a day, was taken off today's Metropolitan Transportation Authority board agenda at the request of E. Virgil Conway, the authority's new chairman.
Calls to Mr.
Conway for comment were not returned.


Applied Power Inc.(APW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pettitte Sends Yankees Home With a Positive
Thank you very much, Andy Pettitte.
That is the simple message the Yankees communicated to the rookie pitcher after his gritty performance against the Baltimore Orioles helped them depart from Camden Yards with a satisfying 2-1 victory tonight.
Thank you very much was about all they could mutter because they were so drained and so relieved.
The Yankees were weary because of the 10-game road trip, worried about what effect the arrival of Darryl Strawberry would bring and wondered if they could dash back into the pennant race.
But Pettitte's solid effort on three days' rest and homers by Paul O'Neill and Bernie Williams made their short journey to New York tonight more bearable.
They were pleased but hardly thrilled.
The ride could have been even sweeter.


Don't Rush to Repatriate Vietnam Refugees; Europeans in Limbo
To the Editor:
Your June 14 news article on unauthorized migration across various Central and Eastern European countries reports a classic dilemma confronted by the authorities of these opening societies on how to manage migration control and at the same time provide protection to genuine refugees in flight from persecution.


Six-Year N.B.A. Labor Deal Waits for Ratification
The National Basketball Association and its players union announced agreement last night on a new six-year labor contract, but earlier in the day a large and glamorous group of dissident players took the first step in trying to undermine the agreement through decertification of the union.
Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, Scottie Pippin, Horace Grant and 13 other players filed a petition with the National Labor Relations Board asserting that the National Basketball Players Association no longer represents them.


Pathmark to Sell Rite Aid New York City Drugstores
The Rite Aid Corporation, the nation's largest drugstore chain, is planning to become the largest in New York City as well.
Yesterday, the company announced an agreement to buy 30 drugstores from Pathmark Stores Inc. for an undisclosed price.
Martin L. Glass, Rite Aid's chief executive, said New York was an attractive area for expansion because it had relatively few large chains.
He said that small, independent drugstores accounted for about half the market in New York City, compared with a third of the market in other parts of the country.


High-Stepping Into the Limelight
Fear is a constant companion for Ricky Watters, like a shoe that fits snugly, like a shadow.
Like a friend.
One would not know it by watching his lean, sturdy frame at running back, by watching the way he has burst with energy with that flamboyant, high-stepping style through the best of National Football League defenses.
But Watters is afraid of failure -- "Am I going to catch that pass or drop that handoff or make that block?" He is afraid of injury.
He was petrified before his first National Football League game -- against the Giants in 1992 at Giants Stadium -- because he was pitted against L. T. and Pepper Johnson and that punishing Giants defense.
He was shivering before Super Bowl XXIX last January in Miami.
Simply the sight of sharks gives him goose bumps.
Even though he can swim, deep water makes him quiver.


With One Word, a Youth Finds Himself Accused of Bigotry
With controversies about high school bigotry smoldering in New York City and Greenwich, Conn., the village of Tuckahoe is trying to understand whether a cryptic message in its own high school's yearbook was anti-Semitic, insensitive or simply an innocuous allusion that got caught up in local school politics.
When the yearbook was published two weeks ago, the misspelled word "cremotoriums" appeared in a sea of coded words beneath the photograph of Robert Pisano Jr., the senior class president and the son of Tuckahoe's school board president.


New Study Finds No Link Between Implants and Illness
The most definitive study yet of the health effects of silicone breast implants has failed to find any association between the implants and connective tissue diseases.
The new study is so compelling and its results so consistent with previous studies that some leading rheumatologists contend that the issue of whether implants cause these diseases can now be considered closed.
They maintain that it is time for the Food and Drug Administration to lift the voluntary moratorium on sales of the implants it requested in 1992.


Britain's Defense Chief Attacks Some in Congress Over Bosnia
In an unusually angry attack, Britain's Defense Minister, Malcolm Rifkind, condemned members of Congress who support withdrawing United Nations peacekeepers from Bosnia, calling the lawmakers "naive in the extreme."
At a foreign policy conference on Capitol Hill, he said, "The consequence of the withdrawal of the United Nations would indeed be a bloody war of a kind that Bosnia has not experienced, with losses of men, women and children" surpassing those of the last three years of war.


Amylin Gets Johnson Deal And Ends One With Glaxo
Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc., a biotechnology company specializing in the treatment of diabetes, said yesterday that it had received a commitment from Johnson &amp; Johnson under which the giant pharmaceuticals company would make equity investments and pay licensing fees totaling as much as $70 million and would collaborate with Amylin in drug development.
At the same time, Amylin said that it was ending a collaboration with Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C. on another drug but that Glaxo would buy $2.5 million of Amylin common stock and that Amylin would continue the drug's development.


International Briefs; NatWest to Cut Jobs
National Westminster Bank P.L.C. said yesterday that it would cut 500 jobs in its life insurance and pension products sales force through voluntary departures.
A spokesman said the current insurance and pensions products sales force at the bank numbered 2,500, including support staff.
He said NatWest had been hurt by "difficult trading conditions in a depressed market." He noted that across the industry sales had fallen by 20 percent in the first quarter of this year compared with a year earlier. (Reuters)


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Barrage of Flamenco, From Fiery to Playful
Aficionados are fond of grumbling that the art of flamenco is dead.
But performers continue to experiment with it, a sure sign of vitality.
And on Sunday two flamenco companies offered new takes on the age-old dance of the Spanish Gypsies.
"Noche Flamenca," which will be presented through July 2 at Theater 80 in the East Village, is a beautifully staged and loving program of dance.
The setting is perfect, intimate yet formal, with a simple row of wooden chairs for the three dancers and four musicians at the back of a small, atmospherically lighted stage.


Easy Does It


International Briefs; British Aerospace Drops Bid for Sub Maker
British Aerospace P.L.C. withdrew its bid yesterday for the submarine maker VSEL P.L.C., clearing the way for a rival bid from the General Electric Company P.L.C.
British Aerospace said it would not be in its interests to match G.E.C.'s offer, which values the maker of the Trident nuclear submarine at $1.34 billion.


Commercial Metals Co.(CMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Albany Can Insure Indoor Air Quality
To the Editor:
"When Office Air Is Hazardous" (news article, June 14), on the "sick building" office space rented by Memorial-Sloan Kettering Hospital, highlights a growing health problem.


It's Only A Test, Or Is It?
THIS is the time of year when many parents start to sweat, and it has nothing to do with the weather.
Summer marks the early season of the E.R.B., an intelligence test that is the required first step on the road to private elementary school for New York City children.
This year, about 2,500 4-year-olds hoping to enter kindergarten in the fall of 1996 will take the one-hour test between now and the end of the year, as their predecessors have for decades.


Jet Is Stormed And Hijacker Held in Japan
The police stormed a hijacked Boeing 747 airliner in the chilly dawn today and captured a man who reportedly had demanded the release of the imprisoned guru of a religious sect accused in the Tokyo subway gas attack.
About 20 police officers, some disguised in overalls worn by airline maintenance workers, rushed to the front and side of the plane and, using small ladders, scrambled into the plane's underbelly.
They then jumped the hijacker, who apparently suffered a head wound while being subdued.


World News Briefs; U.S. to Aid Burmese In Fight Against Drugs
The Administration has decided to increase anti-narcotics cooperation with Myanmar slightly, ending a six-month tug of war in which Federal drug officials pushed for much more cooperation while human rights officials opposed it, Administration officials said today.
Even though Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, produces more than 60 percent of the world's heroin, human rights officials in the Administration fought against stepped-up cooperation on the ground that it would help legitimize Myanmar's repressive military Government.


What Rooms Say About Teen-Agers
HOW do teen-agers live?
Since 1990, Adrienne Salinger, a professor of photography and media at Syracuse University, has photographed and interviewed 90 of them to find out.
The result is "In My Room: Teenagers in Their Bedrooms" (Chronicle Books, $16.95).
Sometimes they talked about themselves more than their rooms during the interviews.
"Everything is crammed into a space that is 12 feet by 12 feet at best," Ms.
Salinger said, "their past, together with their present and their future."


Man in the News; Black Leader for A.M.A. -- Dr. Lonnie Robert Bristow
There has been plenty of heated debate at the annual meeting here of the American Medical Association's House of Delegates, the 432 doctors whose votes on issues as diverse as assisted suicide and gun control and health care reform set policy for the society's nearly 300,000 members.
None of the fractiousness, though, has revolved around Dr.
Lonnie R. Bristow, a 65-year-old New York native who took office today as the first black president of the prestigious but troubled association.


Transsexual Indicted in Murder
A grand jury in Camden County indicted Leslie Nelson yesterday on two counts of murder in the April 20 slayings of two law-enforcement officers who had come to her home in Haddon Heights to investigate a child-abuse complaint.
Ms.
Nelson, a transsexual formerly known as Glenn Nelson, was also charged with the attempted murder of the brother of one of the slain officers, and with firing on seven other officers during a 14-hour standoff with the police before she was taken into custody.


Mr. Cortines Improved New York's Schools
To the Editor:
I was surprised and disappointed by your June 16 editorial dealing with the resignation of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
Mr.
Cortines was the first Chancellor, in my memory, to make a serious difference in the performance of the New York City public school system.
He set tougher standards, he provided strong leadership and he achieved results, as shown by the significant gains in reading and math scores announced recently.


'Ancient' New Blankets
FOR 15 years, Ramona Sakiestewa (above), a Hopi weaver and artist, has been creating one-of-a-kind tapestries.
In 1991, she designed a collection of blankets for Pendleton Mills.
Now, she has created the Ancient Blanket Series, six wool-jacquard blankets produced by Scalamandre in limited editions of 1,000.
The first of the soft, 64-by-80-inch blankets, called "de Chelly," (top right), will be available next month; the others will be produced at six-month intervals.
The blankets are $350 each from Sakiestewa (pronounced sah-KEES-tay-wha) Textiles Ltd., 1516 Pacheco Street, Santa Fe, N.M. 87505; (505) 989-1515 or (800) 230-4049.
Some of the proceeds will go to the Southwest Parks and Monuments Association in Tucson, Ariz., which supports programs of the National Park Service.


Transit Strike Contingency Plan
New Jersey Transit officials said yesterday that they are drawing up a plan to meet the needs of any rail passengers who may be displaced if there is a strike late next week by engineers.
Transit officials say that officials of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, which represents more than 280 engineers, have threatened to walk off the job beginning at 10 P.M. on June 30.
New Jersey Transit said it would announce its contingency plan early next week.
D.
Terry Abbott, general chairman of the local, could not be reached for comment.


Bridge
When the world's best bridge teams gather in Beijing in October to compete in the world championships for the Bermuda Bowl, the United States will be represented by two strong squads with a mixture of veterans and new blood.
In the International Team Trials in Las Vegas, Nev., last week, one qualifying team included four players who have won many world titles: Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., both under 40, and Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff of Dallas.
With Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and Dick Freeman of Atlanta as the new blood, they won the final for once-defeated teams by 128 imps over the Zolotow team.


Panel Says Crumbling Schools Pose Hazard to Students
From crumbling brickwork to rotting windows, many of New York City's public schools are in such disrepair that they pose an immediate safety hazard to students, teachers and staff, an independent panel contended in a report released yesterday.
The deterioration of the city's school buildings is so severe, said the panel of 11 prominent New Yorkers -- most of whom are active in real estate, finance or construction -- that a temporary city property tax increase is needed to finance a huge rebuilding program.


Markets Divided in Reaction to Greenspan Remarks on Rates
The financial markets, reflecting the studied ambiguity of remarks made in a speech on Tuesday night by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, seemed to be split yesterday over where Mr.
Greenspan stands on interest rates.
Mr.
Greenspan told an audience in New York that he was reluctant to cut short-term interest rates, but bond traders yesterday bid up fixed-income prices slightly on the theory that Mr.
Greenspan meant to imply that he would support a rate cut.
Stock traders, however, bid down equity prices slightly on the theory that he would oppose such a cut.


Panel Calls For Overhaul In the Hiring Of Teachers
The city's system of licensing and hiring teachers presents such an obstacle course that school principals resort to back-door hiring routes, a report said yesterday.
For teaching applicants to become certified by the city, they must pass an endurance test.
They spend weeks attempting to speak by phone to a live body at the Board of Education, make numerous trips to Brooklyn to hand-deliver documents, wait months to learn the results of a half-hour oral exam and then have no choice in the schools they are sent to.


Quarterback Switches to Michigan State
Almost a month after receiving his release from scholarship obligations at Notre Dame, GUS ORNSTEIN signed yesterday with Michigan State.
Ornstein, who had attracted wide publicity as the first Jewish quarterback for the Fighting Irish, decided on the Spartans after making official visits to Kansas State, Louisiana State and Ohio State.


Round 1: The Metaphors Prove to Be Mixed, but the Motivations Are Unmistakable
The metaphors ranged from prizefighting to crucifixion and seemed properly rugged for the occasion: the Senate showdown over a controversial nominee caught on the cusp of the Presidential election season.
"In boxing parlance, we saw a technical decision prevail in Round 1 -- a narrow decision," said Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, rooting for the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. to get up off the canvas after its procedural defeat today and prevail in a second Senate vote, on Thursday.


These Devils Well Versed In Leading A Series by 2-0
The Devils are home.
Actually, halfway home.
They hold a 2-0 lead over the Detroit Red Wings and have a chance to win the Stanley Cup in front of their fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The New Jersey road warriors -- a glittering 10-1 in playoff games away from home -- left Joe Louis Arena deathly quiet Tuesday night after their come-from-behind 4-2 victory in Game 2.


Gingrich Opposes Smut Rule for Internet
Speaker Newt Gingrich has bluntly attacked a proposed law intended to block obscenity on the Internet, surprising some religious groups as well as the Republican-controlled Senate, which approved the measure last week.
"It is clearly a violation of free speech, and it's a violation of the right of adults to communicate with each other," Mr.
Gingrich said on Tuesday night on his cable television program.
"I don't agree with it, and I don't think it is a serious way to discuss a serious issue, which is, How do you maintain the right of free speech for adults while also protecting children in a medium which is available to both?"


A Vote in Moscow To Chastise Yeltsin
Enraged by the handling of a rebel raid last week in southern Russia, the Parliament voted no confidence in the Yeltsin Government.
But Chechen negotiators agreed yesterday to a Russian ultimatum to help find the commander of the raid.
Articles, page A6.


Review/Pop; A Country Blue Period
COMING from a painter who likes to work on a heroic scale, Julian Schnabel's debut pop album, "Every Silver Lining Has a Cloud" (Island), is remarkably self-effacing.
With a thin wavering voice that cracks on the high notes, Mr.
Schnabel sounds like a lost little urban cowboy, awash in self-pity.
The songs, which Mr.
Schnabel wrote with several collaborators, are the morose reflections of a world traveler who finds himself at loose ends after being abandoned by a lover.
"I don't know what I'm going to do without you," he moans in "When I Was Young." "Loneliness surrounds me/ Without your arms around me," he declares in "Apartment No. 9." The title song bids "goodbye to every friend I knew."


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Fast Money Could Lure Raiders Back To Oakland
Al Davis, the Raiders' managing general partner, is considering leaving the National Football League high and dry in Los Angeles by moving the team back to Oakland, where it spent 22 seasons building its fierce tradition and rebel image.
A league spokesman said no final decision had been made, and Davis, reached by The Associated Press, said he could not say for sure what was happening.
One league official said Davis was struggling with a very difficult decision and might not know which way he's going from one minute to the next.


Corrections
A chart on June 12 tracing effects of the O. J. Simpson case on popular culture misattributed a quotation from The Arizona Republic.
The quotation, which referred to the "white Bronco of media scrutiny," came from a letter to the newspaper, not an editorial.


Weisman Atop the List at MSG Network
MIKE WEISMAN, the Emmy-winning former executive producer of NBC Sports, is the leading candidate to become the president of the MSG Network.
A permanent successor was not named when DOUG MOSS left last year to run the Buffalo Sabres.
Weisman has had recent discussions with DAVE CHECKETTS, the president of Madison Square Garden, about the position.
Weisman is the president of the Los Angeles-based NMT Productions, which dispatches mobile units to produce live events.
Weisman was unavailable for comment yesterday.


New Cautions About Tap Water
FEDERAL health authorities said last week that tap water that is safe enough for healthy people may be dangerous for those with weakened immune systems.
The announcement, by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Environmental Protection Agency, repeats what advocates for people with AIDS and others have been advising for a while.
But it also raises some questions about exactly what consumers with special needs, including those getting chemotherapy for cancer, ought to do.
The two agencies stopped short of telling all such people to take precautions, and the most appropriate method may simply be to boil water for one minute.
Other possibilities are bottled water or filters that can be installed at the tap.


Two Exchanges Post Rises In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the New York Stock Exchange rose nearly 2.7 percent in the month that ended on June 15, the exchange said yesterday.
The increase in uncovered short sales -- in essence, bets that stock prices will fall -- came despite a continued ascent by stocks that has pushed the Dow Jones industrial average to more than 4,500 points.
Uncovered short sales rose to 2.05 billion shares on the Big Board, up from 2 billion shares for the month that ended on May 15.


Pazienza Set to Take Off On a Middleweight Ride
This is how great life is for Vinny Pazienza these days:
"Last night at midnight, I was eating pizza, with pineapple on top of it."


CHRONICLE
MACAULAY CULKIN'S mother temporarily got sole custody of him and five of his siblings yesterday after alleging that their father left the family and was threatening the children's acting careers.
Justice David B. Saxe of State Supreme Court in Manhattan signed the custody order after the children's mother, Patricia Brentrup, asked for an expedited ruling to allow Kieran Culkin, 12, to start filming the movie "Amanda" in Montana next week, The Associated Press reported.


Jury to Weigh Death Penalty
A jury is expected to begin deliberating today whether to recommend the death penalty for a Little Egg Harbor man convicted last week of killing his girlfriend to collect her $250,000 insurance policy.
John J. Chew pleaded with a jury yesterday to spare his life for the sake of his 11-year-old daughter.


In That Woodsy Dream With a Mystical Donkey
George Balanchine's 1962 version of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" has become the New York City Ballet's mini-"Nutcracker."
More than 30 years after its premiere in 1962, audiences have recognized the ballet's special values, and its first performance in a weeklong run on Tuesday night was led gloriously by Darci Kistler and Peter Boal at the New York State Theater.


Parking: Thin Blue Line of Disrespect
THEY park on the sidewalks and hide fire hydrants with their cars.
They angle where they should parallel and turn normal streets into obstacle paths.
They never seem to feed their parking meters, they rarely get tickets and they run red lights.
Yes, they are New York City police officers, and yes, they do what most New Yorkers cannot.
They drive to work and park at will just about anywhere they like.


U.N. Reassures Serbs on New Bosnia Force
The top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia has written to the Bosnian Serb leader to reassure him that a new 12,500-strong rapid-reaction force will not take sides or act differently from other peacekeepers in Bosnia.
A confidential letter from Yasushi Akashi to Radovan Karadzic, which was shown to The New York Times, omits any reference to the more than 300 United Nations troops seized recently by the Bosnian Serbs.


Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.(LEH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dole Uses Nomination For a Political Victory
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas prevailed today in the first major face-off among Republican Presidential rivals in the Senate.
On the surface, the debate on the Senate floor was over the troubled nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General.
But that only thinly masked an even larger battle -- for the hearts and the votes of the Republican Party's hard-right conservatives between Mr.
Dole and a chief rival for the Republican Presidential nomination, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.


High Court Backs Florida Restriction on Solicitation of Accident Victims by Lawyers
In a sharp departure from earlier decisions protecting the right of lawyers and other professionals to advertise, the Supreme Court ruled today that states could require lawyers to wait 30 days after an accident before writing to solicit the victim's business.
The Court was bitterly divided in a 5-to-4 decision that reflected the continuing debate, both among the Justices and within the legal profession, over the wisdom of the Court's 1977 ruling that advertising by lawyers is a form of commercial speech entitled to protection under the First Amendment.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
6.01
4.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.48
4.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.42
4.55
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.10
6.15
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.58
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.52
7.56
8.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.19
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bombing Suspect's Friend Near Plea Deal
A friend of Timothy J. McVeigh, the principal suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, is close to a deal with Federal prosecutors in which he will provide information about the bombing plot in exchange for leniency for himself, law-enforcement officials said today.
Mr.
McVeigh's onetime colleague, Michael Fortier, has told investigators that he accompanied Mr.
McVeigh on an inspection tour of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City a week before the April 19 blast, and was told of Mr.
McVeigh's plans to blow up a Federal office building as early as last fall.


Yesterday in Washington
FOSTER NOMINATION: The Senate voted not to bring the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General to a vote, as a combination of Republican Presidential politics and intense opposition to abortion all but killed the nomination.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, scored a major political victory, showing conservative Republicans and anti-abortion groups that he could quash the nomination they vehemently opposed.
In the process, he outfoxed a principal rival for the Republican nomination, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, who had sought to lead the anti-Foster effort with a filibuster.
LOBBYING: House Democrats sent a letter to President Clinton criticizing his agreement with Speaker Newt Gingrich to set up a commission to study changes in lobbying and campaigning.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House minority leader, and three others wrote that Congress was ready to act on lobbying changes and that a commission would only delay action.


Though a Melodrama, Life Is Not a Movie
Toward the end of the first act of "Crumbs From the Table of Joy," Lynn Nottage's new play at the Second Stage Theater, a character named Ernestine does something that is hazardous to the health of almost any drama.
This bewildered teen-ager reflects on the differences between her stormy home life and the movies in which she seeks escape, films that comfortingly lay out "a perfect formula resolved in 90 minutes." It is the sort of statement that waves a red flag at the skeptic in theatergoers, since it immediately asks them to consider just how true to life what's happening onstage really is.


Trade Gap Swells to Record; Japanese Auto Imports Cited
The nation's trade deficit widened substantially in April to a record $11.37 billion, the Commerce Department reported today, as stockpiling in America of Japanese cars contributed to a new peak for imports.
The surprisingly big gap by which American imports of foreign goods and services exceeded sales abroad prompted analysts to further pare estimates of second-quarter economic performance, which was already thought likely to be barely positive.


INSIDE
Discord at Time Warner
The ouster of a top Time Warner music executive could set the stage for a change in the company's policy toward rap music.
Page D1.
Implants Cleared in Study
A large medical study, like previous research, has found no link between silicone breast implants and connective tissue diseases.
Page A18.
Lawyer Solicitations Curbed
The Supreme Court said states could require lawyers to wait before soliciting an accident victim.
Page A22.
New President for A.M.A.
Dr.
Lonnie Bristow is the American Medical Association's first black leader.
Man in the News, page A12.
N.B.A.
Accord and Discord
A labor agreement was reached, but there's a player revolt against the union.
SportsThrusday, page B7.


Tyson Settles Civil Suit With Woman
MIKE TYSON has settled the civil suit filed against him by the woman he was convicted of raping four years ago, the boxer's lawyer said yesterday.
"All I can tell you is that the matter has been resolved and Mike is looking to the future and not to the past, and that's why he resolved this," the lawyer, NATHAN DERSHOWITZ, said from his office in New York.
Dershowitz would not say how much money -- if any -- the settlement involves.


AT HOME WITH: Julian Schnabel; And Now, With a Song in His Heart
PAST the steel door, too hastily to heed the cautionary note:
PLEASE DO NOT  SLAM THE DOOR
WHEN YOU ENTER.  IT WAKES THE BABIES UP.


F.C.C. Is Said To Seek an End To Preferences On Sex and Race
The Federal Communications Commission is preparing to scale back a program that gives preference to women and members of minority groups in awarding valuable licenses for wireless communications, agency officials said today.
The move follows a recent Supreme Court decision that sharply restricts the use of Federal affirmative action programs to help members of minority groups.


Telmex Gains in Attempt To Buy Cable-System Stake
In a decision that could threaten American plans to invest in Mexican telecommunications, Mexican Government regulators conditionally approved a deal late Tuesday in which Telmex, the national telephone monopoly, would buy a 49 percent stake in the cable television subsidiary of Televisa, Mexico's largest media company.
The $211 million sale would bring together two of Mexico's largest and most aggressive companies, and would present a formidable challenge for American companies like MCI, GTE and Sprint, which are planning to enter the Mexican telecommunications market when it opens to foreign investment next year.


A Defender of Gangsta Rap Is Dismissed at Warner Music
Moving to quell a year of turmoil, the new chairman of Time Warner's music division yesterday dismissed Doug Morris, the chief executive of the division's United States operations.
Michael J. Fuchs, who became the chairman of the Warner Music Group six weeks ago after the ouster of Robert J. Morgado, said Mr.
Morris was leading a campaign to destabilize Warner Music when it was already under intense pressure because of its involvement in gangsta rap music.


Block (H&amp;R) Inc.(HRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Nursing Home Funds Restored
The Republican legislative leadership has decided that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed $36 million cut in Medicaid funding to nursing homes goes too far.
Their version of the budget, submitted earlier this week, restores half that amount, with the money intended to go mainly to nursing homes with a large proportion of Medicaid patients.
Governor Whitman will still have line-item veto power to strike the restored financing before signing the budget into law.


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Citibank in Budapest: A.T.M.'s and Potted Palms
Banking, both retail and commercial, has been one of the slowest areas of the economy to change in Eastern Europe.
But Citibank has opened its first retail branch in the region, and its flashy decor, lavish services and plastic cards are making a splash.
A discreet steel-doored elevator whisks customers with cash and valuables to their safe-deposit boxes.
Nearby is a wet bar where customers can help themselves to a drink.
In contrast to dingy offices at its rivals, Citibank has transplanted a little bit of Park Avenue to its lobby here on Vorosmarty Square in central Budapest: rich wood veneer, peach carpet, blue and gold walls and potted palms.


G.O.P. Faithful Don't Endorse Nafta
To the Editor:
Re "Who's an Isolationist?" (Op-Ed, June 6): Bob Dole, in his paean to internationalism, toasts Republicans as the party of the "North American Free Trade Agreement, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and most-favored-nation treatment for China." While my old friend may indeed speak for the Senate grandees, he does not speak for the populist rank and file.


Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Suicide Squeeze Winds Up Winning Double for Giants
Giants 6, Pirates 5
Robby Thompson was looking for any kind of hit.
What he got was anything but a usual hit -- or anything but a usual victory for the San Francisco Giants.
Thompson's suicide squeeze-bunt double broke a ninth-inning tie and the Giants prevented Pittsburgh's first sweep of the season by rallying for a 6-5 victory yesterday at Three Rivers Stadium.
Tom Lampkin, who entered the game the inning before, doubled off Jeff McCurry (0-2) to start the ninth and Darren Lewis bunted him over.
Thompson put down a perfectly placed bunt on a 1-1 count that rolled into short right-center and easily scored Lampkin.
Thompson went to second as the Pirates left the base unprotected.
Padres 1, Cubs 0
Steve Finley scored all the way from second base during a sixth-inning rundown and preserved the lead with a leaping catch in the ninth as host San Diego beat Chicago.
Steve Trachsel walked Finley and Ken Caminiti with two outs in the sixth.
Caminiti was caught off first by catcher Rick Wilkins, and, while he was being chased, Finley cruised around to score.
Finley was credited with a stolen base, with the run scoring on a fielder's choice.
Reds 3, Braves 1
John Smiley (6-1) and relievers Hector Tarrasco and Jeff Brantley combined on a three-hitter as Cincinnati snapped Atlanta's seven-game winning streak.
Dodgers 10, Cardinals 1
Delino DeShields hit a grand slam and Tom Candiotti (3-5) allowed three hits in seven innings as Los Angeles routed host St.
Louis.
Astros 5, Expos 3
Greg Swindell (4-3) won for the first time in a month and Tony Eusebio drove in three runs as Houston completed a three-game sweep at Montreal.
Rockies 6, Marlins 3
At Denver, Jason Bates drove in two runs as Colorado topped Florida.
Red Sox 3, Indians 1
Backed by home runs from Mo Vaughn and Mike Greenwell, Erik Hanson (7-1) gave up four hits in eight innings against baseball's best-hitting team as Boston won at Cleveland.
The Indians lost for just the fourth time in 18 games and also lost starter Orel Hershiser to a stiff lower back.
Hershiser (5-3), who left after yielding a leadoff double to Greenwell in the fourth inning, was listed as day to day.
Tigers 1, Rangers 0
Lou Whitaker hit the first home run allowed by Bob Tewksbury this season and Detroit made it hold up in a game that took exactly two hours.
Brewers 10, Blue Jays 9
At Toronto, Jose Valentin's grand slam with two outs in the ninth inning lifted Milwaukee to victory.
White Sox 5, Mariners 4
John Kruk's sacrifice fly in the 10th inning gave Chicago a victory over Seattle at Comiskey Park.
Twins 3, Athletics 2
In Oakland, Calif., Rich Becker's r.b.i. single in the ninth gave the Minnesota its first series victory of the season.
Royals 6, Angels 3
In Anaheim, Calif., Gary Gaetti, flourishing in Kansas City after more than two years as a flop with California, hit a three-run homer, and Jon Nunnally hit two solo shots in the victory over California.
Gaetti's 14th homer put the Royals up 3-0 moments before Nunnally connected, capping a four-run fourth inning against Mike Bielecki (3-4).


10 Years in Prison, No Job And a History of Drug Use
Darnell Collins was paroled from prison in January 1994 after serving 10 years of a 20-year sentence for armed robbery and settled here.
The people who had known Mr.
Collins from the streets since his release said that when he was on drugs, he was a violent, mean man.
Still, last September, when a urine test came back positive for drugs, a state hearing officer decided he should continue on parole instead of having it revoked.
And in October, the New Jersey parole board chairwoman, Mary Keating DiSabato, concurred with the decision to allow Mr.
Collins to remain free, according to Patricia Mulcahy, a spokeswoman for the State Department of Corrections.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Trade Deficit Deepens On Surge of Car Imports  The nation's trade deficit widened substantially in April to a record $11.37 billion as a rush to buy Japanese luxury cars contributed to a new import peak.
The surprisingly big deficit prompted analysts to pare second-quarter economic estimates.
The stockpiling of Japanese cars appeared to reflect well-founded fear that Washington might take punitive action.  [ Page A1. ]


If Daly Decides to Become Coach, Knicks Want Some Strings Attached
Chuck Daly is still hemming and hawing.
But for the 64-year-old former coach of the Nets and the former world champion Detroit Pistons to return to the profession, he will have to make a minor concession to his prospective employers at Madison Square Garden.
Several people in the Knicks' organization say it is important that Daly's No. 1 assistant be a head-coach-in-waiting should he step down after two years.


International Briefs; Tokyo to Disclose Economic Package
With Japan's economy on the brink of recession, the Government is planning to disclose an emergency economic package Tuesday to help stimulate growth, the head of the Economic Planning Agency said yesterday.
The measures will strengthen steps the Government already announced in April, the agency's chief, Masahiko Komura, said after a Cabinet meeting.
That earlier plan included increased public works spending, low-interest loans to small companies and the elimination of some cumbersome regulations -- measures that financial markets judged as seriously inadequate.
This time around, investors are hoping for more beef. (Bloomberg Business News)


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Vacation for Cactuses
Q.
I know house plants can go outside during the summer, but would it also be beneficial for my cactus plants? -- Anne Olesky, Summit, N.J.


They're Normal. And Rock Stars?
When Hootie and the Blowfish performed the second of two sold-out concerts at Jones Beach here on Tuesday night, there were no displays of angst, no cryptic lyrics, no resentment of its growing audience.
There wasn't even a noisy guitar solo.
There were just simple melodies, clean guitar lines and passionate vocals.
Hootie and the Blowfish are a slap in the face to alternative rock.
The band's first album, "Cracked Rear View" (Atlantic), recently spent four weeks at No. 1 on the pop charts, breaking alternative rock's hegemony over successful young rock bands.
Hootie and the Blowfish, a former bar band from Columbia, S.C., represents the return of the well-adjusted and the congenial to the rock world: it talks about sports onstage, dresses casually in T-shirts and seems to have neither a chip on its shoulder nor an ounce of artistic pretension.
Its lyrics mine classic rock topics of love and betrayal by delivering strings of cliches as if they actually mean something again.


Motormen Not Warned On Signals
Even though Transit Authority officials have known for two years that an antiquated signaling system could not always provide the margin of safety needed to avoid accidents, subway motormen were never warned, transit officials conceded yesterday.
The Transit Authority has known of the danger since November 1992, when a consultant's report warned that in some places, signal lights installed more than half a century ago were so close together that a train moving at high speed would not have room to stop before a crash.


S.I. Terminal to Be Reopened by Sending Silt to Landfill in Utah
Port officials said yesterday that they had finally found a way to open a long-dormant marine terminal on Staten Island that had become the focus of an environmental dispute.
They said they would take the unusual and costly step of spending $17.7 million to send contaminated sediment that must be dredged from the shipping berths around the terminal to a landfill in Utah.
The announcement means that by the end of the year, large freighters should be able to begin arriving at the terminal, Howland Hook, helping to revive the moribund maritime industry in New York City.


No Headline
"I have no doubt that this vote expresses the real attitude in Russia about the war against the Chechen people. We have a civil war and we want it to stop." -- GRIGORY YAVLINSKY, a member of the Russian Parliament.  [ A6:1. ]


Fed Sees Signs of Weakness in Robust Economy
The nation's economy is still robust, but showing some signs of weakness, the Federal Reserve said in a survey released today, even as traders and financial analysts continued to puzzle over a speech on Tuesday night by Alan Greenspan, the central bank's chairman.
"Economic activity remains at a high level across much of the nation, although there are indications of some softening in many reports from the 12 Federal Reserve districts," said the study, the latest in a series that the Fed publishes two weeks before each meeting of its top monetary policy panel.


A Father Learns to Accept The Death of His Son
"Past the Bleachers," tonight's "ABC Movie Special," is strewn with hazardous sentimentality traps but an adept cast and a skillful director, Michael Switzer, manage to skirt most of them.
Here's a television movie near top of the form: small, restrained, insightful.
Bill and Harper Parish, played by Richard Dean Anderson and Glynnis O'Connor, are coping with the death of their 11-year-old son, Nathaniel.
All we learn is that he got "terribly sick." Bill, a school administrator, is falling apart and doesn't know what to do about it.
Hilton (Ken Jenkins), who runs the baseball program, suggests that Bill become coach of a team of youngsters, most of whom knew Nathaniel well.
Accepting warily, Bill meets Lucky (Grayson Fricke), a boy who can hear but can't talk.
Lucky seems to have no parents and no history.


High Court Upholds Judge's Conviction for Disclosing Expired Wiretap
The Supreme Court upheld today the Government's prosecution of a Federal district judge, Robert P. Aguilar, for disclosing information about a wiretap after authorization for the wiretap had expired.
The 8-to-1 decision overturned a ruling last year by a Federal appeals court that Judge Aguilar's action in passing on a warning that a distant relative was a target of a Federal wiretap could not have violated the law because, although the judge did not know it, the wiretap authorization was no longer in effect.


Over Scrambled Eggs, Talk of Gay Pride and Free Speech


National Service Industries(NSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arnold I. Dumey, 88, Long a Leading Cryptographer for the U.S.
Arnold I. Dumey, an expert in the deciphering of codes who served the Government throughout World War II and the cold war, died on Sunday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 88 and lived most recently at the Clearbrook Retirement Village in the nearby town of Cranbury.
The cause was heart failure, according to the Institute for Defense Analyses, a Government-financed agency for which Mr.
Dumey had worked as a consulting cryptanalyst for 25 years.


Guggenheim Hopes to Open Three Branches in Venice
The Guggenheim Museum is planning to open three new museum sites in Venice, with the Italian city covering most of the costs.
If things go as planned, officials at the Guggenheim said, two of the 41 national pavilions in the Castello Gardens, the site of the Venice Biennale, would be converted into year-round art spaces.
The Italian Pavilion would become a Museum of Contemporary Art, and the American Pavilion, already owned by the Guggenheim, would exhibit works by contemporary artists.


The Pop Life
R.E.M. on Oldies
Fans of the many recordings that R.E.M. released in the 1980's are in for a disappointment when the band performs tonight, tomorrow and Saturday at Madison Square Garden.


Terror, Harbored for Months or Randomly Instantaneous, Unites 7 People in Death
April Gates had been looking over her shoulder in Atlantic City for months, chain-smoking, shaking, terrified that her violent, drug-prone ex-boyfriend would follow through on his threats to slaughter her and her family.
Jeffrey Roork, a fresh-faced computer graphics designer newly arrived in New York from Wisconsin, simply went to lunch in Chelsea at the wrong time, and ran into the walking blood bath known as Darnell Collins.


Russian Lawmakers Chastise Government
Enraged by Russia's humiliation at the hands of a band of Chechen terrorists, the Parliament here today overwhelmingly approved a motion of no confidence in the faltering Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
It was the first such vote ever to succeed in modern Russia, and in theory it carries only the weight of a formal rebuke.
Mr.
Yeltsin can ignore it until the Parliament passes another such motion, and then he can choose whether to dismiss the Government or dissolve Parliament and call new elections.


Sports of The Times; Are Raiders And Devils On the Move?
BECAUSE I'm an old Nashville hand, I'd like to help in the bizarre scenario of the New Jersey Devils' winning the Stanley Cup and hot-footing it to Nashville.
I've got a new nickname for the team.
People tell me this has never happened in American sports -- a team winning a championship and getting out of town.
Naturally, this casts a pall on the Meadowlands, where the Devils play the Detroit Red Wings tonight, already up two octopuses to none.


Two Views on School Takeover
The New Jersey State Board of Education took testimony yesterday on whether the state should take over the Newark school system, as Education Commissioner Leo F. Klagholz has recommended.
The Deputy Attorney General, Sally Field, argued that the state should assume control of the system because the local board has failed to deliver education of quality.
Raymond Brown, representing the Newark School District, said the state has presented "distorted and inaccurate" information.
The board is expected to make a decision in July.


CHRONICLE
Bogart and Bacall.
Tracy and Hepburn.
Batman and Robin.
Air Jordan and Hare Bugs?
Only in Hollywood.
The industry that gave film audiences memorable duos -- real-life and animated -- has now paired the Academy-Award winning Looney Tunes cartoon character, Bugs Bunny, with the Chicago Bulls All-Star, MICHAEL JORDAN, in a Warner Brothers film, "Space Jam."


Martinez Expects Competition From Graf
CONCHITA MARTINEZ, who won Wimbledon last year when she defeated MARTINA NAVRATILOVA, expects top-seeded STEFFI GRAF to provide the main threat to her title defense when competition gets under way on Monday.
"There's Steffi and me, and after that it would be quite open; really, I don't know who else could do it," Martinez said yesterday after her third day of practice in Eastbourne, England.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


In flea markets, she gets the most attention.


Olajuwon Offers Some Pointers for Knicks
Hakeem Olajuwon, whose fingertips probably prevented the Knicks from winning a National Basketball Association title two seasons ago, indicated yesterday that New York will drift farther and farther from that championship goal if the team fails to improve its personnel.
"They need rebuilding, some redirection," said Olajuwon, who recently led the Houston Rockets to their second straight N.B.A. crown.
"Basically, they still have the same team, and they need to make some changes."


U.S. Widening Inquiry Into Microsoft's On-Line Plans
The Justice Department has broadened its investigation of the Microsoft Corporation's plans for its new on-line network, issuing subpoenas this week to publishers, broadcasters and others who have signed up to be on it.
The requests for documents from the information suppliers of the on-line service, Microsoft Network, signal a second step in the investigation.
Two weeks ago, the Justice Department issued civil investigative demands -- the equivalent of subpoenas -- to Microsoft's rivals in the on-line business, including America Online Inc., H &amp; R Block's Compuserve and Prodigy Services, the joint venture by I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.(ALU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fund-Raiser Sues N.A.A.C.P. for $4 Million
The former chief fund-raiser for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People filed suit today in New York charging the civil rights organization with violating Federal anti-racketeering laws and seeking nearly $4.4 million in back pay and damages.
The suit by the fund-raiser, Gilbert Jonas, asked the court to attach the organization's assets, appoint a receiver to oversee its business affairs and stop the group from paying other creditors until it settles a debt of almost $400,000 with Mr.
Jonas.


Leucadia National May Try to Buy Rockefeller Center or Its REIT
The Leucadia National Corporation, a financial services concern with interests in insurance, banking and products for the home-improvement industry, said yesterday that it might try to acquire Rockefeller Center or the real estate investment trust that holds the mortgage on the complex.
Rockefeller Center has been in bankruptcy protection since May 11.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Leucadia said it intended to explore a variety of possible resolutions to the bankruptcy with the owners of the office complex and with the shareholders and management of the real estate trust, a publicly traded company called Rockefeller Center Properties Inc.
The sole asset of the trust is the $1.3 billion mortgage on the center.


Okinawans Look Back and Call War Futile
It was 50 years ago that Yoshiko Shimabukuro pleaded with the American soldiers to shoot her in the head immediately instead of raping and torturing her first.
The five soldiers refused her pleas and held her down as one used a knife to slice the leg of her pants, even as she scratched and bit him.
Three of the Americans were bare-chested and sunburned red, so that they looked to her like oni, Japanese folk devils.


In Phone Chat, Strawberry Picks Up Clues
Darryl Strawberry has not even played one game for the Yankees yet, but his imminent arrival is being covered so intensely and scrutinized so closely that his simple conversation with Buck Showalter this morning dominated the manager's pregame press briefing.
Strawberry's mood, his voice, his future and his preferred breakfast cereal were discussed and dissected.
Strawberry is coming, and the hype and the hysteria will follow him as he initiates his Yankee career with a news conference Thursday in Tampa, Fla., and follows with his first workout Friday at New York's minor league facility there.
For some unexplained reason, the Yankees have been secretive about the time and the place of a news conference that has already been canceled once.


Dealer Accused of Selling Guns to Criminals
A gun dealer from Westchester County was arrested yesterday on charges that he used his Federal firearms license to smuggle hundreds of high-powered weapons to criminals in Manhattan.
Prosecutors said the arrest of Richard A. Yarmy, 54, highlighted a loophole in state and Federal gun laws that lets manufacturers ship thousands of guns into the area every year to supposedly legitimate dealers, who in turn can peddle the guns through middlemen to drug dealers and criminals.


Harlem Pathmark Is Stalled, Awaiting Word From Mayor
After more than a year of rancorous debate, many residents in East Harlem have finally begun to look forward to the opening of a new Pathmark supermarket in their neighborhood, where large grocery stores are few and far between.
But two months after the Manhattan borough board approved the new store, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani still has not said whether he supports or opposes the 53,000-square-foot project.
As a result, the supermarket that was planned at 125th Street and Third Avenue as a boon to the blighted neighborhood remains stalled, and both proponents and critics say they are bitter and disillusioned with the Mayor.


INSIDE
Mexico Extradition Denied
A U.S. magistrate in Newark refused to approve the extradition of a former Mexican official accused of covering up the investigation of a major political assassination.
Page A3.
On Parole, on a Rampage
Oversight of a parolee who the police said killed seven people in five days seems to have been flawed since his release from prison.
Page B1.
Jackson to Change Lyrics
Michael Jackson agreed to change lyrics on his new album that were criticized as anti-Semitic.
The new lyrics are to appear on freshly manufactured copies.
Page C2.


One Small City Is Jubilant After Lab Gets Reprieve
Residents of Rome, N.Y., celebrated yesterday after the eight-member Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission in Washington unanimously rejected an Air Force recommendation to close the high-technology Rome Laboratory on the grounds of Griffiss Air Force Base.
"A lot of hugging and tears" was the way Francis Crumb, the chief of public affairs for the laboratory, described the reaction among the more than 50 people who gathered to watch the vote on C-Span yesterday morning in a conference room in Building 3, an information technology center in a converted World War II supply depot.


The Times Appoints a President For New Digital Ventures Unit
The New York Times has appointed Martin A. Nisenholtz president of a subsidiary being formed to create new digital services centered on the content of the newspaper.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.
Mr.
Nisenholtz, 40, comes from the Ameritech Corporation, the regional telephone operating company in Chicago, where he was director of content strategy.
He was responsible for developing video programming and interactive information and advertising services to be marketed over the company's voice, data and video networks.


Ex-United Way Leader Gets 7 Years for Embezzlement
The former president of United Way of America, William Aramony, was sentenced today to seven years in prison for fraudulently diverting $1.2 million of the charity's money to pay for a romance with a teen-age girlfriend and other benefits for himself and friends.
Randy I. Bellows, an assistant United States attorney who was the lead prosecutor in the case, hailed the sentence as "incredible," saying that Mr.
Aramony had done "extraordinary damage to one of the most important charitable institutions in the United States."


Winnebago Industries(WGO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


New-Found Simpson Photos May Bolster Prosecution
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case today received photographs taken in January 1992 by a New York City police officer that show Mr.
Simpson, then a football commentator, wearing a pair of brown leather gloves resembling those found at the crime scene and Mr.
Simpson's house after the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The pictures were taken by Michael Conners, a member of the Brooklyn District Attorney's security detail and a bagpiper for the Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, who performed during halftime of a playoff game between the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs at which Mr.
Simpson was the commentator.


Falling Tiles Injure 7 During Skydome Game
Brewers 9, Blue Jays 0
In a game in which seven fans at the Skydome were injured by falling aluminum and wood tiles, the Milwaukee Brewers beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 9-0, yesterday.
Five people were treated for cuts at the Skydome's medical center and released, and an elderly man was given stitches.
A teen-age girl with head cuts was brought to Toronto Western Hospital.


'Pocahontas,' Romantic and Revisionist
"Pocahontas," which had its premiere in Central Park on June 10, opens today in theaters.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on June 11.
Fathers across America will soon be volunteering in record numbers to take the children to the movies, and here's why: Pocahontas is a babe.
She's the first Disney animated heroine since Tinker Bell with great legs, maybe with any legs.
She wears form-fitting, off-the-shoulder buckskin that would be as much at home in Beverly Hills as in 17th-century Jamestown.
She's got sloe eyes, a rosebud mouth, billowing black hair and terrific muscle tone.
And she is the centerpiece of a film that's as great-looking as its heroine.


Tristan Jones, 71, Adventurer Who Sailed the Globe, Is Dead
Tristan Jones, as much an adventurer and humanitarian as he was a respected British author and sailor, died Wednesday.
He was 71.
The cause of death was complications after a stroke, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Times Mirror To Combine Some Bureaus
The Times Mirror Company, which is under pressure from Wall Street to cut costs, has decided to consolidate space at the foreign bureaus of its three largest newspapers, a spokeswoman for the company said yesterday.
Executives have decided that correspondents in cities abroad where The Los Angeles Times, Newsday and The Baltimore Sun now have separate offices should begin to share office space, the spokeswoman, Martha Goldstein said.


Bowman Shots a Lot Harder Than Detroit's Were
The words sounded so strange the way they came from Scotty Bowman tonight, quiet and almost matter-of-fact, with a tone nowhere near as powerful as the feelings inside.
Ten times he has coached teams in the Stanley Cup finals.
Six times his teams have won.
Never in his years in St.
Louis, Montreal and Pittsburgh had the coach of the Detroit Red Wings seen anything close to what happened to his team tonight against the Devils.
"We never were humiliated and embarrassed like we were tonight for two periods," Bowman said after the 5-2 Detroit loss gave New Jersey a 3-0 advantage in the four-of-seven-game series.
"A lot of players in the league would give their eyeteeth to even get one shift in the finals. It's totally unacceptable as a player, as a coach. The entire group has to take the full responsibility.


With Congress Or Without It, Clinton to Aid U.N. in Bosnia
Administration officials said today that President Clinton was ready to send $100 million or more in money and equipment for a new rapid-reaction force for Bosnia, preferably through a Congressional appropriation but without it if need be.
The officials said the Administration planned to begin talks with Congress to persuade it to approve a one-time contribution to finance the force of 12,500 British, French and Dutch soldiers as a way of making good on Mr.
Clinton's pledge to support allies setting up the force.


Who Should Control New York's Schools?; A Heedless Promotion
To the Editor:
My grandson has been pushed through the New York City school system for six years.
For the past two years I have requested that he remain in fifth grade, and now sixth grade.
The principal and district superintendent have refused.


Home Video
Hollywood grabs most of the space in video stores, but a new champion of the little guys, also known as independent producers, is trying to get more room for their movies.
On Tuesday, Hallmark Entertainment will release "Eat Drink Man Woman," Ang Lee's highly praised film about a widowed Chinese chef and his three daughters, and "Oleanna," David Mamet's film about sexual harassment.


Democracy at Risk in Chile
Chile's democracy is facing a severe test.
A general convicted of ordering a political assassination in the United States has taken refuge in a military hospital and refuses to surrender to police.
Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, the country's military commander and its former dictator, has defied civilian authority and says his officers must remain above the law.
If he expects his country to be fully accepted into the community of democratic nations, he must bend to the will of the courts.
After he overthrew President Salvador Allende in 1973, General Pinochet established a brutal dictatorship.
Thousands of innocent civilians were murdered by the military under his command.
In 1988 he held a plebiscite in which voters rejected military rule.
He agreed to free elections and to accept their outcome.
He was defeated at the polls in 1989 but continued as commander of the armed forces.


Christo's Wrapped Reichstag: Symbol for the New Germany
It billows in the wind, it glows in the sun, it is tailored as primly as a dress and engineered as heavily as a battleship.
"Wrapped Reichstag," by Christo and his wife, Jean-Claude, is at once a work of art, a cultural event, a political happening and an ambitious piece of business.
It has got Berlin into more of a celebratory mood than anything since the fall of the wall five and a half years ago, and as the immense project of wrapping the 101-year-old German Parliament building in more than a million square feet of aluminum-colored fabric nears its completion, crowds gather day and night to gawk, to cheer as sections of cloth are unfurled, and to watch for glimpses of the New York artist couple who are treated here like rock stars.


No Headline
"In short, it is time to put up or shut up." JOHN MAJOR, Britain's Prime Minister.  [ A1:5. ]


Senate Gives Right to Set Speed Limits Back to States
The Senate today approved a bill that would permit states to set their own highway speed limits for cars and repeal penalties for states that allow motorcyclists to ride without helmets.
In backing those changes, part of a $6.5 billion highway maintenance bill, several proponents acknowledged that the measure could increase deaths and injuries unless state lawmakers set reasonable speed limits.


Sports of The Times; America's New Team: The Devils
HOCKEY is considered Canada's game with European accents.
Shoot the puck, eh, and remember the Red Army.
But as the Devils pursue the Stanley Cup, they have the opportunity to be the team with the most American names ever engraved on Lord Stanley's huge silver chalice.
Of the 25 members of the Devils' playoff roster, 12 are Americans, in contrast to 9 Canadians and 4 Europeans.


TV Camera in Courtroom Insures the Public's Right to Know
To the Editor:
Re "Pencils, Yes; Camera, No" (Op-Ed, June 20): Don Hewitt, in his argument for banning television cameras from courtrooms, wants to know, "Where is it written that the public has a right to know?" That right is implicit in the First Amendment's prohibitions against abridging freedoms of speech, the press and peaceful assembly, and specifically stated in the Sixth Amendment: "the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial."


Capitalist Fringe Benefit: Absurdist Caper in Estonia
Ilkka Jarvilaturi's absurdist caper film "City Unplugged" imagines an elaborate conspiracy to steal the entire treasury of newly independent Estonia -- $970 million in gold -- on the day the cache is transported from Paris to the Estonian capital, Tallinn.
The scheme, which seems even more farfetched than a similar heist in "Die Hard With a Vengeance," involves first buying up all the flashlights, batteries and candles in Tallinn, then cutting the city's electric power.
Once Tallinn is dark, the thieves plan to break into the central bank and transport the gold to a nearby cigarette factory, where it will be melted down, packaged as golden cigarettes and exported.


World News Briefs; Iran Rejects Demand To Lift Rushdie Edict
Iran today ignored demands by the European Union to lift a death edict against Salman Rushdie, the Indian-born British author accused of blasphemy against Islam in his writings.
European Union representatives from France, Germany and Spain expected that they would receive an official pledge today at a long-anticipated meeting here with senior Iranian diplomats, but Iran did not produce the document.


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in September.


'Wrapped Reichstag': Art, Politics and Business


Big-Ticket Sales Take a Pounding; Industries Supplying the Home Say a Slowdown Has Arrived
It may not look like a recession on Wall Street, where the markets have been booming, or to some inside the Federal Reserve, but for those selling big-ticket goods to homeowners, the downturn is here.
A combination of flagging home sales, weak income gains and growing fears of job losses have hammered demand for furniture, appliances and building materials.
These industries were counting on families feathering new nests to sustain what until recently had been one of the few hot categories of consumer spending.


How Two States Realized They Sought the Same Man
When Lieut.
John Shields looked at the bloody trail of mayhem in Chelsea on Tuesday afternoon, he figured it could easily be weeks before the police tracked down the gunman who had killed two men and critically wounded a third.
At the same time, detectives uptown were searching for a killer from New Jersey who, investigators had learned the day before, might be hiding in Harlem.
The detectives had interviewed two relatives and turned up nothing.
It was the kind of dogged effort, they knew, that might never lead anywhere.


At the Bar; In the longtime war over lawyer advertising, the latest shot leaves as many wounds as ever.
Of course fancy law firms don't advertise, not if advertising is defined as televised come-ons, tacky billboards or -- the focus of a Supreme Court decision on Wednesday -- letters to accident victims soliciting their business.


Fox Aims at 'Saturday Night'
Looking to bring down NBC's increasingly vulnerable "Saturday Night Live," Fox Broadcasting announced yesterday that it would introduce a new Saturday night comedy show of its own this fall, to be produced in conjunction with the venerable comedy magazine Mad.
"Mad TV" will include parodies of movies and television shows, political satire and other spoofs, John Matoian, president of the Fox Entertainment Group, told managers of Fox's affiliated stations at a meeting in Los Angeles.
The show will also offer animated versions of some classic Mad magazine cartoons, including "Spy vs. Spy."


Roadblock on Transit Strike
New Jersey Transit officials say they will go to Federal court on Monday to seek an order blocking a threatened strike by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, which represents more than 280 engineers.
Contract talks have been in mediation for more than a year.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CALLON PETROLEUM CO., Natchez, Miss., agreed to buy certain oil and gas interests from Scott Paper Co., Philadelphia, for $12 million.
SUN COMMUNITIES INC., Farmington Hills, Mich., a real estate investment trust, acquired two Florida housing communities, Saddle Oak Club and Island Lakes, for $14.2 million.


Dow Sets Another Record On Rate-Cut Expectations
After two days of treading water, the stock market rose sharply yesterday to record levels, mainly on the strength of an accelerating rally in a bond market convinced that the Federal Reserve is about to cut short-term interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average surged 42.54 points, to 4,589.64, posting its 40th record advance this year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Connors Makes 4-Year Leap
Jimmy Connors moved into his first ATP tour quarterfinals in four years, defeating Martin Sinner by 7-6 (11-9), 6-0 yesterday in the $725,000 ATP tournament in Halle, Germany.
Connors won just one match on the ATP tour last year.


CHRONICLE
It's the old "from the wings into the footlights" story.
When one of the company dancers in the Kirov Ballet was unable to complete his performance in "Les Saisons Russes" at the Wednesday matinee at the Metropolitan Opera House, VLADIMIR PONOMAREV, the Kirov's production manager, stepped from backstage into the roles of the sultan in "Scheherazade" and the evil sorcerer in "The Firebird."


Muller May Not Stay for New Look
The Islanders unveiled their new logo and a sharp-looking pair of home and away jerseys at Nassau Coliseum this afternoon.
"We have a lot of things to do this summer," said the team's co-chairman and chief executive officer, Robert Rosenthal.
"This is a good way to start."


When a Joy Rider Ignores the Law of the Second Chance
THE bullet tore through the teen-ager's stomach, ripping apart his spleen and parts of his intestines, kidneys and liver.
Doctors said it would take a miracle.
Four months and seven operations later, Howard Caesar was home, shuffling around in slippers in the apartment his family moved to so he could get away from Newark's hardest streets.
Already, he was full of life's possibilities.
Maybe he would go to medical school.


Moves Involving Computer Accounts
There were developments yesterday involving three computer-related accounts.
The Viacom New Media unit of Viacom Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had named Fallon McElligott Berlin, the New York office of Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, to handle the creative responsibilities for Zoop, an interactive video and PC game scheduled to be introduced in October.
The billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
The assignment was awarded after a two-month review that also included two undisclosed agencies.
Local and national media buying will be handled by Creative Media Inc. in New York and San Francisco.


U.S. Judge Refuses to Extradite Former Mexican Official
A United States magistrate refused today to extradite a former high-ranking Mexican official who is accused of covering up the investigation into a political assassination.
The judge ruled that the Mexican Government had presented evidence tainted by torture and lies.
The judge, Ronald J. Hedges, of Federal District Court, said the charges the Mexican Government had brought against the former official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, were flimsy.
Judge Hedges suggested that the testimony in the case pointed to political rot within Mexico's Government and its ruling party, the PRI.


Oakland Rolling Out Welcome Mat
Al Davis is keeping his decision to himself, but the city of Oakland acts as if it had a football team to tend to.
The Raiders -- who currently have no first name -- will be the subject Friday of a special board meeting in Alameda County.
At that time, George Vukasin, president of the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, is expected to be granted authority to personally strike a deal with Davis to bring the Raiders back to the East Bay.


CHRONICLE
The actor LIAM NEESON and his wife, the actress NATASHA RICHARDSON, had their first child yesterday.
The baby, a boy named Micheal Richard Antonio Neeson, was born in a Dublin hospital, their publicist, Susan Culley, announced, according to The Associated Press.
"The reason he was born in Dublin is because Liam is working on a film about a founder of the Irish Republican Army," Ms.
Culley said.


In Gaza Strip, a Top Islamic Radical Is Killed
A leader of the radical group Islamic Holy War was killed in a drive-by shooting in the Gaza Strip today, raising concern about possibly unsettling consequences for peace talks between the Palestinians and Israel.
Islamic Holy War, along with other militant groups, immediately blamed Israel's secret services for the killing and threatened swift reprisals.


Roses in Bloom


Bond Prices Move Higher On Jobless-Claims Report
The Labor Department's report that more Americans than expected filed for jobless benefits last week sent bond prices higher yesterday.
Investors and dealers viewed the report as added proof of an econmic slowdown, raising the likelihood that the Fed would cut interest rates.
The 30-year bond jumped nearly a full point in price -- 31/32 , to 1156/32 -- for a yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, of 6.47 percent, down from 6.54 percent on Wednesday.


Restaurants
If anybody had any doubts about what Americans want in an Italian restaurant, Pino Luongo has dispelled them.
From the moment he transformed his Amarcord, which was Emilia-Romagnan, into Il Toscanaccio, which is Tuscan, the seats have been filled.
Amarcord was trying to represent Italy's finest food region, and the entire room seemed weighted down by the responsibility.
In April, Mr.
Luongo and his partners liberated Il Toscanaccio from such seriousness.
The new chef, Cesare Casella, wanders around with sprigs of thyme, rosemary and sage peeking out of his pockets as he urges people to eat.
Murals enliven one wall, pots of herbs dance along another, and a table in the center of the room is filled with produce and sausages, the picture of rustic abundance.
The colors are brighter, the noise is louder and the clientele seems to represent a different generation.
Jewels are smaller and hair is bigger.


Transactions
American League
AL -- Reduced the suspension of Roberto Alomar, Toronto Blue Jays second baseman, from two games to one after he dropped his appeal.


ESPN and Fox Clash in the Other Cup Face-Off
The Devils have proved superior to the Red Wings through the first two games of the Stanley Cup finals.
But which network has been better, Fox or ESPN?
Who's the better play-by-play announcer, Fox's Mike Emrick or ESPN's Gary Thorne?
Which network manages its corner clock with more care?
Which one gives the best information?
Who is more daring with its production toys?
PLAY BY PLAY Emrick is Vin Scully on skates, a tenor who makes calling hockey like singing an aria.
His greatest skill is weaving a near-radio call of action with player biographies, anecdotes and rules, while maintaining a 60-minute peak of excitement.
Thorne is more playful, more workmanlike and owns a commanding voice.
But he's not hockey's Pavarotti.
EDGE Fox.


TV Camera in Courtroom Insures the Public's Right to Know; Is Print Any Better?
To the Editor:
Re "Pencils, Yes; Camera, No" (Op-Ed, June 20): I regret to say that my friend Don Hewitt, whom I had the pleasure of introducing as the guest of honor at the Edward R. Murrow Brotherhood Awards Luncheon of B'nai B'rith a few years ago, is way off base in his proposal to bar television cameras from trials such as that of O. J. Simpson.


JVC Jazz Festival, With the Old and the New
The JVC Jazz Festival, which opens tonight, is a behemoth, but a slimmed-down behemoth, one suffering from jazz's lack of big concert draws.
Like last year's festival, also a bit skinny, it is divided into two parts.
The first uses the word "jazz" to represent all sorts of big-time entertainment -- ethnic music, gospel, blues -- as long as it can fill Carnegie Hall or Avery Fisher Hall.
The second reflects the state of jazz as clubgoers understand it: mainstream jazz, often played by younger musicians, a good portion of it underwritten by major jazz labels.
It is all a party, and with most of the music being performed free in the great outdoors of Bryant Park, it's a particularly democratic party.
For Michelle Taylor, a senior director of jazz at Atlantic Records, the festival and its outdoor concerts are invaluable in exposing the company's roster of young artists to a larger audience and to cash in on some of the festival's prestige.
Atlantic Records has underwritten one day at Bryant Park for an exceptional lineup, including the saxophonists Wessell Anderson, James Carter and Gary Bartz, the pianist Cyrus Chestnut and the drummer Carl Allen's group.


Such Devoted Sisters
The true story behind "Sister My Sister" has intrigued artists for 50 years, and who can blame them?
It is an irresistible dark tale of murder, incest and class struggle, an event so bizarre that a novelist might hesitate to invent it.
In 1934, in a provincial village in France, two sisters named Christine and Lea worked as maids for a stern middle-aged matron and her grown daughter.
The sisters began an incestuous relationship.
One day, when Madame and her daughter returned home, sure to be on a rampage because the iron had blown the fuses in the house, the maids murdered their employers.
"Sister My Sister," which opens today at Cinema Village, gives this story a far different treatment from its most famous telling, in Jean Genet's play "The Maids." This is an emotional Gothic, a psychological horror story that focuses on the sisters' increasingly tortured relationship in the claustrophobic house.
It is a small film, but a chillingly effective one.


District of Columbia's Mayor Defends Plan for Commuter Tax
With the District of Columbia government straining to reign in a $722 million budget deficit for the current fiscal year, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. strongly defended his proposed commuter tax today as a way to help balance future budgets.
The proposal for the 2 percent tax on the income of commuters from outside the District, which was included in a five-year plan to restructure the city government and restore financial stability, was released on Wednesday.
The tax was immediately criticized as a political ploy by members of Congress from Maryland and Virginia, whose state treasuries would lose hundreds of millions of dollars if it were imposed.


World News Briefs; Paris Presents Plan To Cut Joblessness
Prime Minister Alain Juppe today announced details of a Government plan that he said would get France out of the "minefield" of a 12.2 percent unemployment and soaring budget deficits.
The measures are part of an effort to make good on campaign promises made by President Jacques Chirac, elected last month, to create new jobs and cut the budget deficit.


Americans' Real Wages Fell 2.3% in 12-Month Period
Middle-class angst over falling wages, sometimes dismissed by economists as a matter of anecdote and not fact, received statistical support today as the Labor Department said that wages plunged 2.3 percent after adjusting for inflation during the 12 months through March.
The drop, while not the first, is the largest in the eight years that the Labor Department has calculated these figures.
The decline occurred largely because the department revised upward its estimate of the number of people working in occupations with falling wages.
By contrast, the department's quarterly figures, which have been showing wages flat during the last year after adjusting for inflation, assume that the distribution of people among occupations has not changed since 1989.


Who Should Control New York's Schools?; Education Is Political
To the Editor:
Re "Who Would Want to Be Chancellor?" (Op-Ed, June 17): Former New York City Mayor David N. Dinkins claims that "When politics invades education, education loses." But public education is inherently political.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Republicans Reach Deal on Budget
Republican leaders in the House and Senate struck a deal to cut income and investment taxes by $245 billion over the next seven years, removing the biggest barrier to a compromise plan to balance the Federal budget.


'Dream' as Pitchman
To the Editor:
In "Playing Like a Dream" (editorial, June 17), your tribute to the basketball star Hakeem (The Dream) Olajuwon, you identify his personal qualities, among them that "he is devoutly religious and prays several times a day." You wonder why advertisers shy away from the best basketball player in the world.


U.S. and Japan Open Crucial Auto-Trade Talks
American and Japanese negotiating teams, beginning a last-ditch effort to settle their automotive trade dispute, each spent most of their time today looking for any sign that the other side was about to give way.
If the talks here fail, the Clinton Administration plans to carry out its threat to impose 100 percent tariffs on Japanese luxury car imports starting next Wednesday.
Most Administration officials involved in the issue said they believed the sanctions would go into effect before some kind of deal was struck.


Strawberry Just Swings, The Owner Just Beams
Wearing No. 26 on the back of his uniform, Darryl Strawberry, the newest Yankee, took some hacks in the batting cage here tonight at the team's minor league training complex.
"Look at that -- line drives!" said an observer with a great deal of interest, as well as money invested, in the newest Yankee.
The observer was George Steinbrenner, the self-described boss of the Bronx Bombers.
"Looks pretty good to me, though I may not know a lot about those kind of things."


Life of a Hollow Woman
Living in a bubble of antiseptic privilege, Carol (Julianne Moore) is a stranger in a strange land.
Her life is a string of hollow rituals and reflexive thoughts.
Her big, clean house is eerily forbidding.
Her uninteresting husband, Greg (Xander Berkeley), is barely there.
Carol is much less excited by him than by delivery men who bring her a new sofa in a color she didn't order.
Seen through the small end of Todd Haynes's telescope in his elegantly unnerving "Safe," Carol begins showing symptoms of a peculiar malaise.
And throughout this film's beautifully directed first hour, ominous signs of it are everywhere.
Protected inside her garage, Carol sneezes.
In aerobics class she jumps impassively and doesn't sweat.
A hair permanent somehow makes her nose bleed.
One day, she sits while servants and workmen quietly navigate around her, not even knowing what language to speak in her own home. ("Can I have some milk? Some leche?" she uneasily asks the maid.) There's no corner of this world in which Carol belongs.


Networks Back Out Of TV Deal With Baseball
ABC and NBC have told major league baseball that they are quitting The Baseball Network, the three partners' venture to produce TV games and sell advertising, throwing the game's television future into as much uncertainty as its labor situation.
Ken Schanzer, the president of TBN, said he had not been told of the decision by NBC and ABC but added: "If that's the case, I'm sad, but not surprised. It wouldn't be a shock."


Tokheim Corp.(TOK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New-Found Simpson Photos May Bolster Prosecution
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case today received photographs taken in January 1992 by a New York City police officer that show Mr.
Simpson, then a football commentator, wearing a pair of brown leather gloves resembling those found at the crime scene and Mr.
Simpson's house after the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The pictures were taken by Michael Conners, a member of the Brooklyn District Attorney's security detail and a bagpiper for the Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, who performed during halftime of a playoff game between the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs at which Mr.
Simpson was the commentator.


Fed's Top 2 Said to Discuss Cutting Rates
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman, have talked in recent days about the possibility of lowering interest rates when the Fed's policy makers meet on July 5 and 6, senior Fed officials said yesterday.
The conversations come against a backdrop of a steadily slowing economy.
Mr.
Blinder has publicly expressed concern that the economy might be weakening more than is necessary to control inflation.
Now he appears ready to vote against any resolution at the July meeting that fails to lower interest rates, the senior officials said.


Before Deadly Odyssey, a Parolee Slipped Through the Cracks
On Friday afternoon just hours before the murder spree began, there were two fresh arrest warrants out for Darnell Collins for violating protection orders, when he called his parole officer to say he was changing his address.
But apparently the parole officer, John Goodman, was unaware of either warrant or that the Atlantic City police were searching for Mr.
Collins or that a court order had been issued the day before that barred Mr.
Collins from having any contact with his girlfriend, April Gates.


Showers May Delay Shuttle Launching
All except the weather is ready for the launching of the space shuttle Atlantis on Friday on NASA's most important international mission in two decades, officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today.
A helium leak in one of the shuttle's rear engines was easily fixed, but the dark sky kept erupting in heavy showers today.
Forecasters said there was only a 20 percent chance that the weather would be good enough on Friday for a liftoff.
Only a slight improvement is forecast for the weekend.


Man Charged in Racial Bias, In Incident at a House for Sale
From the sidewalk of this blue-collar suburb, Ina and Ornel White spotted their dream home on Cedar Street, a two-bedroom ranch with a deep yard and neighbors who know each other and keep their squares of lawn carefully clipped.
They were ready to make an offer after they entered with the real estate agent and saw the formal dining room.
Then came the awkward introduction to the neighborhood, the jeering voice of a man screaming, "KKK, KKK, KKK."


A Paving Peril on Roads Is Finally Attacked
Colleen Falcone's florist shop is at the bottom of what local residents call the hill, and when she hears the screech of brakes, she puts her arms over her head, ducks behind the counter and prays.
"It seems like nearly every day, there's an accident on that hill, and one of these days I expect a truck to come rolling through my shop," she said.


Paris Journal; Is It a Cigarette War, Or Just a Lot of Smoke?
"I am just outraged," a young woman said by way of introduction to two people smoking at coffee hour after services at a Paris church recently.
"Your smoke is going right upstairs to the nursery and I am simply outraged."
"You're outraged," nodded one of the smokers, and kept puffing right along.


Executive Changes
GREENPOINT FINANCIAL CORP., New York, named Bharat B. Bhatt, former chief financial officer of Shawmut National Corp., as vice chairman.
PENN VIRGINIA CORP., Philadelphia, an oil and natural-gas exploration and production company, appointed Steven W. Tholen vice president and chief financial officer.


Off-Duty Officer Kills Man Waving Air Gun Outside Bar
A Queens man who had just been thrown out of a bar was shot to death by an off-duty police officer early yesterday while waving an air gun, the police said.
The man, Raymond Murray, 20, of 36-14 165th Street in Bayside, was shot twice in the chest by Officer Jeffrey Poje outside J. P. O'D'S on Union Turnpike in Flushing, not far from St.
John's University, the authorities said.
He was pronounced dead at Queens Hospital Center a short time later.


It's Atlantic City For Seles's Return
Atlantic City will be the site of MONICA SELES's first tennis match in more than two years, a three-set exhibition with Martina Navratilova on July 29.
The "Return of Champions" match will be held at the Atlantic City Convention Center, Caesars Atlantic City officials said.
It is not known if the match will be a prelude to an appearance a month later at the United States Open.


UConn to Get $1 Billion For a Face Lift
As they moved to cut spending and shrink government this spring, lawmakers in Hartford took one stunning step in the opposite direction: They approved a $1 billion package to rebuild and expand the University of Connecticut.
University officials say the 10-year plan, widely called UConn 2000, is the largest such initiative in the nation for a publicly financed university.
It entails building new dormitories, new chemistry and pharmacy buildings, a new campus in downtown Stamford and an expanded campus in Groton, and it bucks a national trend toward trimming support for public higher education.


Top School Food Officials Are Removed After Inquiry
As the result of a devastating report that contends school food service officials covered up outbreaks of food poisioning and approved huge shipments of rancid beef, chicken and turkey to school cafeterias, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has removed the top three food service officials.
The report, issued yesterday after a 15-month investigation, details a pattern of "evasion, denial and deception" in the Office of School Food and Nutrition Services, which feeds 800,000 children daily.


Election Campaign in Haiti Splits Allies
The midday election rally was drawing to a close, and Senator Turneb Delpe of the National Front for Change and Democracy was about to move on to his next campaign stop when a small plane appeared.
Suddenly, hundreds of leaflets for a rival electoral slate endorsed by the President began raining down on Mr.
Delpe and his supporters.
Mr.
Delpe, whose party also supports Mr.
Aristide, gestured to the sky and smiled ruefully.
"I wish we had the money to do that," he said.
"But we don't, so we are just going to have to rely on the people remembering that without the Front, Aristide could not have come back."


Accounts
*
Kaplan Educational Centers, New York, a unit of the Washington Post Co., to Frierson &amp; Mee, New York, to handle its account in New York, previously in-house.
Frierson &amp; Mee handles the Kaplan account nationally.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Pringle USA, Boston, a unit of Dawson International P.L.C., to Gearon Hoffman, Boston, to handle advertising and public relations for the manufacturer of leisure and golf apparel.
The agency already handles the company's Duofold underwear account.
The billings have not been determined.


Removal of Some Blood Supplies Urged
An advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that the agency remove blood products from the market if they had been derived from donors who had a rare neurological disease.
While the 15-member special panel said there was little or no scientific evidence that the illness, a degenerative disease of the central nervous system, is transmitted by transfusion of blood and its derivatives, the group recommended pulling affected supplies to maintain confidence in the nation's blood system.
The illness, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, destroys part of the brain and is fatal.


Schultz Not Considered U.S.O.C. Shoo-In
Although he remains the favorite, Dick Schultz is not guaranteed to be named executive director of the United States Olympic Committee today in a special meeting called to discuss his candidacy in Boston.
Backing Schultz, former executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, are three top Olympic officials: John Krimsky, the U.S.O.C.'s interim executive director; Dr.
LeRoy T. Walker, president of the Olympic committee, and George Steinbrenner, a vice president of the U.S.O.C.
But a combative meeting is expected today as questions are raised about Schultz's candidacy in particular and about the selection process in general.


With Lower Bid, WMS Wins Bally Gaming, Beating a Rival
In a development that disappointed investors, WMS Industries said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement to acquire Bally Gaming International in a stock swap valued at about $116 million.
The price is not only lower than the original bid by WMS, but it is also well below an offer made earlier this week by the Alliance Gaming Corporation.
Under the terms of the revised offer by WMS, Bally shareholders will receive 0.55 share of WMS for each share of Bally.


People
*
Kenneth J. Domanski, executive vice president and deputy creative director at McCann-Erickson New York, was named to the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director at McCann-Erickson Japan, Tokyo.
Both are units of the Interpublic Group of Cos.
Mr.
Domanski's position in New York will not be filled.


Bumbling and Stumbling
Scratch the polished surface of a seasoned performer like Nathan Lane or (heaven forbid) Carol Channing, and you'll probably find a weak-kneed, nauseated child, convinced that every entrance represents a potential hell of humiliation.
Tales of public embarrassment, accordingly, are the favorite war stories of most actors and have woven their way into works ranging from Christopher Durang's "Actor's Nightmare" to Lisa Kron's "101 Humiliating Stories." But no one has delivered them with quite the hang-dog winsomeness of Karen Trott in "The Springhill Singing Disaster," her eminently likable, painfully funny show at the New Theater Wing of Playwrights Horizons.


CHC Helicopter (FLYAF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
"Books become movies and plays, but GEORGE WEIN told me that this is the first time a book has been turned into a jazz concert," said JOHN BERENDT, the author of the best seller "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" (Random House).
Mr.
Berendt's book has become the inspiration for a benefit concert and musical tribute to the lyricist Johnny Mercer at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday night.
Mr.
Wein, the jazz impresario and founder of the Newport and JVC jazz festivals, came up with the idea of a musical tribute to Mercer, a friend of his, after reading Mr.
Berendt's book, which tells the story of the death of a young man in Savannah, Ga., and recounts some of that city's notables, including Mercer, who died in 1976 at the age of 66.


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Confession Is Good for the Sale
SECRET LIFE  An Autobiography
By Michael Ryan
356 pages. Pantheon Books. $25.  DREAMING  Hard Luck and Good Times in America
By Carolyn See.
343 pages. Random House. $23.


Killer Is Sentenced to Die
After deliberating for three hours, a jury decided yesterday that a Little Egg Harbor man, convicted of killing his girlfriend to collect on her $250,000 insurance policy, ought to die by lethal injection.
The defendant, John Chew showed no emotion but his mother, Doris Bystrick, openly wept.


Senate Dooms a Vote for Surgeon General
The nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General died in the Senate today when Democrats failed for a second and final time to end a Republican filibuster.
President Clinton said the defeat sent a "chilling message" to the nation.
But Administration officials hinted that they were prepared to offer Dr.
Foster, a 61-year-old obstetrician-gynecologist from Nashville, another job, possibly an advisory role in the campaign against teen-age pregnancy.


Corrections
The Key Rates table on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday misstated the discount rate on June 21 a year ago.
It was 3.50 percent, not 3 percent.


Doctors Isolate a Common Cancer-Related Gene
An important gene that predisposes people to various kinds of cancer as well as causing a rare genetic disease has been isolated after an intensive search lasting more than a decade.
The discovery has aroused strong interest among researchers because, unlike other cancer-related genes, the defective form of this gene is relatively common in the population, suggesting it may be a significant cause of many cancers.


Jackson Plans New Lyrics For Album
Michael Jackson, responding to charges of anti-Semitism, will change some of the lyrics of a song on his new album, "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I," his record company said yesterday.
Melani Rogers, a spokeswoman for Epic Records, a division of Sony Music, said Mr.
Jackson would delete the words "Jew me" and "Kike me" from his song, "They Don't Care About Us" and substitute "strike me" and "do me" on albums manufactured in the future.


Masters of the Marble World
Egged on by nervous parents, 65 children ages 8 to 14 from eight states arrived in Wildwood yesterday to compete in the World Series of Marbles, an annual four-day event sponsored by three marble manufacturers.
Listening to a portable radio while playing and wearing rosary beads in memory of her coach, who died last week, Stephanie Zlokas, 14, of Allegheny County, Pa., captured the girls' title.
The male winner was Jason Williams, also 14, of Clarksburg, W. Va.
They each got a trophy, a plaque, a National Marbles Tournament wristwatch and a $2,000 scholarship.
The match took place in concrete rings erected on the beach.
TERRY PRISTIN





Russian Leaders Try to Force Showdown With Legislators
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin and his Government, supported by President Boris N. Yeltsin, today challenged legislators to repeat their vote of no-confidence and thus risk losing their seats in early parliamentary elections.
The first no-confidence motion, passed on Wednesday, was essentially a cost-free vote, because the Constitution allows Mr.
Yeltsin to ignore it.
The vote was a way for deputies to cast a ballot against Mr.
Yeltsin and the status quo, marking the real beginning of the election campaign for Parliament.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday about a management change at United Dominion Industries misstated the new title of Charles D. Houseman.
He is president and chief operating officer of the company's engineering services subsidiary, the Litwin Companies, not of the parent company.


Princeton Picks Coach
JULIE PLANK, for 10 years an assistant coach at Stanford University under the highly respected TARA VANDERVEER, was named the head coach at Princeton University yesterday.


U.S. Agency Reports Lyme Disease Cases Up by 58% in '94
Federal health officials reported yesterday a surge of 58 percent in Lyme disease cases throughout the country in 1994, partly because of an increased numbers of the ticks that transmit the bacterial infection.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said 13,083 cases were reported in 44 states last year, up from 8,257 in 1993.
The total was the highest since the agency began surveillance for the disease in 1982.


Hopper Enlarged: The Father of Giants
IT'S always cheering to watch great art withstand the onslaught of institutional need.
The Whitney Museum of American Art's yearnings to be hip, accessible and strongly identified with an artist who looms large in the public mind are plastered all over "Edward Hopper and the American Imagination." Luckily, they don't stick -- to the art, at least.
Hopper's gritty, majestic paintings, in which mesmerizing unities of light and architecture heighten the poignant distances between people, more than hold their own.
In many ways, Hopper is the Whitney's Picasso: an artistic giant bound up in its history and growth.
The Whitney has had five previous Hopper shows, and it owns the world's largest concentration of his work.
This exhibition celebrates the arrival of the artist's long-awaited catalogue raisonne, published by the museum and W. W. Norton. (It was written by Gail Levin, a former curator at the Whitney, whose full-length biography of Hopper is due this fall.) But the show's real goal seems to be to raise Hopper's Picasso quotient even higher by nominating him as a fount of inspiration for film noir, literature and post-modern art.


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


You Don't Get Hugs Like This at Harvard


A 'Topper' Movie in the Age of AIDS
"Heaven's a Drag" is a film so determined to find inspirational uplift in the AIDS crisis that it seesaws wildly between witty drawing-room comedy and tear-drenched pathos.
One minute it is dispensing Noel Coward-style repartee; the next it is awash in grief.
Its final scene is a sentimental leave-taking complete with a golden archangel and a flock of seraphim.
While navigating between these extremes, the movie also finds time to offer politically pointed vignettes on homophobia and gay-bashing.
With all its inconsistencies of tone, "Heaven's a Drag" is still clumsily endearing for the way it wears its heart on its sleeve.
You might describe it as "Longtime Companion" meets "Topper," with a dollop of "La Cage aux Folles."


On My Mind; Berlin to Beijing
Five times in six decades the United States has confronted threats to its national interests from a specific kind of enemy: political dictatorships sitting atop a great military machine and bent on expansion, political or territorial.
Three times the U.S. finally had to go to war to deal with the dangers presented by that system of government -- German, Japanese, Iraqi.
To deal with the Soviet model, the U.S. used its political, economic and idealistic strength and made clear that if necessary it would commit its military power.


Art in Review
Rirkrit Tiravanija 303 Gallery  89 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 1
Rirkrit Tiravanija's affecting fusion of process and performance art is as messy as it is pure.
It rarely involves permanent objects and usually centers around free food or, as in the case of the recent Whitney Biennial, free music. (On that occasion, a rock-and-roll band consisting of the artist and several friends periodically played their hearts out in a small room-within-a-gallery that suggested a garage but was actually a replica of a small downtown gallery space.) Mr.
Tiravanija's main goal seems to be to remind us that all art is in essence an intangible gift and an ephemeral experience.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
Orbit Technologies Inc. of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., said yesterday that it had received an $18.4 million contract for the first phase of its titanium refining venture with the Chinese Government.
*
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it had formed a joint venture with Loma Negra, which is an Argentine cement producer, and a unit of Philip Environmental Inc. of Canada to create an industrial waste-to-energy facility in Argentina.


Art in Review
'Subjects From LIFE'
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through next Friday
From the late 1930's to the mid-60's, Life magazine was one of the most influential forces in photography.
Famous for going to whatever lengths necessary to get a story, Life's editors developed a distinctive style of photo essay in which dramatic pictures and chatty copy were presented in dynamic layouts.


Corporate Express Inc.(CEXP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hill &amp; Knowlton forms a unit to direct public relations efforts toward gay men and lesbians.
THE increasing interest among mainstream advertisers in aiming sales pitches at homosexuals has led a major public relations agency to form a unit for marketing communications efforts that address gay men and lesbians.
Hill &amp; Knowlton, ranked third among the world's public relations companies in the annual directory published by the J. R. O'Dwyer Company, has begun operating a gay and lesbian specialty group within a group that handle clients in industries like entertainment, food, information technology, sports and travel.
Fourteen employees -- gay and straight -- at offices in seven cities are working for the specialty group in addition to their other duties.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  JOEL-PETER WITKIN, Pace/MacGill Gallery, 32 East 57th Street (through tomorrow).
Another dose of Mr.
Witkin's now-familiar coy horror, involving Victorian stage sets, artificially aged prints and, of course, corpses, human and otherwise (Charles Hagen).


G.O.P. LEADERSHIP ANNOUNCES ACCORD ON TAX REDUCTION
Republican leaders in the House and Senate struck a deal tonight to cut a variety of income and investment taxes by $245 billion over the next seven years, the final element of a compromise blueprint for balancing the Federal budget by 2002.
Speaker Newt Gingrich and the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, announced the tax and budget agreements tonight, ending three weeks of off-and-on haggling between their offices and Congress's ranking tax and budget officials.


Sabres Beef Up Defense
The Buffalo Sabres signed defenseman RUMUN NDUR, 19, to a multiyear contract yesterday.
The 6-foot-2-inch, 200-pound Ndur played the last two seasons with the Guelph Storm in the Ontario Hockey League.
He had 10 goals, 21 assists and 187 penalty minutes in 63 games last year. (AP)


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond (BBBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend "WORD OF MOUTH," Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
A one-man comedy written and performed by James Lecesne.
Sunday only at 8 and 9:45 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $35.
Information: (212) 580-1313.


Whitman Told to Release Letter
An appeals court ruled yesterday that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman must disclose to Senate Democrats a letter she received from the Internal Revenue Service inquiring about the removal of $769 million from the state pension system in 1992.
The Governor has refused to release the correspondence, citing concern about compromising the state's position in the event of a lawsuit by the I.R.S. demanding reimbursement of the money.
A lower court supported her, but the appeals court said, "The state's suggestion that disclosing the contents of the letter will require it to engage in a public debate over its views on the subject is not a reason supporting secrecy."


A Humbled Shell Is Unsure On Disposal of Atlantic Rig
Two days after abandoning plans to sink an old oil rig in the North Atlantic, in the face of pressure from environmental groups and European governments, a humbled Royal Dutch/ Shell Group said today that it had no idea where and how to dismantle the rig.
"There are no real immediate plans," a Shell spokeswoman in London said.
"It's in tow at the moment back to the north of the Shetland Islands."


Jerseyans Favor Smoking Ban
Nearly one-fourth of them are smokers, but most New Jersey residents want the practice banned from public places, a poll released yesterday shows.
The survey, conducted by the Eagleton Institute on behalf of the University of Medicine and Dentistry, also found that most doctors who know their patients smoke have not offered to help them quit, and that 68 percent of New Jerseyans consider second-hand smoke a health hazard.


Major Quits as Tory Leader In Gamble to Solidify Party
In a stunning gamble that shook Britain's political establishment from top to bottom, Prime Minister John Major announced today that he was resigning as head of the Conservative Party in order to force an immediate election for the party leadership.
He expects to win it.
It was an act of high-stakes brinkmanship: if he loses, Mr.
Major, 52, will have to step down as Prime Minister.
If he triumphs or scares away all challengers, he hopes to regain control over a divided and mutinous Tory party that has been plummeting in the polls for more than two years.


Inside Art
One Grant
The Dia Center for the Arts received a $1 million grant this week from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
It is the institution's first major grant since its founding support from the de Menil family ended in 1983.
"Dia is a hidden jewel, and it needs to be recognized as a cultural treasure," said Rachel Bellow, the program officer for the arts at the Mellon Foundation.


For Children
'The Snow Queen'
Wings Theater  154 Christopher Street  West Village  (212) 627-2961  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Through Aug. 13
Like the best of Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tales, "The Snow Queen" is enigmatic and not too moralistic.
It is slightly adult and has an icy charm.
Gerda, a girl, is friends with Kai, a boy, and they carry out their friendship on a rooftop garden of roses.
In this play, as in the story, their personalities complement each other, and their future together looks as sanguine as the red roses until a splinter flies into Kai's eye and he turns grumpy.
In the play, Kai looks up and says, "The sky isn't blue enough." He is lured to the evil Snow Queen, who is blind to beauty and can't fall in love.


Critic's Choice/Film; Colossally Outrageous And Black
B-movie heaven is a hard place to get to these days, but for the next seven weeks the Film Forum can take you there.
Beginning today, an ebullient new series called "Blaxploitation, Baby!" celebrates the wild flowering of lurid, trendy, outrageous potboilers that purported to speak to or about black America in the early 1970's.
The anything-goes spirit of this catchall genre yielded films ranging from better-than-you-remember ("Superfly") to unbelievably awful ("The Klansman," in which Richard Burton walks with a limp and is supposed to be from Alabama), not to mention the fringe benefits of colossal camp appeal.
As Newsweek said of the classically overwrought "Mandingo," and as can be said of so many films in this thorough series, it's "calculated to appeal to the broadest possible audience -- sadists, masochists, bigots, sex fiends and historians." Historians can count on a particularly good time.


Daly Keeps Knicks Waiting and Guessing
Chuck Daly continues to keep the Knicks guessing.
He could still be debating whether to return to the coaching profession or he could be on a salary drive.
The Knicks are not sure.
On the day he planned to tell the organization he either wanted to replace Pat Riley as coach or wanted his name withdrawn from consideration, Daly has apparently delayed his decision.


For Los Angeles Subway Project, a Sinking Spell


School's Tainted Food
Responding to a report that contends that school food service officials covered up outbreaks of food poisioning and approved huge shipments of rancid beef, chicken and turkey to school cafeterias, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has removed the top three officials.


Matsushita Says It Will Sell Sony's Mini-Disk System
In a sign that its own digital compact cassette audio system faces a troubled future, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said today that it was planning to begin selling the mini-disk system developed by its rival, the Sony Corporation.
While the president of Matsushita, Yoichi Morishita, insisted that his company, known for its Panasonic brand, would continue to make and sell digital compact cassette systems, the move suggested to many analysts that the digital compact cassette could eventually fade away.
The move comes as Matsushita and Sony face off over another format battle in digital video disk systems.


Special Pleaders: The Lobbyists' Art; The Grass Roots, Just a Free Phone Call Away
The blandly cheerful recorded voice asks for your name, address and zip code.
You say it into the phone.
The voice thanks you.
In less than a minute, with a call to an 800 number, you have sent letters to your representative and senators in support of securities litigation reform.
It is not necessary to understand the issue or to know what the letters will say.
You do not have to know who your legislators are, and you probably have not guessed that you are calling at the behest of some of the nation's richest companies.


Remedial Education at CUNY
In the 25 years since it adopted open enrollment, the City University of New York has had to carry out a large and expensive remedial effort for students unable to keep up with college-level work.
Now the city and state budget crises have forced the university to curtail many programs, including remedial instruction in reading, writing and mathematics.
The remedial-education budget cuts need not be destructive, however.
Indeed, they should be embraced as an opportunity to refashion a program that has grown too large and weakened the essential mission of the university.
For all its many problems, the City University remains one of the glories of New York.
Despite this year's tuition hikes and cutbacks in departments and programs, enrollment is expected to keep growing.
The city needs the university more than ever to help supply the trained work force to keep its economy alive.


S.E.C. Seeks Information On Bond Issue
Court documents filed yesterday in Miami show that the Fanjul brothers, leaders in Florida's $2 billion sugar industry and major contributors to President Bill Clinton's 1992 campaign, have been swept into the continuing regulatory crackdown on political influence-peddling in the municipal bond market.
The documents were filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission's Miami office in an effort to enforce a subpoena it had served three weeks ago on Alfonso Fanjul and his brother Jose F. Fanjul, who jointly run the family's flagship business, Flo-Sun Inc., in Palm Beach, Fla.
According to the court documents, the Fanjuls are also directors and shareholders of FAIC Securities, a Miami brokerage house that is the target of the S.E.C. inquiry.


New-Found Simpson Photos May Bolster Prosecution
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case today received photographs taken in January 1992 by a New York City police officer that show Mr.
Simpson, then a football commentator, wearing a pair of brown leather gloves resembling those found at the crime scene and Mr.
Simpson's house after the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The pictures were taken by Michael Conners, a member of the Brooklyn District Attorney's security detail and a bagpiper for the Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, who performed during halftime of a playoff game between the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs at which Mr.
Simpson was the commentator.


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


For Arkansas Democrats, The Times Turn Painful
So many ill winds have blown in the last two years for public figures from Arkansas that some people in Bill Clinton's home state, particularly Democrats, have taken to wondering whether his election to the Presidency, with all the subsequent national attention on not only him but also his associates, was more curse than blessing.
"Is it over all positive for Clinton to have been elected?" said Bill Paschall, a political consultant and lobbyist who has worked on a number of Democratic campaigns in the state.
"My sense is that the answer is yes. But people are asking the question. I think the people here view politics more dimly than ever."


Strawberry Takes His First Swings as a Yankee


Decertification Threat Hangs Over N.B.A.'s Contract Vote
With management officials and owners and the leadership of the union aligned on one side and a growing group of dissident players on the other, the National Basketball Association has plunged into a struggle that is destined to sully its pristine image.
The conflict is unprecedented in sports labor history.
In a rush to ratification, the owners will meet in New York and the union's player representatives in Chicago today to vote on the six-year labor agreement negotiators completed Wednesday night.
The owners will unquestionably ratify the agreement; the outcome of the players' vote is unpredictable.


Two Out of Wimbledon
The Spanish clay-court specialists SERGI BRUGUERA and ALBERTO BERASATEGUI withdrew from the Wimbledon championships yesterday.
Bruguera, seeded eighth, and Berasategui cited injuries for their withdrawals, the All England Club said in a statement, but did not say what the injuries were.
Because the draw has already taken place, Wimbledon will ask both players to undergo medical examinations to confirm the injuries before the tournament starts Monday.
Bruguera defeated Berasategui in the French Open final on clay last year, but both players have shown a disdain for grass.
Bruguera has played at Wimbledon only once since 1990, and Berasategui has never played at the All England Club.


Displaced Workers Don't Feel Hopeful
To the Editor:
Re "Who Should Worry About the Economy" (Op-Ed, June 16): Stephen S. Roach, chief economist at Morgan Stanley, assures us that despite the fact that "the line between recession and recovery has been blurred as never before" and that "the restructuring of corporate America is going forward with a vengeance," we shouldn't worry.
He tells us we should be hopeful.


2 Appointments Made For Newark Arts Center
The New Jersey Performing Arts Center, scheduled to open in downtown Newark in 1997, yesterday announced the appointments of Stephanie S. Hughley as vice president for programming and William Lockwood Jr. as principal programming associate.


Moving Performance Hurt by Talk of Move
Now, the biggest remaining questions deal with the aftermath of what is almost certain to be a Stanley Cup championship for the Devils.
Will they hold a parade, and, if so, where?
Will Claude Lemieux win the Conn Smythe Trophy as most valuable player in the playoffs, or will it go to Martin Brodeur or Scott Stevens?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.77
4.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.41
4.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.39
4.54
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.02
6.10
7.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.47
6.54
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.46
7.52
8.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.09
6.15
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


STANLEY CUP FINALS
The New Jersey Devils keep getting better, and the National Hockey League championship keeps getting closer.
In one of their best playoff performances yet, the Devils outplayed the Detroit Red Wings for a 5-2 victory before a sellout crowd at the Meadowlands last night.
The Devils lead the final series, 3-0, and can wrap up the title with a victory in Game 4 Saturday night.
Claude Lemieux scored his 13th goal of the playoffs, and the stingy Devils' defense stifled the Wings for most of the game.
SportsFriday, page B9.


France Held Secret Talks With Serbs
France negotiated for the release of United Nations soldiers taken hostage by the Bosnian Serbs even as the United Nations and Western governments were insisting that their release must be unconditional, Western officials said today.
In return for the release of the United Nations soldiers, which included many French troops, the Bosnian Serbs apparently received assurances that NATO warplanes would not make further air strikes on Serb positions.
Another part of the deal seems to have opened the way for long-stalled deliveries of food to besieged Muslim enclaves, the officials said.


The Selling of the Special Olympics; Charity and Pity Are Out. Marketing Tie-Ins Are In.
Timothy P. Shriver leaned back in his chair, loosened his tie, cradled the phone on his shoulder and turned on the charm in an effort to sell a $150,000 30-second television spot on the Special Olympics World Games opening ceremonies.
"Do you have 20 minutes for me?" Mr.
Shriver murmured into the receiver.
"I can come down to New York."


New Fire Alarm Plan Gets Cool Reception From City Council
The Fire Department yesterday gave the City Council a new plan to cease using fire alarm boxes in all of Brooklyn and parts of Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx, on a 45-day trial basis.
The new plan comes three months after the Council firmly rejected an earlier plan by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to remove all of the city's 16,300 fire alarm boxes.


Market Place; Why are dividend yields low? A study discounts one theory.
AS the dividend yield for stocks fell to record lows this year -- setting off a traditional warning that the stock market was overvalued -- bullish analysts dismissed the warning by saying the figures underestimated the payout because they did not include billions of dollars worth of stock repurchases by companies.
Maybe it is time for another argument.


U.S. Agency Reports Lyme Disease Cases Up by 58% in '94
Federal health officials reported yesterday a surge of 58 percent in Lyme disease cases throughout the country in 1994, partly because of an increased numbers of the ticks that transmit the bacterial infection.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said 13,083 cases were reported in 44 states last year, up from 8,257 in 1993.
The total was the highest since the agency began surveillance for the disease in 1982.


Yankees Being Invaded By Outside Distractions
Buck Showalter criticized his players on the first night of the 10-game journey in Detroit after they played like Little Leaguers.
George Steinbrenner swooped in the next day to bark at Showalter, nearly dismiss a coach or two and sit behind the dugout.
Darryl Strawberry amazingly became a Yankee, a daily sideshow to the intriguing trip.
Luis Polonia grumbled about Strawberry and Danny Tartabull hoped it would signal his impending exit.
The starting pitchers gagged.
These Yankees resembled the old Yankees.
What do all of these typically chaotic Yankee developments prove?


To Prosecutors, Breakthrough After 5 Years of Scrutiny
Three years ago, Browning-Ferris Industries, the nation's second-largest waste-removal company, began competing for a share of New York City's $1.5 billion a year private garbage-hauling business.
Soon afterward, David A. Kirschtel, then the company's sales manager in the city, found a dog's head on the lawn of his Rockland County home.
Stuffed in the dog's mouth was a note: "Welcome to New York."


Chechnya: New Hope
After agreeing to gradual disengagement of their military forces, Chechen and Russian negotiators meeting here today began to hash out details of Chechnya's future if and when soldiers lay down their arms, but adjourned for the day without touching the trickiest topic of all, how independent the secessionist republic would be.
In the talks, Russians and Chechens, who are tired of war, are seeing the first real -- if highly fragile -- signs that both sides are ready to give peace a chance.
And the fact that both sides agreed to meet again on Friday was viewed by many as a more optimistic development than anyone could have expected only days ago.


Anne Tabachnick, Figurative Artist, 67
Anne Tabachnick, a figurative artist whose painterly style was inspired by Matisse, died on Tuesday at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 67.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said her daughter, Felicity Turner.


Bergen County Gets Top Rating
For the 20th year in a row, Bergen County has been given Moody's Investor Service's Aaa rating, county officials said yesterday.
Bergen, one of the wealthiest counties in the state, was one of only four in New Jersey to get Moody's highest rating.
The investment service said Bergen's "economic base remains sizable and diverse, and unemployment levels continue to be below both state and national levels."


Indulging an Ear or Two With the Words of Poets
As cyberbabble threatens to engulf us all, language -- real language -- is having a come-to-meeting, hand-clapping revival.
Poetry cafes are generating a lively buzz on the Lower East Side.
The rap-into-poetry phenomenon is analyzed in The New Yorker.
Language is flowing and being listened to, and not just by literary veterans.
Young people are discovering the word.
Now public television joins the movement, impressively, with "The Language of Life With Bill Moyers," an eight-part series that gets under way tonight with two hourlong installments.
Mr.
Moyers and his longtime collaborator, David Grubin, the producer and director, simply went to the Geraldine R. Dodge Poetry Festival in Waterville, N.J., and recorded before an appreciative audience -- all ages, all colors -- the appearances of 18 poets.
The readings are interspersed with interviews and scattered spontaneous recitations by aspiring poets who sing of everything from Jim Morrison and the Doors to growing up in the ghetto.


Clinton Returns to Jersey To Begin Re-election Push
He has barely a visible campaign apparatus yet and he says he wants to defer re-election politicking as long as he can.
But demurrals aside, President Clinton all but officially opened his re-election campaign here today as he embarked on a mission to raise $3 million over the coming week.
Returning to New Jersey, a pivotal state in Presidential politics that gave Mr.
Clinton a narrow victory in 1992, the President addressed his first major fund-raising event of the 1996 campaign tonight, urging Democrats to come to his side in what he said was a "debate of first principles" taking place in Washington.


State Workers Talk of Strike
State workers are furious about plans to freeze their wages, make them pay for about 30 percent of their health benefits and privatize some of their jobs.
So yesterday their union, the Communications Workers of America, which represents 34,000 workers, said that the membership had voted to authorize a strike.
But public worker strikes are illegal in New Jersey, and a union spokeswoman conceded that the primary purpose of the vote was to send Governor Whitman a message.


A French Country Inn With a Bronx vvvvROOOOM!
WE are in a French country inn.
We sit on rustic chairs in a mansard room wallpapered in burgundy toile.
We sip welcoming glasses of chilled chardonnay from etched goblets.
We look out at the water.
En famille, we inhale the musk of roasting garlic wafting up from the kitchen.
We hear: vvvvROOOOM!
A motorcycle accelerating to warp speed screams past below the window, followed by a babble of radio from a passing convertible and the pounding rhythms of rap from a next-door neighbor's boombox.
The water is not the Loire or the Dordogne.
It is Eastchester Bay.
We are abroad at home, in the Bronx.


AT&amp; T to Pitch Infomercials
The AT&amp; T Corporation is joining a list of well-known marketers that sponsor infomercials by introducing its first such program-length commercial, which blends technology pitches with issue-related advertising, in 23 cities.
The infomercial, with George Plimpton as the host, begins running Sunday on local television stations in cities including Boston, Dallas and Washington, and will add stations next month in cities including Chicago, Los Angeles and New York.
Titled "The Street You Live On -- The Information Superhighway and You," the infomercial will be interspersed with messages promoting the AT&amp; T view on pending telecommunications legislation.


Gilbert Promoted
The Rangers yesterday promoted ROD GILBERT to the team's director of community relations.
Gilbert, 54, has been the Rangers' manager of community relations for the last six years and coordinates the Rangers' street hockey program involving 3,000 children and 25 programs.
Gilbert, a 16-year National Hockey League veteran, was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1982.
The Rangers also promoted KEVIN KENNEDY to vice president of marketing from director of marketing.


Anderson Gets Pact and Jets' Confidence
Another Jets starter appears to be on the way out as the club yesterday signed Richie Anderson, their halfback-fullback, to a three-year contract.
The investment in the 23-year-old Anderson, who has performed only sparingly for the Jets in two seasons, indicates the likelihood that the high-priced Johnny Johnson has played his final game.


Clinton's Choice for Top Doctor Is Rebuffed by a Vote in Senate
The Senate gave a final rebuff today to the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General, but Dr.
Foster said his appetite for public service was only whetted by the grinding experience.
A rumored new White House post devoted to combating the nation's "epidemic of teen-age pregnancy" would appeal to him, he said, if President Clinton were to offer it.
"Things have various ways of taking on significance," Dr.
Foster declared, sitting in the White House and characterizing the Senate debate as an opportunity to press beyond the abortion issue and focus on the problem of teen-age pregnancy.


High Court's Opinions on Lawyers' Ads: Sharp Words and Sharp Scrutiny
Following are excerpts from Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's majority opinion and Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's dissent in Florida Bar v.
Went For It Inc., in which the High Court held that states could limit lawyers' soliciting of clients.
Joining the majority was Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Stephen G. Breyer.
In dissent were Justices John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR
Rules of the Florida Bar prohibit personal-injury lawyers from sending targeted direct-mail solicitations to victims and their relatives for 30 days following an accident or disaster.
This case asks us to consider whether such rules violate the 1st and 14th Amendments of the Constitution.
We hold that in the circumstances presented here, they do not. . . .


Art in Review
Stephan Balkenhol
Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through next Friday
The recurrent subject of Stephan Balkenhol's work is a nondescript male figure, standing in an open-necked shirt and slacks, with his hands in his pockets or cocked against his waist.
The figures are hacked from wooden columns and then simply painted: white or red for a shirt, green or black for the pants, brown for the hair.
The bare wood supplies the flesh color.
Mr.
Balkenhol's technique links him to the traditions of German Expressionism, but his calm, ordinary subjects seem to reject Expressionism's overheated visual rhetoric.


First Bite Spoiled Golden Apple
"If Darryl comes back, I'm out of here," ranted my friend Wayne Kabak, usually the most measured of men, at a Yankee game two weeks ago.
"What kind of a message is this to kids, a role model, his drug addiction. . . ."
His 12-year-old son, the apprentice catcher Benjamin, cocked an eye up from his complex scorecard and Kabak quickly added: "You know it's really not the drugs so much. It's the divisiveness. Everywhere he goes, Strawberry sets off bad vibrations. And it's been so much fun rooting for the Yankees these past couple of years. A team that seems to enjoy playing together."


Japan's Problem: What to Do With an Excess of Luxury Cars
Selling cars in Japan with the steering wheel on the "wrong" side has been mainly a losing proposition for American auto companies.
But now a new group of companies might try such a difficult and foolhardy thing -- the Japanese auto makers.
If the United States puts the 100 percent tariffs on Japanese luxury cars into effect on June 28, auto makers here will face a problem -- what to do with the Lexuses, Infinitis, Acuras and other luxury cars that have already been built for export to the United States but can no longer be exported there.


Antidotes for a Cartoonish Image
Americans tend to think of Australia as a continent of Crocodile Dundees: tall, sandy-haired blokes who drink beers the size of motor-oil cans and say things like "gud-dye mate." Naturally, this doesn't sit well with Australian artists and intellectuals.
"Antipodean Currents: 10 Contemporary Artists from Australia," at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo, sets out to provide a richer, more sophisticated image of Australian culture.
Julia Robinson, the exhibition's curator, describes Australian artists as "post-colonials, viewing 'central' cultures -- once England's and now that of the United States -- at a remove that is partly nostalgic, partly ironic, and very much their own."


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


GSD&amp; M Snares A Mastercard Job
Mastercard International said yesterday that it had selected GSD&amp; M in Austin, Tex., to handle the media buying portion of its account, with billings estimated at $80 million.
Those duties have been handled by DeWitt Media in New York since September 1992.
The choice was unusual because GSD&amp; M is better known for its creative work, for clients like Coors and Wal-Mart, than for media services.
"I think media is the next creative frontier," said Roy Spence, president of GSD&amp; M. Daniel Murray, senior vice president and general manager for creative products for the United States region of Mastercard in New York, said the assignment was unrelated to the creative portion of the account, which remains at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Praise for Officers Performing Under Fire
It was the kind of crisis an officer can prepare for his whole career and still not know he can handle: a shootout with an obviously desperate suspect in and around the backyards and driveways of a residential neighborhood.
But law enforcement officials and residents who saw what led up to the fatal gunfight Wednesday morning with Darnell Collins praised the officers, saying they had put themselves at risk but had avoided endangering civilians.
"I think they were careful," said Jodi Dey, who watched the police chase Mr.
Collins down the driveway across the street from her house seconds before the shootout began.
"They yelled for people to get inside their houses. But they were lucky nobody was out. It could have turned out a lot worse."


Mismanagement and Waste Erode U.N.'s Best Intentions
While the United Nations was trying to keep peace in Somalia last year, $3.9 million vanished from its headquarters in Mogadishu.
The cash, lying inside a cabinet with a faulty lock, was stolen in what investigators believe was an inside job.
A steel safe had been shipped in to store the money, but minus its combination.
The incident epitomizes some uncomfortable truths about the United Nations as it prepares to celebrate its 50th anniversary.
It was in Somalia for the noble purposes of delivering food to starving people, which it did for a time, and restoring civic order, which it did not.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about a recovery by Wall Street firms in businesses like mergers and acquisitions, misidentified the investment bank involved in the proposed merger between the First Data Corporation and the First Financial Corporation.
It was Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, not Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Tribute to Perry
Four days before opening the defense of his Wimbledon title, PETE SAMPRAS stood alongside three other tennis champions at St.
Paul's Cathedral in London yesterday at a memorial service for the former champion Fred Perry.
Sampras, VIRGINIA WADE, JOHN NEWCOMBE and MARTINA NAVRATILOVA each read a verse from Rudyard Kipling's "If" to pay tribute to Perry, the three-time Wimbledon champion who died in February at the age of 85.
Perry was Britain's last men's champion, in 1936.
Wimbledon ballgirls and ballboys stood in line in their uniforms as some 2,000 people entered the cathedral.
Among those inside were the former stars STAN SMITH, KEN ROSEWALL, MARIA BUENO and ILIE NASTASE.


U.S. Agency Reports Lyme Disease Cases Up by 58% in '94
Federal health officials reported yesterday a surge of 58 percent in Lyme disease cases throughout the country in 1994, partly because of an increased numbers of the ticks that transmit the bacterial infection.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said 13,083 cases were reported in 44 states last year, up from 8,257 in 1993.
The total was the highest since the agency began surveillance for the disease in 1982.


Reaching the Retarded: An Old Kennedy Mission
Despite the long philanthropic association that members of the Kennedy family have had with the issue of mental retardation, they have rarely spoken publicly about Rosemary, the eldest daughter of Joseph P. and Rose Kennedy, born retarded in 1918 into a family of brilliant overachievers.
Through Miss Kennedy's early years, and after she was institutionalized in her 20's, the family concealed her condition from the public, invariably describing her as shy and withdrawn and anxious to avoid the family spotlight, according to historical accounts.


Pataki Offers Package on Welfare Regulations
Gov.
George E. Pataki mounted his first assault on New York's thick web of welfare regulations today, arguing that he could save tens of millions of dollars for governments and social-service agencies by reducing requirements for inspections, paper work and eligibility as well as health and safety standards.
The Governor, a Republican who declared war on regulatory excess during last year's campaign, proposed 209 changes to rules for social services in a package he released this afternoon.


U.S. Agency Reports Lyme Disease Cases Up by 58% in '94
Federal health officials reported yesterday a surge of 58 percent in Lyme disease cases throughout the country in 1994, partly because of an increased numbers of the ticks that transmit the bacterial infection.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said 13,083 cases were reported in 44 states last year, up from 8,257 in 1993.
The total was the highest since the agency began surveillance for the disease in 1982.


Crucial Democrat Joins Dole in Bid to Redo Environmental Rules
In a gambit to build support for tight curbs on Federal environmental regulations, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, today published a new draft bill that preserved the pro-business heart of his legislation while conceding enough in details to satisfy a crucial Democratic ally.
While Mr.
Dole won over Senator J. Bennett Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat who has long crusaded to reduce the costs of environmental regulations, other influential Democrats continued to hold out, and Clinton Administration officials and environmentalists strongly criticized major elements of the Dole-Johnston deal.


Calpers to Invest $200 Million in New Fund
The board of the $86 billion California Public Employees' Retirement System has voted to invest $200 million in Relational Investors L.P., a new San Diego-based fund that will take big stakes in poorly performing companies and act as a catalyst for change.
Relational Investors is headed by Ralph Whitworth and David Batchelder, both former associates of T. Boone Pickens, the one-time corporate raider.
Mr.
Whitworth also previously headed the disbanded United Shareholders' Association, the investor advocacy group.


Joe Fawbush, 38, SoHo Art Dealer
Joe Fawbush, an art dealer whose SoHo gallery was known for showing the artworks of a high number of women, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village.
He was 38 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Raoul Reyes, a friend.


Adobe Systems In $500 Million Deal for Frame
Adobe Systems Inc., extending its reach in the growing market for electronic publishing, agreed today to acquire the Frame Technology Corporation in a $500 million stock swap.
Frame, based in San Jose, Calif., produces software used for creating technical documents in large corporations; most of the software runs on high-powered computer work stations using the Unix operating system.
As such, it complements Adobe's Pagemaker product, which runs primarily on personal computers and is used to create documents like newsletters for smaller companies.
Pagemaker was added by Adobe last year when it acquired the Aldus Corporation.


Jail for Charity Leader
The former president of United Way of America, William Aramony, was sentenced to seven years in prison for using the charity's money to pay for a romance with a teen-age girlfriend.
Article, page A14.


Mary Raffa; Cuomo's Mother-in-Law, 91
Mary Raffa, the mother of Matilda Cuomo, former First Lady of New York, died yesterday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She was 91 and lived in Lake Success, N.Y.


Sudden End for 2 Who Had Everything to Live For
At 26, Jeffrey Roork was where he wanted to be.
He was not the next Steven Spielberg, a role he once said he coveted, but he was loved by his longtime girlfriend, nurtured by an admiring boss, enchanted by New York City and bursting with creative energy for everything from computer graphics to street art.
At 54, David Roth, too, had good reason for satisfaction.
His architectural firm was thriving, his son was soon to graduate from Harvard, and he and his Finnish wife, Marja, reveled in the natural beauty around their remote weekend cabin in the Catskills.


Scientific Research Depends on Federal Largess
To the Editor:
The idea floating about Washington that corporate America and private foundations can provide sufficient monies to offset the cuts in Federal funding of scientific research is preposterous and absurd.
The horizon for return on investments by corporations is a few years, while the horizon for return on investment by the Government is decades.
A case in point is my own experience as an academic scientist.


Base-Closings Panel Spares New York Laboratory but Cuts 2 Huge Air Force Depots
In a strong rebuke to the Air Force, a Presidential commission voted today to keep open a high-tech military laboratory in upstate New York that the Air Force had wanted to close, and to shutter two huge maintenance depots in California and Texas that it had wanted to keep open.
The commissioners decided to save Rome Laboratory in Oneida County, N.Y., which employs more than 1,000 civilians.
They also set aside Air Force recommendations on the two maintenance depots, effectively closing McClellan Air Force Base near Sacramento, Calif., and Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, each of which stands to lose more than 10,000 civilian jobs.


Devils Are One Game From Ordering Wings to Go
With thunderous chants of "We want the cup! We want the cup!" ringing in their ears, the Devils thrashed the Detroit Red Wings, 5-2, tonight before a raucous sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and are now one victory away from replacing their archrivals, the Rangers, as Stanley Cup champions.
Did anyone say sweep?
New Jersey leads the four-of-seven-game series, 3-0, and can clinch the cup on Saturday night at the Meadowlands.
Only one club has overcome a 3-0 deficit in the finals.
The Toronto Maple Leafs rallied to defeat Detroit in 1942.


New-Found Simpson Photos May Bolster Prosecution
Prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case today received photographs taken in January 1992 by a New York City police officer that show Mr.
Simpson, then a football commentator, wearing a pair of brown leather gloves resembling those found at the crime scene and Mr.
Simpson's house after the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The pictures were taken by Michael Conners, a member of the Brooklyn District Attorney's security detail and a bagpiper for the Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, who performed during halftime of a playoff game between the Buffalo Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs at which Mr.
Simpson was the commentator.


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,M) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Titania of High Spirits and High Extensions
Valentina Kozlova, who was dancing her final season in New York with the New York City Ballet, was an exuberant Titania to Ethan Stiefel's impetuous Oberon in George Balanchine's "Midsummer Night's Dream" on Wednesday night.
Ms.
Kozlova was a young ballerina with the Bolshoi Ballet in 1979 when she and her former husband, Leonid Kozlov, defected in Los Angeles.
Balanchine invited them to join the City Ballet shortly before his death in 1983.


Pulsipher Can't Escape Trouble
Bill Pulsipher proved last night that he is a battler.
But yielding 14 hits in six and two-thirds innings usually translates into defeat, as it did last night when the high-flying Philadelphia Phillies completed a four-game sweep of the Mets with an 8-2 victory before 15,216 fans at Shea Stadium.
Pulsipher allowed the majority of the Phils' season-high 19 hits -- also a season high for the beleaguered Mets staff.
Pitching in and out of trouble all night (the Phillies had at least one hit in every inning), Pulsipher allowed 6 runs (4 earned), walked 3 and struck out 4 in his second major league start.


Protection for Corporate Fraud
Two bills before Congress reveal how reckless the Republicans have become in their zeal to reduce regulation.
The bills -- which would "reform" laws governing securities firms and banks -- go far beyond their stated purpose of ending frivolous litigation.
What they would actually do is insulate corporate officials who commit fraud from legal challenge by their victims.
The Senate securities bill sets out to protect corporate officials from being sued when they issue overly optimistic predictions of corporate profitability that are simply innocent misjudgments.
Sponsors cite cases where opportunistic shareholders waited for a company's share price to nosedive, then sued on the grounds that their investment was based on fraudulent representations of the company's health.


METRO DIGEST
A MAFIA GARBAGE CARTEL
State prosecutors charged yesterday that a Mafia-dominated cartel used arson and threats to control the city's commercial garbage business for more than 50 years, forcing virtually every business, university and hospital in New York City to pay up to 40 percent more than the going rate for trash collection.  [ Page A1. ]


Who Should Control New York's Schools?
To the Editor:
It is not Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani but the Board of Education that has the responsibility of selecting New York City's new Schools Chancellor.
It should exercise this responsibility without submitting its choice for approval by the Mayor.


Film Makers Who Learned Of Desolation And Lighting
IN 1919, when Edward Hopper was earning his living as a commercial illustrator (a job he loathed), he received a congenial assignment: to depict an audience watching a movie.
Hopper's drawing accompanied an article that claimed going to films was healthier than hanging around saloons, and his picture had this caption tacked on: "Movies give cheap, democratic amusement." No argument from Hopper, who happened to be both frugal and movie-loving.
Taking theaters as a subject -- most famously in "New York Movie" (1939), with its enigmatically bored or pensive usherette -- was simply the most obvious way in which films were essential to Hopper.
During a long lifetime of moviegoing, what he saw on screen often inspired him indirectly, so that a film like "Little Caesar" (1930), with its dramatically lighted scene of thugs in a diner, reverberates years later in Hopper's "Nighthawks" (1942).
And in turn, the desolate landscape we are now quick to call Hopperesque has had a profound influence on the movies.
"Days of Heaven" and "Psycho" wouldn't be the same without him.
"Edward Hopper and the American Cinema," a provocative series that runs through Aug. 13 at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is smart enough not to reach for one-on-one matchups between particular paintings and movie scenes.
Instead of nagging at the question of who influenced whom, the series suggests the cyclical way that the movies, Hopper and American culture have shaped one another.


Big Private Garbage Haulers, Linked to Mafia, Are Indicted
State prosecutors charged yesterday that a Mafia-dominated cartel used arson and threats to control the city's commercial garbage business for more than 50 years, forcing virtually every business, university, and hospital in New York City to pay up to 40 percent more for trash collection than they would have in a free market.
Culminating a five-year investigation led by an undercover police officer posing as a garbage hauler, a state grand jury indicted some of the largest garbage haulers in the city, as well as executives described as senior members of the Gambino and Genovese organized crime families.


Diner's Journal
In Mufti
For a restaurant critic, dining is a hit-or-miss affair.
Unfortunately, when you try hundreds of restaurants, there are more misses than hits.
That thought crossed my mind as I stood on the threshold of Deniz.
It looked vast and empty, and despite the many letters I have received from satisfied patrons, I almost turned around and went elsewhere.
I'm glad I changed my mind: Deniz is definitely a hit.
The cool beige dining room is comfortable but nondescript, offering no hint that the restaurant has an interesting menu dedicated to Mediterranean fish.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  BRITAIN'S LEADER TAKES A GAMBLE  Prime Minister John Major announced that he was resigning as head of the Conservative Party in order to force an immediate election for the party leadership.
If he loses he will have to step down.
A1  MISMANAGEMENT HURTS U.N.
GOALS  While the U.N. was trying to keep peace in Somalia last year, $3.9 million was stolen from its Mogadishu headquarters in an incident that epitomizes some uncomfortable truths about the organization.
A1


Bikers Without Helmets Cost Us Big Money; Not Jefferson's Idea
To the Editor:
Dick Teresi, in "The Case for No Helmets" (Op-Ed, June 17), significantly understates his case.
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 218, the various state helmet laws it compels and the ways these laws are enforced epitomize the petty tyranny that has begun to result in various manifestations of peaceful and violent revolt in this country.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.99
4.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.35
4.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.35
4.58
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.05
6.02
7.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.49
6.47
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.48
7.46
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.12
6.09
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Trash-Hauling Indictments
For half a century New York City has been prey to Mafia racketeers who control the commercial waste-hauling industry.
Restaurants, hospitals, universities and businesses have been systematically gouged with prices 40 percent higher than an honest market would charge for their waste disposal.
Now prosecutors have finally attacked the corruption broadly, with an indictment against 17 individuals, several of them associated with organized crime families, 23 carting companies and 4 trade associations accused of ripping off the city.
District Attorney Robert Morgenthau must still prove the 114 counts in the indictment.
But there is no doubt about the city's long victimization.
The $1.5 billion yearly business in hauling New York's trash should draw competitors from all over.
Instead it is dominated by a mosaic of market-splitting cartels whose monopoly practices are enforced by mob muscle the moment an honest competitor seeks a slice of the business.


Poland's Shadow
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Henryk Jankowski, a Roman Catholic priest who played a prominent role in the Solidarity movement in the 1980's, ironically forgot that he is a servant of a Jewish carpenter from Bethlehem when he called upon Poles "to bestir themselves" and "no longer tolerate governments made up of people who have not declared whether they come from Moscow or from Israel" (news articles, June 17 and June 22).


In America; The Valedictorian's Un-Graduation
By all accounts, Ben Sharpe is a great student.
When his final marks for the eighth grade at the Capital Christian Center School in Sacramento, Calif., were faxed to this office, a New York Times staffer exclaimed: "Wow! Look at this report card!"
Nothing but A's.
One teacher had inserted on the report card: "Student work excellent. Exceptional pleasure in class." Ben's final grade-point average was 4.0, the highest possible at his school.
He won the Superintendent's Award as the "most outstanding" eighth-grade student and was chosen to be class valedictorian.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 14 about a Senate subcommittee hearing on the American Association of Retired Persons misstated the location of Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana.
He was the man seated at the right of Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming.
The person standing and talking with Mr.
Simpson was Chuck Blahous, Mr.
Simpson's legislative director.


CHRONICLE
EVA GABOR has been hospitalized in Los Angeles with a broken hip.
The actress, 74, injured herself in a fall in Mexico on Wednesday and was admitted to the hospital early Thursday, said Ron Wise, a spokesman at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where she was in fair condition yesterday.
Ms.
Gabor, the younger sister of Zsa Zsa, is best known for her role in the television series "Green Acres" as Lisa Douglas, a rich New York socialite who married a loopy farmer and moved to his house in the country.
The show ran from 1965 to 1971.


Probation for 2 in School Supplies Theft
Two truck drivers accused of stealing $32,000 worth of public school supplies were sentenced yesterday in State Supreme Court in Queens to five years probation after pleading guilty to charges of grand larceny.
The defendants, Andrew Baraba and Jack Marchese, also must each pay the Board of Education $10,000 in restitution for conspiring with school warehouse employees to steal the supplies and sell them to private retailers.


No Screaming Here


GOVERNMENT ACTS TO SET ITS POLICY ON RACE PROGRAMS
Little more than a week after the Supreme Court ruled that Federal preference programs based on race must be held to an exacting constitutional standard, the Clinton Administration is beginning, occasionally with fits and starts, to develop its response.
Administration officials said today that the Justice Department would provide legal guidance on affirmative action to Federal agencies next week and ask them to review their programs to make sure of meeting the standard laid down by the Court.


In Review of Albany's Budget, Moody's Remains Pessimistic
A leading state credit agency issued a skeptical report today on the first budget of Gov.
George E. Pataki, who entered office in January with a pledge to restore fiscal responsibility to New York.
The agency said "the state's fiscal picture remains stressed," and its analysts said that an upgrade in its low bond rating appeared unlikely soon.
Mr.
Pataki immediately attacked the report from Moody's Investors Service, one of two major agencies that assess the state's creditworthiness.
He charged that Moody's had overlooked what he said were several accomplishments, particularly a 1 percent actual drop in state spending over last year.


Teacher Charged With Lewdness
A Queens high school math teacher was arrested yesterday after he exposed himself in front of two teen-age girls, and he was later identified in a police lineup by a dozen other young girls who accused him of committing similar acts, the police said.
Investigators said the teacher, Bradley Green, who works at Martin Van Buren High School, was parked in his van on 214th Street in Bayside, Queens, yesterday morning when he exposed himself to two 13-year-old girls on their way to school.


Raghavan Narasimhan Iyer, 65, An Expert on East-West Cultures
Raghavan Narasimhan Iyer, a philosopher, author and professor emeritus of political science at the University of California at Santa Barbara, died on Tuesday at St.
Francis Medical Center in Santa Barbara.
He was 65 and lived in Santa Barbara.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said his son, Pico Iyer.


Drug-Driven Killing Rampage Points Up Flaws in Parole System
Just about everyone who had spent any time with Darnell Collins says he had been heavily into cocaine for many months, and the police say the drug surely played a significant part in the five-day shooting rampage in New Jersey and Manhattan in which he killed seven people and wounded four others.
In February, his girlfriend, who last Saturday morning was the second to be murdered, kicked him out of her house in Atlantic City because his drug use made him abusive, friends and relatives said.
Mr.
Collins's name was found scrawled in the address book of the third murder victim, William Dawson, a man the police say was a drug dealer.
And one of his stops in New York during the rampage was a Harlem crack house where a woman was shot.


Judges Screen Jurors Faster Than Lawyers, Study Says
Having judges ride herd on lawyers during civil jury selection can move the process along three times as fast, according to a report released this week on a four-month experiment conducted in some New York State courts.
Lawyers, who had been accustomed to running jury selection without judicial supervision, were relegated to standing by while judges handled most of the questioning and were then given time limits to finish up.
They were less than enthusiastic about the experiment.


Yves Congar, French Cardinal, Is Dead at 91; Vigorous Ecumenist and Promoter of the Laity
Yves Cardinal Congar, an influential Dominican theologian whose reformist views helped to inspire Pope John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council, died on Thursday in Paris.
He was 91.
Ordained a priest in 1930, Pere Congar, as he was widely known throughout his life, soon became a defining force of the ecumenical movement, which had been seen as a largely Protestant enterprise.
In January 1936 he preached a series of sermons on the subject in Paris, and the next year he attended ecumenical conferences in Oxford, England, and Edinburgh.
He sustained his commitment to the movement through decades of speaking and writing.


New York Acts to Curb FraudIn Managed Care for the Poor
A well-dressed saleswoman knocked on the front door of Jovanni Davila's home in the Bronx this spring and delivered a frightening message: the state was ending Medicaid coverage in June, Ms.
Davila says the woman told her, and like millions of other poor people she would have to look elsewhere for medical care.
Why not protect yourself right now, the woman asked, and sign up for the managed-care organization she represented?
If Ms.
Davila did not enroll, the woman warned, the state would only sign her up later.


A Line Is Drawn in the Sand
Now that Monmouth Beach Borough has a new 180-foot-wide beach, thanks to the $19 million federally financed sand-restoration project that included adjacent Sea Bright, local officials want to tighten restrictions.
Summer beach passes are available only to residents; outsiders must buy daily $4.75 passes.
Earlier this week, residents packed borough hall to protest a five-page list of proposed new beach regulations.
"For 18 years I've gone for a swim after work," complained Raymond S. Smith.
No longer.
Proposed new ordinances would prohibit swimming after 6 P.M. as well as picnicking, ball-playing, kite flying, using floats or water-wings and changing clothes, among other activities.


In Brief
*
The Daewoo Motor Company of South Korea will sign an agreement next week for a joint venture with the Polish auto maker Fabryka Samochodow w Lublinie to produce 90,000 vehicles annually, Poland's Industry Ministry said yesterday. *
The Italian car maker Fiat and the Moroccan Government signed an agreement yesterday for the assembly in Morocco of the Fiat Uno.


Giving Devils Fans Their Due
Pitchfork-wielding New Jersey Devils fans gathered yesterday outside the South Mountain Arena, where the hockey team was practicing to face the Detroit Red Wings and, perhaps, win it all in today's fourth game of the Stanley Cup finals.


Casey's General Stores Inc.(CASY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Kentucky's Rhodes Withdraws From Draft
It's uncertain where RODRICK RHODES, Kentucky's 6-foot-7-inch junior forward, will end up after removing his name from Wednesday's National Basketball Association draft.
There has been speculation that Rhodes would return to Kentucky, leave college basketball to play overseas or transfer to another school.
The Fresno Bee reported yesterday that a source inside the Fresno State program said Rhodes's first choice was to transfer to Coach JERRY TARKANIAN's program.
The newspaper also said Rhodes is considering Syracuse.


Folk Center's Funds Eliminated by House
The House of Representatives has moved toward eliminating all Federal money for the American Folklife Center, an agency of the Library of Congress whose role is to preserve the nation's folk traditions.
The sponsors of the measure, which would eliminate the center's $1.1 million appropriation, said that their intention was not to kill the agency but instead to apply the money to more pressing needs.


Immigration Officials Considering Ways to Improve Detention Center
Top immigration officials met with local authorities yesterday to plead for the reopening of the immigration jail in Elizabeth, N.J., assuring them that the Immigration and Naturalization Service would consider their ideas about how to make it a better place.
The immigration officials said the service would consider raising guards' wages, creating a civilian review board or even ending its contract with Esmor Correctional Services, the private company that runs the 300-bed detention center that exploded in violence on Sunday.


Oneok Inc.(OKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Russians and Chechens Agree Over Elections
Russian and Chechen negotiators agreed today to hold national and regional elections in Chechnya, but the question of how and when such elections would be held and who would run them were too thorny to thrash out immediately so the negotiators called a three-day recess.
After five days of talks, which are being held under the auspices of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the negotiators said they would extend a cease-fire that was due to expire today while they consult their governments.


CHRONICLE
PATRICIA S. FLEMING, the White House director of AIDS policy, usually consults with doctors and politicians about AIDS issues, but this week she also gave an audience to the model VERONICA WEBB.
Ms.
Webb and TIMOTHY ROSTA, the executive director of Lifebeat, a music-industry organization that gives money to AIDS services, went to see Ms.
Fleming in Washington on Thursday to discuss AIDS prevention programs, particularly those in urban areas.
Ms.
Webb, a board member of Lifebeat, said she mainly wanted to find out how she could assist Ms.
Fleming.


Bond Prices Retreat After Durables Data
Prices of Treasury securities retreated in quiet trading yesterday as a strong report on durable goods caused traders to reassess the chances of a cut in short-term interest rates.
The 30-year bond fell 13/32 , to a price of 11425/32 for a yield of 6.49 percent, up from 6.47 percent on Thursday.
Shorter-maturity bill rates were also weaker, as were the intermediate-term notes.


Anatoly Tarasov, 76, Innovative Coach of Hockey in Soviet Union
Anatoly Tarasov, the fiery and inspirational coach who led the former Soviet Union to become a dominant world power in international hockey, died yesterday in Moscow.
He was 76.
A Russian news agency said he died after a long illness.


Business Digest
U.S. and Japan Extend Trade Talks Over Autos  Japanese and American trade negotiators in Geneva agreed to extend their bargaining sessions over the Clinton Administration's threatened sanctions on Japanese luxury cars through the weekend.
Negotiators reported minimal progress in a session that focused on how Japanese auto makers could increase their purchase of American parts without explicitly agreeing to a numerical target or its equivalent.  [ Page 1. ] While business has been brisk at many car dealers, some are now seeing a falloff as the tariff deadline nears.
There is still a decent supply of cars, but not in all models.  [ 46. ] Bradlees in Bankruptcy Filing  Bradlees, the struggling regional discount retailer, filed for bankruptcy protection, saying it had to do so because many of its suppliers, fearing they would not be paid, stopped shipping their goods.
The Dow industrials were off 3.80 points, to 4,585.84, retreating from Thursday's record close of 4,589.64.
For the week, the average rose 75.05 points.  [ 37. ] Treasury securities prices fell, too, on the strong durable goods report.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.49 percent.  [ 36. ] USAir Stock Down 6.5%  Shares in USAir Group fell 6.5 percent, to $12.50, because of rumors that the troubled carrier planned to buy Hawaiian Air, T.W.A., or both.
USAir denied the rumors.  [ 34. ] G.M. to Raise Prices 2.7%  G.M. said it planned to increase prices in the United States for its 1996 model cars and trucks by an average of 2.7 percent, which is comparable to Ford's price rises.  [ 46. ] Shanghai Rents Are Soaring  With surging demand from American and other foreign companies streaming into China, Shanghai's real estate market has become one of the most expensive in the world.
Real estate agents estimate that residential and office rents have more than doubled since 1992.  [ 1. ] New York Warned on Budget  Moody's warned that New York State's "fiscal picture remains stressed" and said that the state failed "to rebuild reserves as a buffer against the next economic downturn."  [ 22. ] Credit Cards on the Internet  Mastercard and Visa agreed to a standard for credit card transactions on the Internet.
Mastercard plans to join -- with minor modifications -- an encryption system that Visa is developing with Microsoft.  [ 35. ] F.C.C.
Awards 99 Licenses  The F.C.C. said it had awarded 99 licenses to winners of its airwave auction, which ended in March.  [ 35. ] Dickstein Claims Hills Victory  Dickstein Partners said it believed it had won its proxy fight for control of the board of Hills Stores, clearing the way for a sale of the regional discount store chain.  [ 35. ] Duty-Free, a Hit in Manila  The Philippines has moved into the top ranks of the world's duty-free merchandisers, but with a twist.
The main customers are incoming travelers, not outgoing.  [ 34. ] Wheat Futures Up on Crop Damage  Wheat futures prices surged after early Kansas harvest results showed unexpectedly heavy damage from April rains.  [ 43. ] The dollar weakened on news that inflation was accelerating in Germany, making a Bundesbank rate cut unlikely.  [ 43. ]


Daly Tells the Knicks: Thanks, but No Thanks
He had the immaculate wardrobe, the gaudy world championship rings and a sterling reputation.
But Chuck Daly searched long and hard for the one element he needed to return from retirement.
And in the end, his heart was nowhere to be found.
Without the passion to coach again, he told the Knicks, "No," today, passing up one of the National Basketball Association's prime jobs for much less money and much more sanity.


Appier Is the First Pitcher To Notch Victory No. 11
Royals 4, Twins 0
Kevin Appier reached 11 victories quicker than any pitcher in Kansas City history, allowing three hits in seven and one-third innings last night as the Royals shut out Minnesota, 4-0, at Kauffman Stadium.


Lord Stan Still Waiting For Wings to Wake Up
The familiar chalked outline on the blackboard in the visitors' dressing room, identified as Lord Stan, issues the same distressing reminder for the Detroit Red Wings.
They were already on a first-name basis with their new silver friend, at the start of an endless summer together that held the promise of pool parties, nights on the town and who-knows-what until who-knows-when.
Except for the reminder -- "4 WINS TO GO" -- unchanged even now, three games into their nightmare.
Even after they awoke, their Presidents' Trophy season had been reduced to a series of conflicting explanations from quiet voices.
Of all the harsh words Scotty Bowman, the Detroit coach, used in his public post-game diatribe after the 5-2 loss to New Jersey in Game 3 on Thursday night, the closest he came to identifying his team's situation was a simple observation.
"Something happened to our room between the second game and this game," Bowman said.


Court Allows Discovery In Tobacco Class Action
In what plaintiffs' lawyers hailed as a victory yesterday in a giant class-action suit against tobacco companies, a Federal district judge in New Orleans agreed to permit the discovery process to go forward, months before an appeals court is able to rule on the legality of the class action.
The decision, announced by Judge Okla B. Jones 2d, means that a consortium of lawyers from close to 60 plaintiffs' law firms can begin the process of gathering millions of internal research and corporate documents from the tobacco companies and taking depositions from those who may become witnesses in the case, which is the largest class action in history.


Britain's Foreign Secretary To Quit in Cabinet Shuffle
Gracefully removing himself as a bone of contention at a time of political turmoil when the Prime Minister's future is on the line, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd announced today that he would resign from the Government in a Cabinet reshuffle next month.
The 65-year-old Mr.
Hurd, who has been a Cabinet minister for 16 years and Foreign Secretary for nearly 6, sought to depict his long-rumored decision as a natural finale for someone serving so long.
His aides produced a February letter stating his intention to retire this summer as proof that it was not sudden.


CHRONICLE
The comedian LEA DELARIA has just landed a role in "Saved by the Bell," the NBC Saturday morning television show for children.
Last year, Ms.
Delaria came to national prominence as an openly lesbian comedian when she appeared on the Arsenio Hall show.
She is well known on the comedy circuit, particularly in gay clubs, for her act, which focuses largely on lesbian themes.


Old Dam Gives Way to Torrential Rain in Virginia


Credit Cards On Internet Given a Lift
Hoping to make it as easy to buy things over the Internet as it is to push a button, Mastercard International and Visa International said yesterday that they had agreed to a standard for electronic credit card transactions.
In effect, Mastercard has agreed to join -- with minor modifications -- a system that Visa was developing with the Microsoft Corporation.
The system is intended to be open in that other card companies and software vendors will be invited to participate.


May Orders For Durables Jumped 2.5%
Orders and shipments of factory equipment and other costly manufactured goods surged in May, as business and consumer demand remained strong despite signs in other recent Government statistics that the economy was slowing.
But most economists concluded that the extra manufacturing activity was not enough by itself to change the course of the economy or alter the Federal Reserve's policy on interest rates.


SESSION EXTENDED BY U.S. AND JAPAN IN IMPASSE ON CARS
Japanese and American negotiators agreed early this morning to keep talking through the weekend in an effort to head off the imposition of $5.9 billion in sanctions against Japanese imports that loom just four days away.
But officials from each country said neither side gave much ground in a day and night of intense talks.
Long after this city had shut down for the night, the Japanese and American teams remained holed up in a small American trade office on the edge of Lake Geneva, arguing over the demands from Washington for fundamental changes in the way Japan regulates its economy and organizes it industry to keep outsiders -- both foreign and Japanese -- at bay.


School Guard Is Charged in Rape of Brooklyn Schoolgirl
In the latest of a recent spate of sex cases involving security officers in New York City public schools, a guard was arrested yesterday on charges that he raped a 15-year-old girl more than two years ago.
The arrest was announced on a day when both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines participated in a ceremony at Murry Bergtraum High School in lower Manhattan to honor several hundred members of the Division of School Safety for meritorious service and heroism.


A School Rape Case
In the latest of a recent spate of sex cases involving security officers in New York City public schools, a guard was arrested on charges that he raped a 15-year-old girl more than two years ago.


Corrections
A brief front-page summary on Wednesday for an article about the uprising at an immigration detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., misstated some elements of discussions between immigration officials and James F. Slattery, chairman of the company that ran the center.
While Mr.
Slattery said he had discussed tensions at the center with the officials, he did not characterize those discussions as a warning.
And Mr.
Slattery did not say the officials had asked him not to speak publicly about the incident.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Not Very Weighty Works By Another Bach Son  Trio Bell'Arte Tenri Cultural Institute


Battle's Ex-Foes Meet on Okinawa
He was a strapping 17-year-old farm boy from Michigan, she was an Okinawan schoolgirl just a bit younger, and if they had met, they might have killed each other -- or, a little later, married.
But others did the killing for them, and today Robert C. Fawley and Utako Ogidoh met as names engraved on the same vast tombstone, two of the more than 200,000 people who died in the battle of Okinawa.


Religion Journal; On the Importance of Instilling Unity
Each year, summer's arrival means the start of a cycle of national religious meetings.
The faithful of one particular group or another meet in conventions, assemblies and synods to debate resolutions, elect officers and spend time with people of shared beliefs in a country that grows evermore religiously diverse.
Over the last 10 days, for example, more than 200 Roman Catholic bishops met in Chicago, while 20,000 Southern Baptists met in Atlanta.


Can Jones Make Kids Want to Be Like Roy?
Somewhere on Madison Avenue, dreams Roy Jones Jr., there is a wealthy sponsor who wants someone with taste, wants a role model.
And Jones, who makes his living beating up people, wants to be that man.
It is one reason he has deigned to defend his supermiddleweight crown Saturday night against the unpredictable Vinny Pazienza.
Paz -- the raging, uncontrolled Pazmanian Devil -- sells tickets, even at $30 pay-per-view prices.
He attracts attention.
The Atlantic City Convention Center has already sold as many seats, 7,000, as Riddick Bowe did defending his version of the heavyweight championship last Saturday in Las Vegas, Nev.


Teacher Accused of Asking Student for Bribe
A high school social studies teacher with a salary of $62,331 was charged with extortion yesterday, accused of soliciting $300 in bribes to improve the grade of a senior enrolled in his remedial economics course.
The teacher, identified as Kenneth D. Cotton, 44, of Queens, was arrested on Thursday night at Jamaica High School in Queens by investigators from the office of Edward F. Stancik, the special commissioner of investigation for the city's school system.


What Gives With the Pathmark?
Companies that might yet invest in depressed areas of New York City are watching intently to see if the East Harlem Pathmark project dies a messy political death.
Impoverished Manhattanites who tend to pay more for less food, and the community development groups that have worked for years to fix that problem, desperately want the supermarket built.
Why, then, is Mayor Rudolph Giuliani taking so long to approve this important project?
The Pathmark would be in a development at 125th Street and Third Avenue, to be built on city land with tax breaks and a low-interest mortgage -- a common strategy for stimulating development in risky neighborhoods.
The Manhattan borough board voted in favor of the project two months ago, bravely rejecting baseless charges that nonprofit developers from black Harlem had "invaded" Latino turf.
In truth, the black nonprofit organization had been asked in by the Community Association of East Harlem Triangle, after the original partners dropped out of the deal.
If built, the Pathmark will support 200 jobs, 75 percent of them going to local residents.
Many of those will be management jobs, filled through a training program.


Observer; Summer on a Hot Tin Mind
Presidential politics --
Ah, but I see you reaching already to turn the page.


Censorship for Lawyers
Florida's courts have a rule prohibiting lawyers from soliciting business by direct mail from accident victims or their families within 30 days of an accident.
The Supreme Court, finding that the rule's main purpose is to protect both the victims and "the flagging reputations of Florida lawyers," has upheld the rule by a narrow 5-to-4 vote.
But the dissenters, who called the rule "censorship pure and simple," had it right.
The decision is an unfortunate retreat from two decades of rulings that have given First Amendment protection to so-called "commercial speech," including advertising by lawyers.
Since 1977 the Court has recognized that businesses and professions have certain free speech rights, even if they may be regulated to insure that their ads are not false or misleading.


Dissatisfied With Union, Players Snub N.B.A. Pact
The agreement that union officials negotiated with the National Basketball Association this week turned out today not to be an agreement at all.
About seven hours after the league's owners unanimously ratified what they thought was a new six-year labor agreement, Simon Gourdine, the union leader, emerged from a meeting of player representatives and said the union was prepared to return to the bargaining table for additional negotiations.


Yanks Put Blue Jays All Alone In Cellar
In a perfect world, when the American League East is the beast it was expected to be, a series between the Toronto Blue Jays and the Yankees would rock the Bronx for days.
And a matchup between David Cone and Jack McDowell would have the fans standing in the aisles.
But nothing is perfect about 1995 for the Blue Jays or Yankees.
And so it was that McDowell and Cone, winners of the league's 1993 and 1994 Cy Young Awards, pitched on a wet night in a half-empty Yankee Stadium, an atmosphere greatly reflecting their teams' respective seasons.


Why Do Devils Love Lemaire? Because Coach Is Always Right.
From the first day he walked into the Devils' dressing room to open training camp two years ago, Jacques Lemaire commanded the attention and respect of his players.
He had earned them with his accomplishments as a center for the Montreal Canadiens, learning from their winning tradition while piling up Stanley Cup championships.
What the Devils have learned since is that the 49-year-old Lemaire, with his expertise as a teacher on the ice, has an ability to read the personalities and emotions of his players and to apply the right approach.


New Departure Adds to Turmoil For Salomon
Dennis J. Keegan resigned unexpectedly yesterday as head of proprietary trading at Salomon Brothers Inc., the most senior departure from the troubled Wall Street firm in almost two years.
Shigeru Myojin, a managing director who had been due to leave at the end of this year, will now remain with Salomon.
He will become its vice chairman and assume Mr.
Keegan's responsibilities for trading on the firm's behalf and for risk management, the company said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  TRADE TALKS ARE EXTENDED
American and Japanese negotiators agreed to extend talks in Geneva on automotive trade through the weekend.
But after a day and a night of intense negotiations, there were few signs of progress.  1  CHANGING TIMES FOR RUGBY
As the Rugby World Cup tournament ends with a South Africa-New Zealand showdown, two black players have emerged as stars, a major change for the sport. 1  SHANGHAI REAL ESTATE BOOM
Shanghai's real estate market has been transformed from a cheap backwater to one of the most expensive in the world; rents have more than doubled in three years. 1  REMEMBERING OKINAWA
It would be difficult to find more gracious losers than the Japanese who marked the 50th anniversary of the last great campaign of World War II at Okinawa. 3  DOUGLAS HURD RESIGNS
Removing himself as a bone of political contention, Britain's Foreign Secretary announced he will resign from the Government in a Cabinet reshuffle next month. 4  ACCORD ON CHECHEN ELECTIONS
Russian and Chechen negotiators have agreed to hold national and regional elections in separtist Chechnya, but not yet on when and how they will be held. 4  NEW CHARGES IN MEXICO
After being denied a request for the extradition of a former official accused of covering up the investigation into an assassination, Mexican officials announced new charges. 5  Innsbruck Journal: Quiet insurgency among Catholics. 4  National 6-8, 48  RESPONSE TO A RULING
The Administration is beginning to react to a Supreme Court ruling that changed the rules on race-based preference programs.  1  WHOSE BUDGET IS IT?
News analysis: The Speaker dominated in the crafting of the Republican budget proposal, but the President's veto power means that there is still considerable deal-making ahead.  1  The President set out to sell his own budget plan.7  THE ADVERTISING OF A PRESIDENT
Far earlier than is usual, President Clinton is buying television time for campaign-style commercials.  1  JUDGE ITO OPENS THE FILES
In the Simpson trial, Judge Lance A. Ito said he would release all transcripts and documents pertaining to the dismissal of 10 jurors.  6  RELIGION OR CRUELTY?
In New Mexico, a rite of worship and sacrifice has gotten the attention of animal-rights advocates.  6  TALKING ABOUT A BOMBING
Terry L. Nichols, the second man charged in the Oklahoma City bombing, told a legal adviser that he had no idea who the suspect John Doe No. 2 was.  6  THE MILITARY AX
A Presidential commission voted to close another major military installation in California but decided to keep open the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Maine.  8  DIMINISHED PRESENCE
Religion Journal: As the summer cycle of national religious meetings begins, the illnesses of two leaders change the tenor.  25  SCRUTINY FOR PLANE CRASHES
Some often-embarrassing facts on the causes of military plane crashes were hushed up to protect careers, a longtime Air Force safety officer contends.  48  CAR IN A WEB
The latest entanglement for the electric automobile is Republican politics.  48  Metro Digest 21  H.M.O.'S SALES PITCH
Dr.
Jonas Salk, who developed the first successful vaccine against poliomyelitis, one of the most feared diseases of the middle part of the century, died.
He was 80.  1  Roger Grimsby, anchor. 8  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  The trash-hauling indictments.
Bad news for workers.
Censorship for lawyers.
What gives with the Pathmark?
Letters  Russell Baker: Summer on a hot tin mind.
Bob Herbert: The valedictorian's un-graduation.
Jane Hamilton-Merritt: Refugees of the secret war.
Alfred A. DelliBovi: A bridge to the 21st century.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 14  Crossword 10


Opera About Opera, Tersely
Not every librettist chooses a composer as wisely as Paul Griffiths did when he wrote "The Jewel Box" in 1991.
This playful, post-modern opera about opera, a thinking person's counterpart to John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles," is fully scored by Mozart.
Concert arias, minor arias that were once plundered by rival composers and neglected excerpts from Mozart's unfinished opera, "Lo Sposo Deluso," were gathered by Mr.
Griffiths, given new English texts and woven together with dialogue.
The result: a literate, self-conscious drama about a composer, very like Mozart himself, who steps inside the proscenium, manipulating his characters to create a new genre of opera out of the manners of opera buffa and opera seria.
The two-act original work, which met with success in its initial performances in England in 1991 and in the United States at Wolf Trap Opera in Vienna, Va., and the Skylight Opera of Milwaukee, was shortened to a 75-minute chamber opera, "The Small Jewel Box," that was given its premiere by the American Opera/ Musical Theater Company at the New York Academy of Art in TriBeCa on Thursday night.


Just Behind Garibaldi, a Place for Conversation in Good Company
SO what can happen on a park bench?
The other day, Howard Schoenfeld finished writing a section of his memoirs, and at 2:30 in the afternoon he set out as he does every day to join the group of friends who sit near the statue of Garibaldi in Washington Square Park.


Oakley Lists His Criteria for a Coach
Holding a brush and a pail at his newly reopened car wash in Riverdale yesterday, CHARLES OAKLEY suggested that the next Knicks coach should be the antithesis of PAT RILEY, who quit last week.
"Don't be the type of guy who says, 'You can only rebound,' or, 'You can only play defense,' " Oakley said.
"Just go out and play basketball. Open up the court and just see what happens.


The Opera In England: Vigorous But Spiky
"It looks as if the old spell on English opera may be broken at last," Benjamin Britten wrote in the summer of 1945, savoring the triumph of his "Peter Grimes." Purcell, the last English composer to gain anything more than fleeting operatic success, had died 250 years before.
Britten's swift tale of crime and vengeance prompted a burst of operatic activity in England that has hardly let up for five decades.
Although Covent Garden's Verdi Festival occupies center stage here this month, operas by Britten and various successors have stolen a share of the limelight.
New productions of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" amd "Billy Budd" have arrived at the English National Opera and Covent Garden, and "Grimes" was given a concert performance on Tuesday at the City of London Festival.
Britten's own Aldeburgh Festival honored "Grimes" with an orchestral concert and also presented a new opera by Nicola LeFanu.
The Glyndebourne Festival, meanwhile, mounted the latest Harrison Birtwistle opus, "The Second Mrs. Kong."


Dickstein Claims Victory in Fight for Hills Stores
Dickstein Partners Inc. said yesterday that it believed that it had won its proxy fight for control of the board of the Hills Stores Company, clearing the way for a sale of the regional discount store chain.
"We are extremely confident we have won by a very large margin," said Mark Dickstein, president of the New York-based investment firm.
He said he thought his firm's slate had the support of about 55 percent of the outstanding shares, while Hills's proposed slate of directors received less than 25 percent.


Two Dead in Upper West Side School Bus Accident


Judge Delays Sentencing In Baby Case
A judge today delayed the sentencing of Waneta E. Hoyt, the 49-year-old woman convicted of suffocating her five young children more than two decades ago, after Mrs.
Hoyt asked that a new lawyer replace her public defenders.
In interviews and letters to reporters since her conviction in April, Mrs.
Hoyt had criticized the public defenders, saying they had failed to present witnesses and evidence that would have helped win an acquittal.


INSIDE
State to Hire for Javits
To break the grip of mob-influenced unions, New York State is to hire its own permanent work force for the Javits Convention Center.
Page 21.
Data on Dismissed Jurors
Judge Lance A. Ito said he would release documents relating to the dismissal of 10 jurors in the O. J. Simpson case.
Page 6.
Raiders Leavingg Los Angeles
The Los Angeles Raiders said they would return to Oakland, leaving the nation's second-largest market without professional football.
Page 27.
Daly Says No to Knicks
Chuck Daly, the Knicks' top choice to replace Pat Riley as coach, said he would not take the job.
Page 27.


States to Share Sweatshop Data
Labor commissioners from New Jersey, New York and California met in Atlantic City yesterday and agreed to share records on enforcement and violations in the garment industry.
The states will work closely to identify manufacturers who operate sweatshops elsewhere and try to move their operations, said the New Jersey Labor Commissioner, Peter Calderone.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INTERCEL INC., Lanett, Ala., the cellular telephone service company, agreed to merge with privately held Powertel PCS Partners L.P., a limited partnership formed to bid on licenses for wireless communications services.
Terms were not disclosed.
KNIGHT RIDDER INC., Miami, the publishing company, plans to buy back an additional three million of its common shares.
MEASUREX CORP., Cupertino, Calif., repurchased the roughly 10 percent of its shares held by Harnischfeger Industries, Brookfield, Wis., a maker of paper-making machinery and mining equipment.
Measurex bought 1.6 million of its shares for $32.50 each, for a total purchase price of $52 million.


Ruling on Mexico Case: Score One for Salinas Inc.
No sooner had a United States magistrate denied Mexico's request for the extradition of a former prosecutor charged with covering up the investigation of an assassination than the authorities rushed to announce new charges against the suspect.
The next case, they said, would have more witnesses, more evidence, and a better chance of forcing the former official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, back to Mexico to stand trial.
Yet even if Mr.
Ruiz Massieu is eventually shipped home, the American ruling on Thursday left two other prominent Mexicans breathing somewhat easier.


As TV Fades to Black, Networks Point Fingers
For ABC and NBC, the collapse of the Baseball Network on Thursday was the direct fault of their partner in the television venture: Major League Baseball.
"If you're looking for someone who exhibited good faith, it was the networks," said Dennis Swanson, the president of ABC Sports.


Dr. Jonas Salk, Whose Vaccine Turned Tide on Polio, Dies at 80
Dr.
Jonas Salk, who in the 1950's developed the first successful vaccine against poliomyelitis, the viral illness that had gripped a fearful nation with images of children doomed to death or paralysis, died yesterday at Green Hospital in the La Jolla section of San Diego.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said a spokeswoman for the Salk Institute, which Dr.
Salk had established to carry out medical research.


Schultz Elected to Top U.S.O.C. Position
Dick Schultz, who formerly headed the National Collegiate Athletic Association, was elected executive director of the United States Olympic Committee today after he allayed concerns about commitment, potential for conflict of interest, institutional control and athletes' rights.
Schultz, who will be 66 in September, said that he would take the job by Sept. 1 and that he would feel "comfortable" remaining in the position through the 2002 Winter Games to be held in Salt Lake City.


Raiders Run a Reverse Play Back to Oakland
Al Davis, the rebel of the National Football League, signed an agreement yesterday with the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum to move the Raiders from Los Angeles back to Oakland, Calif., which could leave the National Football League without a team in the nation's second-largest television market.
If the deal is approved by the Oakland City Council and 23 of the 29 other N.F.L. owners, it will mark the first time in modern professional sports history that a team has left a city and moved back.


Acadians Didn't Leave Nova Scotia Willingly
To the Editor:
In a June 18 news analysis on the G-7 economic summit meeting in Halifax, you describe Nova Scotia as "the cool northern land the Cajuns fled for the steamy Louisiana bayous."


Lakehurst Sleeps Easier After Decision on Base
When Butch Wood was growing up in this small borough in southern New Jersey, there was an expression he heard often enough that he recalled it today at the age of 54: "We had the apple."
"The apple represented total care," he said, sipping a drink at the Airship Tavern.
"You put your head down at night and you were secure that in the morning you had a job, benefits, for you and your family."


Youth Charged In Crown Heights Incident Is Arrested Again
Lemrick Nelson Jr., the teen-ager who faces Federal civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights in 1991, was arrested early yesterday and charged with disorderly conduct and resisting arrest after police officers tried to search him, the police said.
Mr.
Nelson, 19, fought with police officers who were trying to question him and five other men, , one of whom had marijuana, in front of a Crown Heights apartment building, the police said.


Gruesome Find in Sleeping Bag
Employees at an Acme supermarket made a gruesome discovery yesterday morning in a grassy area behind the store.
They found the body of a young woman in a zipped-up sleeping bag.
Prosecutors said the badly decomposed corpse was that of a red-haired white woman in her early 20's, clad in a tank top and boxer shorts.
As of last night they didn't know who she was, how she died, or how long she had been dead.


Roger Grimsby, 66, Anchor And Initiator of 'Happy Talk'
Roger Grimsby, whose commanding delivery and acerbic wit as the anchor of "Eyewitness News" at WABC-TV in New York helped redefine local television news, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66.
The cause was lung cancer, said Bill Beutel, his former newscast partner at WABC.


Elway and Shanahan Reunite
Fans who arrived at the Waldbaum's Celebrity Golf Classic in Oceanside, L.I., shortly after 2 P.M. yesterday were not disappointed with the trio present at the first tee: Denver Broncos quarterback JOHN ELWAY, the Penguins' MARIO LEMIEUX and the Broncos' new coach, MIKE SHANAHAN.
Previously, Elway and Shanahan were close in Denver as the quarterback and offensive coordinator, so close that DAN REEVES, then the Broncos' head coach and now coach of the Giants, considered them too close.


In Philippines, Duty-Free With a Difference (or Two)
A strange new permutation of duty-free shopping has catapulted an unlikely candidate, the Philippines, into the top ranks of the world's duty-free merchandisers.
Philippine authorities have changed the formula of usual duty-free shops, which are based at airports and sell small luxury items -- alcohol, tobacco or perfume for tourists to carry aboard departing flights.


Don't Stop the Presses
Get me rewrite! cried Assemblywoman Rose Heck, a Republican from Hasbrouck Heights, when she saw the Assembly preparing to pass a bill that would have eliminated 14 state-mandated programs, saving taxpayers up to $28 million.
Among the mandates to be cut was one requiring municipalities to advertise all proposed ordinances -- a $4 million annual windfall for publishers.
Contending that the public needs to know, Assemblywoman Heck, who owns two weekly newspapers, got that item restored, with the backing of the New Jersey Press Association.


Devils' Hardy Souls Nearly in Heaven; Fans Who Stuck With Team That Got No Respect Are Elated
Joe LoPrinzi should have been in the hallway of the Meadowlands Byrne Arena selling beer.
Instead, his swelling biceps straining the seams of his New Jersey Devils T-shirt, he was peeking in on the rink, watching his hockey team swoop toward the Stanley Cup with more heartfelt emotion than most of New Jersey could ever imagine the Devils inspiring.
"I could get fired for this," he said.
Below him, the Thursday night capacity crowd chanted "We want the cup!" as the Devils trounced the Detroit Red Wings to move to one game away from New Jersey's first-ever hockey championship.


Is Tyson 'Redeemed'? Ours Not to Decide
To the Editor:
In "Not Ready for Redemption" (Op-Ed, June 17), Jill Nelson protests the use of the black community "as a backdrop to promote and celebrate Mike Tyson," three months out of prison on a rape conviction.


Rema Hort Mann Television Executive, 30
Rema Hort Mann, a cable television executive, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 30.
The cause was stomach cancer, her family said.


Shuttle Flight Is Delayed


Alpine Group Inc.(AGI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Scott Paper and Kimberly-Clark Discuss Merger
The Scott Paper Company and the Kimberly-Clark Corporation have discussed a merger valued at about $7 billion, but the discussions have not been resolved and an agreement is not a certainty, executives at the two companies said yesterday.
A merger, in which holders of Scott shares would receive Kimberly stock, would create the nation's second-largest consumer products company, behind the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.


Clinton, Playing the Early Bird, Is Lining Up Campaign-Style Ads
In a highly unusual move almost a year-and-a-half before the next election, President Clinton is buying television time to begin broadcasting campaign-style commercials.
The advertisements deal with the issue of crime and will be shown starting next week in crucial electoral states like Florida, Michigan and California.
"It's unprecedented," said Tad Devine, a Democratic political consultant who has worked on several Presidential campaigns.
"For an incumbent President, this is much, much earlier than anyone has ever thought of going on the air."


Road Gets Bumpy for Electric Car, And Presidential Politics Is Blamed
The future of the electric automobile, always uncertain, now appears tangled in Republican Presidential politics.
California requires that in the 1998 model year, 2 percent of the cars sold by major auto makers in that state have "zero emissions," and Gov.
Pete Wilson has generally supported the program.
But Mr.
Wilson is running for President and has recently taken steps that advocates of the cars say amount to laying the groundwork for eviscerating the electric car plan to placate four Republicans whose support he needs for the nomination.


Man Indicted in D.W.I. Deaths
A 22-year-old man from Clayton who the police said was driving while intoxicated was indicted in the deaths of two teen-agers killed in April on their way home from an alcohol-free senior prom, Gloucester County prosecutors said yesterday.
Donald S. Hinrichs 3d faces two counts of aggravated manslaughter stemming from the crash, which killed Joe Berry, 18, and Tania Mokienko, 17, on the night of the Delsea Regional High School prom.
JOE SHARKEY


Clinton Calls G.O.P. Plan On Budget 'Too Extreme'
A day after Republican Congressional leaders reached an agreement on a seven-year blueprint for tax cuts and a balanced budget, President Clinton today began a public campaign to set out the differences between a plan he called "too extreme" and his own proposal to erase the deficit over 10 years.
In a conference call with five Democratic governors, Mr.
Clinton said the Republican budget plan, which would cut a variety of taxes by $245 billion and sharply scale back Federal spending, would "complicate your lives as governors considerably." He said the Republican proposal would shift to the states new responsibilities even as the magnitude of the cuts risked sending the nation into an economic downturn.


A Case of Nerves At the High End; Dealers for Japanese Luxury Cars Uncertain as Tariff Deadline Nears
Pooling their money to buy lottery tickets in bulk and politely warning the wavering that Lexus prices may balloon within days, salesmen at McGrath Lexus in this monied Chicago suburb are playing every angle to hedge against their Government's threat to impose tariffs on their wares.
Most, professionally conditioned to yearn for a deal, expect Washington and Tokyo to come to terms before the Wednesday deadline for applying 100 percent tariffs to luxury cars sold by the Japanese.
But some, like Jack Eleftheriou, have begun scanning the want ads.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Arts yesterday about the wrapping of the Reichstag in Berlin by the artist Christo misidentified the government body that was first approached for approval, in 1971.
It was the Parliament of West Germany, not East Germany.


Judge Ito to Open Files On 10 Dismissed Jurors
Obviously disgusted by the conduct of several former jurors in the O. J. Simpson case, Judge Lance A. Ito agreed today to release by July 3 hundreds of pages of potentially embarrassing transcripts and documents pertaining to the dismissal of jurors in the case.
Only a few sensitive items, he said, would be edited out.
The judge acted on pleas from Mr.
Simpson, news organizations, the American Civil Liberties Union and a former juror in the case.
But he clearly needed little coaxing, given the conduct of some former panelists.
He suggested that some had sought to serve on the case solely for the notoriety, then cashed in afterward, writing books, courting interviews, and, as he put it, "running around in limousines to talk shows." Those, he said, were hardly privacy interests worth protecting.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
How Being Easy to Listen To Can Expose Banality of Ideas  Musicians' Accord Weill Recital Hall


Six Die in Blaze In Upstate New York


A Man Charged in the Oklahoma Bombing Talks About His Co-Defendant
Terry L. Nichols, one of two men charged in the Oklahoma City bombing, has told a legal adviser here that he does not know the identity of the mysterious suspect known as John Doe No. 2 and is not sure whether his co-defendant, Timothy J. McVeigh, was involved in the attack.
In a conversation on June 8 with Karl Granse, a self-taught anti-government legal researcher and lecturer, Mr.
Nichols said he was not involved in the April 19 bombing of the Federal Building.


Hoping in Vain for a Reprieve


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Violetta Heads for Trouble Despite Indifferent Groundlings  Metropolitan Opera Morth Meadow, Central Park


Bad News for Workers
The economy has grown steadily for four years.
Productivity -- output per hour of work -- shot up by 2 percent last year and by a gaudy 2.7 percent annual rate at the beginning of this year.
Profits are near record levels and stock prices have surged 15 percent since January.
By some measures, these are bountiful times.
But not for many workers.
A disturbing report released this week by the Labor Department shows that average wages and salaries fell by more than 2 percent, after accounting for inflation, between March 1994 and March 1995.
Total compensation, which includes fringe benefits like health insurance, fell even more, by about 3 percent.
A big factor in that decline was health benefits, which fell 8 percent for unclear reasons.
The losses were not caused by workers shifting from high-paying manufacturing to low-paying service jobs.


Bikers Without Helmets Cost Us Big Money
To the Editor:
Re "The Case for No Helmets" (Op-Ed, June 17): While Dick Teresi and other motorcycle enthusiasts delight in feeling "the wind in their hair," the rest of us are feeling their hands in our pockets.
Bikers without helmets cost the rest of us big money.


New Teams Will Pick Through the Litter
It is a collection of unwanted and abandoned players, a choosing ground of National Basketball Association castoffs, high salaries and humbled egos.
Every now and then, a small gem emerges.
Too often, a large piece of petrified wood turns up.
Take your pick: Vernon Maxwell or Roy Tarpley.


In New Mexico, an Ancient Rite or a Blood Sport?
On every St.
John the Baptist Day, June 24, the people of Jemez Pueblo in northwestern New Mexico gather for a rite of worship and sacrifice they call the gallo, or rooster pull.
After attending Mass, men named Juan or John may choose to honor their patron saint by offering him a rooster, which is buried up to its neck in the pueblo plaza.
Then, horsemen compete to see who can uproot the bird.
Waving the rooster in the air, the winner flees, as the other men, in hot pursuit, try to grab the trophy.


Raise Police Caliber With Military Recruitment
To the Editor:
As Police Commissioner William J. Bratton proposes a systemic answer to the problems with immature and abusive behavior of some of New York's Finest, I am reminded of some poignant observations made a decade ago by thoughtful veteran police officers.


Bridge
Bridge education in New York City schools has made unobtrusive but substantial progress in the past year.
Thanks to the efforts of Anita Strauss at Library Power, an organization that promotes school library activities, 10 schools, including one in the South Bronx and one on the Lower East Side, now have bridge classes for fourth, fifth and sixth graders in their libraries. (Information is available from 212 684-2758.)
The originator of this concept is Sidney Rosen of Manhattan, who has taught bridge to sixth graders at Public School 158, on the Upper East Side, for several years.
At the end of the school year, arrayed in bridge T-shirts, they play a tournament.
This year, the trophy was won by Danielle Santoro, with Marisa Kaplan second.


A Gingrich Budget Gain
The Republican balanced-budget proposal unveiled with some flourish on Thursday evening is a compromise that, on most of the issues that count, bears the stamp of the House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, more than that of his Senate counterpart, Bob Dole, the majority leader.
But the important thing to remember is that it is only a Republican proposal.
In a Republican Congress, it is an impressive work of political deal-cutting.
In the two-party world beyond Capitol Hill, it stands no chance of becoming law without major changes.


Corrections
An obituary headline on Thursday about the philosopher E. M. Cioran referred incorrectly to his work.
In addition to his books of philosophy, he wrote short stories and essays.
He was not a novelist.


Shanghai's Neo-Capitalists Find Real Estate
When he was posted here last fall, the United States Consul General was pleased to find an attractive villa in a new development called Elegant Garden.
Warned about high rents, the consul got what he thought was a good deal: $7,500 a month for a four-bedroom house with a lawn and a driveway.
Even before he moved in, the new consul, Joseph Borich, noticed that his name and position were being used in brochures to attract new tenants.
But after other villas filled up at rents higher than his, the management announced that he was no longer welcome.


Cocaine Seized on Turnpike
The hazards of turnpike tailgating were underscored for two people from the Bronx whose U-Haul truck was pulled over by the state police.
Officers said yesterday that they found the truck was carrying 220 pounds of cocaine, the biggest seizure so far this year.
When stopped, the driver, Justiniano Santos Rodriquez, 42, and a passenger, Teofila Ynocenc Garcia, 26, claimed to be transporting furniture from Florida.


The Unlikely Cast of the Kirov's 'Swan Lake'
There was a time when "Swan Lake" as danced by the Kirov Ballet would have been a paradigm of its genre.
Nowadays, the company that produced Rudolf Nureyev and Mikhail Baryshnikov is virtually bereft of male talent in its top ranks and as its "Swan Lake" showed on Thursday, open to curious casting on first nights.
The swan queen at the Metropolitan Opera House was Yuliya Makhalina, a striking stage personality whose contortionist physique is less suited to classical roles than it would be to contemporary works by Maurice Bejart.
Her prince was a Danish guest: Kenneth Greve, last seen here in American Ballet Theater's corps de ballet in 1989 and now a principal with the Royal Danish Ballet.


Hershiser Goes on the Disabled List
Cleveland Indians pitcher OREL HERSHISER has been put on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to June 22 with a lower back sprain, the team announced yesterday.
The Indians recalled the right-hander ALBIE LOPEZ from Class AAA Buffalo to fill Hershiser's spot in the rotation.


Comptroller Threatens To Stop Water System Sale
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to sell New York City's water system -- and to use some of the proceeds to pay for repairs to schools and other construction projects -- ran into potentially crippling opposition yesterday from the city's Comptroller -- the one official who has the power to block it.
The proposed sale of the system -- including the city's upstate reservoirs, its pipelines and sewage plants -- is central to the Mayor's budget strategy.
It would raise $2.3 billion, allowing the city to pay off old bonds and provide $400 million in cash this year, as well as $600 million more over the next three years for capital projects.


Find Humane Ways to Live With Pigeons
To the Editor:
Steve Ressler's letter of June 17 describes pigeons as "soiling" everything, "besides being disease carriers," and again it is Chicken Little and the sky is falling -- all because of pigeons!


Bengals Hire Moeller as Assistant Coach
The Cincinnati Bengals announced the hiring of GARY MOELLER as tight ends coach yesterday.
Moeller resigned as the head coach at the University of Michigan on May 4, six days after his arrest for assault and battery and disorderly conduct.


G. J. Silberfein, 86, Supporter of Israel
George J. Silberfein, a retired dress manufacturer and supporter of Jewish causes, died on Monday at Hollywood Medical Center in Florida.
A former resident of Huntington, L.I., he was 86 and lived in Hollywood.
He was active in what became known as the Airlift to Israel of 1947, when Israel was moving toward statehood under threats from Palestine's Arab neighbors.
The operation smuggled guns, ammunitions and dissembled planes past the British Mandate authorities.
Mr.
Silberfein contributed to and raised funds for the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies, his main charity, for about 50 years.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Connors, 42, Loses a Quarterfinal Match
Playing in his first Association of Tennis Professionals quarterfinals in four years, 42-year-old Jimmy Connors succumbed to the strong serve of Marc Rosset, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, yesterday on the grass court in Halle, Germany.
Third-seeded Michael Stich, the defending champion, beat Richey Reneberg, 6-3, 6-4.


Saberhagen Sets Example For Teammates
The only way the Mets can find consistency these days is to put Bret Saberhagen on the mound and let him will them to victory.
No Saberhagen, no chance.
Fortunately for the Mets, it was Saberhagen's turn to take the hill tonight, and he turned in another sterling performance.
The right-hander allowed three runs and six hits in nine innings, as the Mets ended a four-game losing streak by whipping the Atlanta Braves, 9-3, before a crowd of 38,000.


Sports of The Times; Darryl's Latest Message
AS Darryl Strawberry, in Yankee pinstripes for the first time, attacked baseballs with all his customary ease and power in the batting cage in the Yankees' minor league complex in Tampa, Fla., yesterday evening, he seemed less a potent figure than a pitiable one.
Strawberry had returned to baseball by the good graces of the self-appointed St.
Bernard who sits in the Yankee owner's chair.
It was George Steinbrenner who talked about giving "this young man his last chance," and he has signed an $850,000 contract for the last 13 weeks of the season.


No Headline
"L.A., this is a glitter town. You've got to be a blockbuster hit, same as a movie. If they don't think it's a great movie they won't go see it. I guess we're not a blockbuster. So, I guess we'll take our show somewhere else." -- NOLAN HARRISON, defensive end for the Los Angeles (soon to be Oakland) Raiders.  [ 30:4. ]


Must Russia's Destiny Be Locked in Its Past?
To the Editor:
In objecting to Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s criticism of expanding NATO to include former Soviet satellite countries, Frederick Gabrielsen (letter, June 16) warns about a cyclical historical pattern that foretells the return of Russian imperialism to Eastern Europe.
But does not history show linear development too?
Or should we fear Great Britain's return to world imperialism, a German attack on France, an American return to legal slavery?


Yesterday in Washington
REGULATORY CHANGES The Clinton Administration threatened to veto a bill curbing Federal regulatory power unless lawmakers weakened it substantially.
The threat came in a letter to Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and Senator Tom Daschle, the minority leader, from Sally Katzen, administrator of regulatory affairs in the Office of Management and Budget.
Leading senators of both parties are negotiating legislation, similar to a measure passed in the House, that would sharply limit Government authority to enforce regulations under laws protecting health, safety and the environment.
It would give businesses new opportunities to appeal rules in court and would increase the Government's burden of proof that proposed regulations were necessary and affordable.
SECURITIES OVERHAUL The Senate continued debating a measure that would make it more difficult for people to sue companies and stockbrokers when stock prices dropped sharply.
The measure, similar to one passed by the House, is expected to come to a vote early next week.
If it passes, which is likely, both houses will have given final approval to the full series of Republican-inspired proposals to overhaul the nation's civil litigation system.


Acid Rain Credits
To the Editor:
A June 5 news article suggests that the market-based trading system for acid rain pollution credits has been less successful than predicted and may not be working at all.
I strongly disagree.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Reassigned Kim Batiste, third baseman, from Bowie of the Eastern League to Rochester of the International League and Scott McClain, third baseman, from Rochester to Bowie.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Orel Hershiser, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 22.
Recalled Albie Lopez, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Designated Hector Fajardo, pitcher, for assignment.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Clint Lawrence, pitcher.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Optioned John Roper, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Activated Chuck McElroy, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Placed John Hudek, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Doug Brocail, pitcher, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  N.B.A. -- Announced Rodrick Rhodes, Kentucky junior forward, has withdrewn his name from the N.B.A. draft and will retain his college eligibility.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Named Gary Moeller tight ends coach.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Signed a letter of intent to move the team to Oakland for the 1995-96 season, contingent on the approval of the NFL's membership and the appoval of Oakland city and county officials.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A la Rube Goldberg: Thunder, Drums, Chimes, Rattles, Hisses  'Sounds and the Machines  That Make Them' The Kitchen


A Bridge to the 21st Century
Think of it this way.
A certain Monsieur Antoine boards the Concorde at 11 A.M. in Paris, crosses the Atlantic, takes a high-speed airport link to a renewed Times Square, enjoys lunch with a glass of red wine on 46th Street's Restaurant Row, takes in a matinee on Broadway and returns to the airport in time for a slower overnight flight home.
And at no point does he worry about gridlock and missed connections.
That is a fanciful idea today.
But it is precisely the vision New York must keep in mind if it hopes to remain a world-class international city tomorrow.


State to Hire A Work Force At Javits Hall
Moving to break the grip that mob-influenced labor unions have long held over hiring practices at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, the state will soon begin hiring its own permanent work force there, stripping the unions of their rights to assign workers, officials said yesterday.
The changes, they say, should sharply reduce what trade show exhibitors have described as exorbitant costs that they have had to pay to union workers for constructing booths and providing supplies.


Bankruptcy Protection Being Sought by Bradlees
Bradlees Inc., the struggling regional discount retailer that has seen its performance severely crimped by a heavy debt load and the expansion of national chains like Wal-Mart Stores, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday.
The Chapter 11 filing ends weeks of speculation that Bradlees, which is based in Braintree, Mass., would be unable to line up the financing needed to avoid seeking protection from its creditors.


Black Stars End Cherished Afrikaner Myth
To the thickset Afrikaner who lectured an American visitor in a hotel bar, one thing was to be understood: "Rugby, for this country, is not a sport -- it is a religion." And for decades, an unwritten tenet of the creed has been that whites are specially suited for this bruising game.
"Blacks just don't like contact sports," said the Afrikaner, J. J. Pretorius, who spoke before the start of the Rugby World Cup, which is being held in South Africa this year.
The tournament began last month in Cape Town and ends with the final here on Saturday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the discovery of a gene that predisposes people to various cancers omitted the name of the scientific journal that published the paper about the finding.
It was Science.


METRO DIGEST
ALTERING RECRUITMENT FOR MANAGED CARE In response to a sharp rise in complaints about fraudulent sales tactics, state and New York City officials announced that in the city, they would no longer allow managed-care companies to enroll new members directly -- a practice several other states have banned because the potential for abuse is so great.
Mr.
Nelson, 19, fought with police officers who were trying to question him and five other men, one of whom had marijuana, in front of a Crown Heights apartment building, the police said.  [ 23. ] CONVERSING, JUST BEHIND GARIBALDI So what can happen on a park bench?
The other day, Howard Schoenfeld finished writing a section of his memoirs, and at 2:30 in the afternoon he set out as he does every day to join the group of friends who sit near the statue of Garibaldi in Washington Square Park.
Hoyt asked that a new lawyer replace her public defenders.  [ 24. ] TOWN SLEEPS BETTER AFTER NEWS ON BASE The town of Lakehurst, N.J., has lived under a shadow ever since the Pentagon recommended that a base to which the town's economy and identity are tied, be closed to save money.
But the town won an unexpected reprieve as a Presidential commission ruled that the base should stay in business.  [ 24. ] Moody's Investors Service, in a report on the new state budget, warned that New York's "fiscal picture remains stressed."  [ 22. ]


Clinton Threatens a Veto of Bill Curbing Regulatory Powers
The Clinton Administration today threatened to veto a bill curbing Federal regulatory power unless it was substantially weakened.
The threat came in a letter to Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and Senator Tom Daschle, the minority leader, from Sally Katzen, administrator of regulatory affairs in the White House Office of Management and Budget.


Safety Officer Says Military Hid Crashes
A longtime senior Air Force safety officer contends that the military hushed up facts and played down investigations in dozens of plane crashes, some involving deeply embarrassing incidents of misconduct, to protect senior officers' careers.
Three investigations are under way at the Pentagon into the accusations, which include a case in which two Navy pilots and a navigator removed their clothes, helmets and oxygen masks to expose their buttocks to the crew of another fighter jet.
They passed out, the plane crashed and all three were killed.


Corrections
A dance review in The Living Arts on Thursday about a performance of "Noche Flamenca" on Sunday at Theater 80 in Manhattan provided the theater's location incompletely.
It is at the home of the Pearl Theater Company, at 80 St.
Marks Place in the East Village.
Reservations: (212) 924-0077.


Officer Who Killed Student Is Reassigned
A New York City police officer who shot and killed a college student who was waving an air pistol has been placed on modified duty for working in a Bayside, Queens, bar in his off duty hours, a law enforcement official said yesterday.
While investigating the shooting Thursday morning, investigators learned that the officer, Jeffrey Poje, 28, had worked at a place where liquor was served.


California Takes New Hit on Base Closings
A day after stripping California of an Air Force maintenance depot that employs more than 10,000 civilians, a Presidential commission voted today to close the naval shipyard in Long Beach, Calif., which employs another 3,500.
By following the Navy's recommendation on Long Beach, the commission was able to save the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard on the Maine-New Hampshire border.
Dating from the War of 1812, Portsmouth is one of the nation's most historic bases, and is also the only one in the region able to service nuclear-powered submarines.


DANCE
Some Kirov Dancers Show What They Can Do Kirov Ballet Metropolitan Opera House


Innsbruck Journal; A National Church Faces a Challenge From Within
For most of this year, a quiet insurgency has been building among Austrian Catholics, prompted by doctrinal differences with the Vatican and by scandal surrounding Hans Hermann Cardinal Groer, the 75-year-old primate of the Austrian church who was accused of sexual abuse 20 years ago.
The results have been startling: In April, more than 5,500 Austrians left the church -- twice as many as in the same month one year earlier -- joining some 350,000 people who have forgone Catholicism in Austria over the last 10 years.
In June, a group of protesters began an unprecedented attempt here to gather 100,000 signatures to protest the Vatican's rulings on the celibacy of priests, sexual morality and the ordination of women.


June 18-24: Ghosts and Daggers; British Politics Takes A Cue From the Bard
British politics is an unlikely hybrid of the high and the low: a noble-minded enterprise combined with blood sport.
It's like a poetry recital held on a raft in shark-infested waters.
Perhaps that's why Michael Heseltine, Britain's president of the Board of Trade, is reluctant to challenge Prime Minister John Major in a Conservative Party leadership contest that Mr.
Major virtually demanded last week.
Mr.
Heseltine brought down Margaret Thatcher in a challenge in 1990 -- "the hand that wields the dagger" as he put it in Shakespearean prose -- and it has taken all this time for some Tories to forgive him.
So he would prefer someone else to do the stabbing now.


Celebration And a Plea For Spending On Seawolf
Under a gloomy sky as steel-gray as the boat being christened, Navy Secretary John H. Dalton today delivered an impassioned plea for continued spending on the nuclear-powered Seawolf submarine, even as its future remains highly doubtful in Congress.
In doubt, too, is what will happen to thousands of workers at the Electric Boat Division of General Dynamics, many of whom watched pensively as Mr.
Dalton's wife, Margaret, broke a champagne bottle on the hull of the boat at a crowded ceremony in the shipyard here.


POSTINGS: Therapy Center for the Terminally Ill; On East 86th St. For Poor Children
Adjoining brownstones at 419 and 421 East 86th Street are now being demolished to make way for Cassidy's Place, a publicly and privately supported therapeutic center to serve, free of charge, about 100 poor, terminally ill children, many with AIDS and cancer, and their families.
It will be run by the Association to Benefit Children, which has five other programs in the city, and named after one of the children of two key supporters, Kathie Lee and Frank Gifford.
Newfound friends on the Upper East Side -- fifth graders at the Chapin School -- raised $433 for a stroller and rack.


Carolyn Wechsler, Laurence Belfer
Carolyn Esther Wechsler, a daughter of Susan Simon of Boca Raton, Fla., and Joel Wechsler of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Laurence David Belfer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Belfer of New York.
Rabbi Richard Thaler is to perform the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 27, teaches the second grade at the Dalton School in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a managing director at the Edward S. Gordon Company, a commercial real estate firm in New York.


Florida to Cut Guards At Highway Rest Stops
Florida is cutting back on the 24-hour security at highway rest stops it instituted two years ago after the murder of a British tourist at a rest area about 30 miles from Tallahassee.
As a result of government budget cuts, the armed security guards will patrol the welcome centers only from dusk to dawn beginning July 1.
Since the private security companies began staffing the service plazas, they report that guards spend most of their time assisting motorists, shooing off panhandlers or corralling drunken drivers.


Johanna Semple, Andrew Herwitz
Johanna Palmer Semple, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lorenzo Semple Jr. of Aspen, Colo., was married last evening to Andrew Barron Herwitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Herwitz of Swampscott, Mass.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at a house rented for the occasion in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Herwitz, 32, graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
She is a candidate for a doctorate in clinical psychology at New York University.
She has been a chef at Il Cebreo in Florence and Mustards Grill in the Napa Valley.
Her father, the screenwriter, wrote "Three Days of the Condor" and "Pretty Poison." Her mother, Joyce Semple, is the president of the Wheeler Opera House Associates, the booking unit of the performing arts center in Aspen.


What Fans These Mortals Be
The Beatles had a fan club.
Bon Jovi has a Japanese fan club.
Even the New York Mets have a fan club.
But Brian (Kato) Kaelin?
Houseboy, actor, nervous courtroom testifier?
It's understandable that the man who let Mr.
Kaelin live in his guest house -- O. J. Simpson -- had a fan club during his football days.
And he has his fans still.


An Expanded Season Defies Odds
SUCH is the state of the arts that survival depends on the power of thinking small, common wisdom has it.
Shrinking funds dictate the scaling down of productions -- in size and number.
It's only logical.
But real wisdom is not common, and logic has nothing to do with running a theater, certainly not a nonprofit professional theater in Westchester County, which has a daunting mortality rate for such uncommon pursuits.


Alexandra Plaut, Shaun E. Hekking
Alexandra Plaut, the daughter of Gloria A. Plaut and Richard L. Plaut, both of New York, was married yesterday to Shaun Egan Hekking, a son of Mary Gail Klevana of Bratislava, Slovakia, and Laurie Hekking of Hamburg, Germany.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hekking, 26, teaches the first grade at the Collegiate School in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father retired as a writer.
Her mother is a real estate agent with the Atanas Realty Corporation in Williston Park, L.I.


On Sunday; Graying Ethos In the Field Of Greens
THE fastest way to come to terms with the Park Slope Food Co-op is to walk in, pause, and inhale deeply.
Your midbrain will overload.
Imagine a room steeped for 22 years in the heady pungencies of multigrain bread, citrus-scented cleaner and loose-bagged spices -- whole cloves, ginger, garam masala, green tea, you name it -- all textured into a funky full-bore aroma therapy.
The dialectics come later.
That's the other constant here.
The left-leaning communal philosophy that was the driving force in the early years, though still carried on by graying survivors like Joe Holtz and Robert Weisburd, has mostly evaporated, leaving only the forms: self-absorbed, enthusiastically vehement argument, by now as ingrained in the co-op culture as the smell.


Joan E. Netsky, Allen M. Rush
Joan E. Netsky, a daughter of Rose and Leon Netsky of Elkins Park, Pa., is to be married today to Allen M. Rush, a son of Barbara and Martin Rush of Silver Spring, Md.
Rabbi Randall Mark is to perform the ceremony at the Mountain Lakes Nature Preserve in Princeton, N.J.
The bride, 34, is a systems analyst at The New York Times.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.
Her father is an owner of the Quaker Jobbing Company, an upholstery supplier in Philadelphia.
Her mother, now retired, taught business and computer courses at Olney High School in Philadelphia.


A QUESTION FOR: Patrick Stewart
Q: What does aging mean to an actor?
A: Aging is one of the bonuses that actors have.
Not only do you literally grow into certain roles, in terms of being the right age for them, but the longer you're in the world the more likely you are to grasp what's going on in a role like King Lear.
It seems to me there are two perfect times to do Shakespeare.
One is when you're very young and utterly inexperienced and massively arrogant and you know nothing.
That's one great time to do Shakespeare.
Because you don't have any questions at all.
And the other time is when you've been around for a while and matured into some of the roles.
That's one of the reasons why for me "The Tempest" is so interesting right now.
Aging is a blessing.
One's just got to hope to live long enough to do all these things.


Nora Staebler, Steven Schultz
Eleanor Dana Staebler, the daughter of Sally Staebler of Bingham Farms, Mich., and Michael Staebler of Ann Arbor, Mich., was married last evening to Steven Hall Schultz, the son of Deborah and David Schultz of New Vernon, N.J.
Rabbi John Schechter performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Schultz, 25, is known as Nora.
She is to become an associate marketing manager at the Campbell Soup Company in Camden, N.J., in August.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Michigan this spring.


Coming This Summer: Fund Documents for Real People
MUTUAL fund investors, circle Aug. 1 on your calendars, and label it Prospectus Freedom Day.
That's the date set by Federal and state securities regulators for the introduction of a simplified fund prospectus, now a lengthy and often impenetrable legal document that outlines a fund's investment techniques and risks for potential investors.


The Nation; One Perverse Distinction New York Can't Claim
IT is an article of faith among New Yorkers that if it happens in the Big Apple it is either top of the heap or bottom of the barrel.
The famous New Yorker cover by Saul Steinberg showing the Manhattan skyline dwarfing the rest of the United States is a wry expression of New York City's outsized ego.
That self-centeredness is also evident in the best-worst way New Yorkers rank their museums and their murder rate, their home teams and homeless, their roguish politicians and percolating night life.


Randi E. Moore, Edward Campbell
Randi Elise Moore, the daughter of Mrs.
Clayton Edward Moore of Westhampton Beach, L.I., and the late Mr.
Moore, was married yesterday to Edward Cuyler Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Campbell Jr. of Quogue, L.I.
The Rev.
Michael Donahue performed the ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Quiogue.
Mrs.
Campbell, 34, is a marketing services manager at Reckitt &amp; Colman Inc., a consumer-products company in Montvale, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father was the Mayor of Westhampton Beach from 1972 to 1978.


The Great Escape
TECHNOLOGY MAY BE THE engine of progress but its milestones are historic disasters -- Titanic, Hindenburg, Chernobyl, Challenger.
Even its successes are built on unemployment and bankruptcy, the social costs that must be paid if the loom is to displace the hand shuttle and the sail yield to steam.
These destructive forces were brought to mind by a voice-mail message I received last month from a stranger, asking me to call about a "personal matter." The caller turned out to be a historian, Michael A. Findlay, who is studying the artifacts now being brought up from the wreck site of the Titanic two and half miles deep in the Atlantic Ocean.
His news was that my grandfather's property tag had been recovered.


Waiting for 'Eleutheria'
ELEUTHERIA  A Play in Three Acts.
By Samuel Beckett.
Translated by Michael Brodsky. 196 pp.
New York: Foxrock/Four Walls Eight Windows. $20.


A Quintessential Laid-Back Fish House
THE Coast Grill has the feel of a quintessential fish house, rustic, laid-back, on the water.
The Southampton address is deceptive.
The restaurant has more in common with its North Sea neighborhood than with the grandeur of Gin Lane.
The 10-year-old veteran predates the influx of the sophisticated Tuscan and sleek American spots with their drop-dead good looks.
The Coast Grill is a slightly rakish roadhouse set beside the Peconic Marina.
A knotty-pine bar is at center stage.
Two brightly painted porches are the dining rooms.
Diners sit at cloth-topped tables and look out at sunsets reflected in Wooley Pond.
Overhead tiny Christmas lights are strung from the rafters.
This is also the perch for a stuffed swordfish, bluefish, shark and scores of whimsical wooden fish.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Ryan Topham, outfielder.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed John Jaha, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Activated Len Dykstra, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Assigned Ryan Karp, pitcher, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Signed Gabe Alvarez, shortstop.


CHRISTIAN McBRIDE: GODSON OF SOUL
"THE LAST TIME I WAS IN CARRBORO," Christian McBride says in his rumbling-deep voice, "the one thing I remember is how enthusiastic and loud the crowd was. I thought it was Prince up here on the bandstand. Let it be that way tonight."
The last time he played here, though, at the Arts Center in Carrboro, near Chapel Hill, N.C., was as a sideman.
Now McBride is leading his own band in a tuneup for his big-time debut at the Village Vanguard in New York.
The 23-year-old McBride, perhaps the best and the most hyped young player in jazz at this moment, plays the bass, an instrument that hasn't fronted a major jazz group since Charles Mingus took ill in the late 1970's.
But no matter.
Thanks to his prodigious talents -- and the marketing muscle of Verve Records -- McBride's first record, "Gettin' to It," has become a hit, and the audience, mostly academic and high-tech types, rewards him as enthusiastically as instructed.


AUDIT BY CONGRESS FAULTS A PROGRAM FOR FREE VACCINES
Congressional auditors say that a Federal program that distributes free vaccine to millions of children was misconceived and mismanaged, and in view of those findings Republican members of Congress say they intend to dismantle it.
Even Congressional Democrats say the program known as Vaccines for Children -- which had its share of skeptics when it was unveiled in 1993 -- must be radically changed or it will not survive.


Ethics -- Style and Substance
There were heartening signs last week that the Republican leaders are beginning to understand the public's yearning for a cleaner Congress.
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, had already shut down his tax-exempt Better America Foundation after reports about its spending to help his Presidential bid.
Now he has decided to return leftover contributions and to disclose all the foundation's donors.
Speaker Newt Gingrich, meanwhile, said he will pay his own way on his summer book tour to avoid exceeding House limits on the amount of free travel a member may accept.
We applaud these gestures and their healthy symbolism.
What is needed now is substance to go with the symbolism.
That means prompt action to clean up campaign financing and to outlaw the free meals, vacations and other gifts that lawmakers get from lobbyists.
These matters now hang precariously in both chambers.


UNNECESSARY OBJECTS: Tattooed Doll
What to give to a child who's too young for a Harley, not ready for a real tattoo and not yet allowed to cross the street, let alone make a midnight visit to the East Village for some body piercing?
Tattoodles, naturally, the tattooed doll from All Star Toys now in stores near everyone (with extra tattoos available).
So far no one is selling dolls to be pierced or branded, at least not in toy stores.


On 11th Ave., Traffic Bad, Detour Worse?
When Terry Muggeo moved to her split-level, one-family home on 141st Street near 11th Avenue some 20 years ago, the neighborhood was quiet and the only traffic on the streets was headed to and from residents' driveways.
But now, she says, 11th Avenue and the surrounding streets have become a traffic hazard.
At night, the rumbling of trucks keeps her awake.
Ms.
Muggeo said careless drivers often speed and cause accidents.
And although 11th Avenue is supposed to be a one-way, eastbound street, she said cars frequently travel in both directions due to the lack of traffic lights and stop signs.


Ms. Rasenberger And Mr. Linden
Mary Eleanor Rasenberger, a lawyer, was married yesterday to Eugene Linden, a journalist and author.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Ms.
Rasenberger, 33, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Harvard University and a master's degree in philosophy from Boston College.
She is a daughter of Nancy and Raymond Rasenberger of Bethesda, Md.
The bride's father is a partner in Zuckert, Scoutt &amp; Rasenberger, a Washington law firm.


She Runs, She Jumps, She Renounces Love
Pocahontas  With the voices of Irene Bedard, Mel Gibson, David Ogden Stiers, Russell Means and Linda Hunt Directed by Mike Gabriel G 82 minutes


Christine Kenna, Sydney Moore
Christine Joan Kenna, a daughter of Joan and Frank Kenna of Woodbridge, Conn., is to be married today to Sydney Nettleton Moore, a son of Judith and David Moore of Woodbridge.
The Rev.
Allison Buck Cook, an Anglican priest who is the aunt of the bridegroom, is to perform the ceremony at the Madison (Conn.) Beach Club.
The bride, 26, who will be known as Mrs.
Kenna-Moore, received an M.B.A. degree last month from the University of Maine.
She graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father is the chairman of the Marlin Firearms Company and the Marlin Company, an employee-communications service, both in North Haven, Conn.


Defending Abrasiveness, Giuliani Cites Successes
For 18 months, New Yorkers have watched with fascination and sometimes apprehension as Rudolph W. Giuliani became the most combative and occasionally abrasive Mayor in memory.
Last week, under fire after the most intense hostilities of his tenure cost the city its Schools Chancellor, Mr.
Giuliani sat down to defend that confrontational style, insisting it conceals a carefully designed political strategy.
A host of city leaders have spent days maligning what Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone called the Mayor's "sledgehammer approach" to leadership, saying it produces little but noisy strife.
But Mr.
Giuliani forcefully disagreed.
On Friday, during a 45-minute interview in his office, the Mayor maintained that his "out front" methods had produced significant accomplishments.
As a Republican in a town dominated by Democrats, he said, he sometimes needs to generate controversy to shake up entrenched interests.


Builders Practicing Communication Arts
WHEN the subject is residential real estate, paradox abounds.
Although the sale of single-family houses is running about 12 percent below the corresponding period last year, the demand for new luxury homes is high.
Douglas Rozell, a builder in Yorktown Heights and president of Douglas Development, says he has never been busier.
Mr.
Rozell now has four custom-designed houses nearing completion and a development for 10 luxury town houses in the pipeline.


EVIL'S BACK
We can certainly identify and punish the lone "evil" individual (a Susan Smith, Jeffrey Dahmer or Lyle Menendez).
But it's going to be much harder to deal with enemies who mass in patriotic groups and proclaim that they are the ones "fighting evil" and "standing up for a good cause." It is more important now than ever to define evil in universal and unsophisticated ways: Is it violent?
Does it break the law of the land?
LOIS WELBER Boston


Varied Produce Offers Tempting Alternatives to Coleslaw
WHAT is slaw?
Culinary historians trace the term to the Dutch "sla" for salad.
Coleslaw is so named because the Dutch word for cabbage is "kool."
Indeed, coleslaw is the mother of all slaws.
But the produce stands are filled with other inspirations for one of the most versatile and inviting salads.


Streetscapes/Church of the Holy Trinity; Soon They'll Hear the Tintinnabulation of the Bells
IT'S the dogs allowed at the 8:15 service that perfectly complete the illusion of church on a Sunday morning in a quiet, shady village.
In fact, it's too quiet at the exquisite 1899 Church of the Holy Trinity at 316 East 88th Street, for the deterioration of the French Renaissance-style tower has kept the bells silent for two years.
This September, after a $275,000 repair, they will ring again, but the 275-member congregation still needs to raise an additional $5 million for other repairs over the next decade.


EVIL'S BACK
Your article referred to "the Salem witches 'confessing' they'd embraced Satan before they were put to death." Those convicted during the Salem witch trials of 1692 refused to confess to the charge of practicing witchcraft and went to their deaths with their integrity intact.
It is true that there were about 55 confessions during this tragic time in Colonial history, but, ironically, those people were held in prison in the belief that confession was the first step to redemption.
They may also have been considered a valuable source of information about the supposed conspiracy of Satan against this community.
None who confessed were hanged.
ALISON D'AMARIO Director of Education The Salem Witch Museum Salem, Mass.


E. A. Diamond, Robert J. Kheel
Elizabeth Ann Diamond, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Diamond of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Jeffrey Kheel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Kheel of New York.
Judge Leonard B. Sand of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Kheel is the owner of Diamond Consulting, a financial planning concern in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Boston University.
Her father is a marketing representative for Oroton/Anne Klein and Michael Stevens Ltd., both handbag manufacturers, in New York.
Her father was an owner and her mother, Janet Diamond, was an administrator of the Markay Handbag Company, a former manufacturer in New York.


You Can Go Home Again, and It's Two Months Early
The ramps connecting the Cross Island Parkway to the Throgs Neck Bridge, under renovation since January, were reopened on Wednesday afternoon, more than two months ahead of schedule.
The $7 million project was undertaken to repair potholes that had allowed salt to penetrate over the years, cracking the ramp's steel reinforcements and sending pieces of concrete falling to the road.
Completion had been scheduled by Labor Day.


'Militia' Man Tells of Plot To Attack Military Base
The way Eric Maloney tells the story, the plan to blow up Camp Grayling, a National Guard base in northern Michigan, was hatched in late January when 70 members of the Michigan Militia Corps, a statewide right-wing paramilitary group, met at a truck-stop restaurant northwest of Detroit.
Mr.
Maloney, then a member of a local unit called the Oakland County Sixth Brigade, says the focus of conversation that night was photographs taken by a militia member of Russian tanks being transported to the camp on rail cars.
Some at the meeting considered the photos proof of a conspiracy theory popular among far-right groups: that foreign troops under United Nations command are massing to take over the country.
They wanted to act.


Dear Mickey: Messages and Prayers for an American Hero
The letters and get-well cards and telegrams flood into the hospital every day, filling up boxes that begin to cover a wall, disconcerting some of the staff with the sheer volume -- "tens of thousands," by one estimate -- and, in a way, painting a portrait of America, its hunger for a hero, its love of a self-described flawed sports star, its embrace of and identification with an American dream and the face of the American nightmare.
Most send their correspondence to "Mickey Mantle/Baylor University Medical Center/Dallas, Texas." One, though, wrote "Mikey," another "Mickey Mantle/Dallas, Tex.," another "Mickey Mantle -- patient," as if to try to avoid possible confusion, and yet another mailed his postcard to, simply, "#7/Baylor Hospital/Dallas," as though the post-office sorters, and the whole world, for that matter, must know without a doubt who is identified that way.
The digit being the former Yankee center fielder's uniform number.
Hundreds of letters were also sent to Mickey Mantle's Restaurant on Central Park South in Manhattan.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Natalie Cole.
Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M., next Sunday at 8 P.M. and next Monday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
COMING UP Chicago, July 27-30.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Shaboom," a musical revue about the 50's, with poodle skirts, hot rods, malt shops and rock-and-roll, with Lee Allen and Dane Anthony.
Saturday through Thursday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Through today.
Tickets: $12.50 plus a one-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue.  (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Liza Minnelli, with Billy Stritch.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Bill Cosby.
Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "The Will Rogers Follies," a musical.
Tuesday and Friday at 7 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Through July 4.
COMING UP "Guys and Dolls," July 7 to Sept. 3.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "Hot Cha Cha." Eighteen dancers perform Latin dances, including cha-cha, mambo, merengue and tango.
Monday at 7:30 P.M. and Wednesday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
"The Coconut Ballroom," with Pia Zadora and a 29-piece orchestra conducted by Merv Griffin, features the music of the Big Band era with salutes to Tommy Dorsey and Glenn Miller.
Thursday and Friday at 7:30 P.M., Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM Clint Holmes's "Sophisticated Rhythms." Starts Saturday.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with music, humor, dancing and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Ralph Pope, comedian; the dancing Williams Brothers; Dolores Park, singer, and Peter Gossamer, illusionist.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue.  (800) 257-6227.
COMING UP Dick Fox's "Doo Wop," July 26-31.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine  Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Starts Saturday.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
COMING UP The Beach Boys, July 6-9.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Lou Rawls.
Friday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Saturday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Next Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Next Monday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP Donna Summer, July 5-9.
The Temptations, July 11-16.
George Carlin, July 18-23.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
GRAND BALLROOM "A Tribute to the Platters," with Sonny Turner, singer.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50; $15 on Saturday.
John Michael Montgomery, Friday at 9 P.M.
COMING UP Yanni, July 2-3.


Correction
Because of a production error, a review on June 11 about "DiMaggio: The Last American Knight," by Joseph Dur so, misidentified the speaker in a quotation from the book.
The player who explained Joe DiMaggio's self-perception by saying "He knew he was Joe DiMaggio" was Lefty Gomez, not Lefty Grove.


Help for Men Who Wreak Violence
A vital aspect of domestic abuse  [ "Police Receiving More Calls Reporting Domestic Violence," April 23 ]  is providing help for the men who are abusive.
While the violent man needs to learn alternatives to abuse, he is often unable to ask for help.
At the Family Service Association, we provide group-education workshops to help men learn to eliminate their abusive-violent behavior, understand their feelings and improve their ability to relate to women.
Men who use violence can learn new techniques of interacting with the women in their lives.


Canterbury Cathedral Charging Admission
Beginning this month, tourists visiting Britain's Canterbury Cathedral in Kent will be charged a $3.20 entry fee; $1.60 for children, based on $1.60 to the pound.
Canterbury is joining the ranks of other British cathedrals, including St.
Paul's and Ely Cathedral, that charge admission to tourists in order to offset high operating costs.
Cathedral officials say Canterbury costs over $11,000 a day to run, and the voluntary system that has been operating only netted about 20 cents per visitor.


Megastore List On Boulevard May Grow to 6
Local community boards approved applications last week for megastores along Northern Boulevard, which if approved by the city would bring to six the number of large retail outlets along the boulevard.
Over vehement objections of some board members, Boards 1 and 2 approved a Kmart project.
Board 2 will vote on a Caldor next month.


In Japan, Some Shun Lifetime Jobs to Chase Dreams
SHIGENORI SASAKI had just about everything.
A job at a bank, good pay, prestige and opportunities for promotion.
But he did something that once would have shocked many Japanese.
He quit and took a job elsewhere.


Interest in Judaism In Japan Is Recalled
The article about Ted Tsuruooka, the Japanese-American who now serves as president of a Jewish congregation  [ Long Island Journal, June 4 ] , was uplifting.
Mr.
Tsuruoka's religious decision to join the Jewish people is not unique.
There has been considerable interest in Judaism in Japan for several decades.
The interest was so great in the 1950's that one prominent American rabbi actually suggested that Jews consider sending representatives to Japan to seek converts.


Idina M. Jones, Frank R. Holden
Idina Maria Jones, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Jones of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Frank Robertson Holden, a son of Virginia Holden and Max W. Holden, both of Glen Arbor, Mich.
The Rev.
Joseph Cervero officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John in Darien.
Mrs.
Holden, 27, is a trust operations analyst with Wells Fargo Nikko Investment Advisers, pension plan managers in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.


THE NEXT MILES DAVIS MAY BE ON THIS PAGE
FINDING A UNIVERSITY WITH A JAZZ PROGRAM MAY BE EASIER THAN EVER THESE days, but the surest route to jazz proficiency -- the old-fashioned apprenticeship -- is another matter.
The big band, the archetypal jazz university, peaked long ago, and, with the deaths of Arthur Taylor and Art Blakey, there are ever fewer older band leaders willing to discover and mold young talent.
Betty Carter understands this.
She studied at the Detroit Conservatory of Music as a teen-ager, but it was by singing with band leaders like Lionel Hampton that she really learned music -- how to write an arrangement, how to keep the piano player from ruining a perfectly nice tune by tacking flowery arpeggios onto the end.


Paterson Hopes Hotel's Rebirth Will Lead the City's Way
The checkered history of the Alexander Hamilton Hotel sounds a lot like the history of Paterson.
In the 1950's, the hotel was perhaps the best in North Jersey -- an institution associated with elegance and power, a place where high-society wedding receptions were held in the Main Ballroom and political deals were cut in the Hamilton Bar.


From Switzerland, a Rediscovery of a True Master of Angst
IN a traveling retrospective of the early 1970's, Ferdinand Hodler (1853-1918) was presented as a painter relatively unknown in the United States.
Fifteen years later, in another touring show, his landscapes were billed as little known.
Now, with "Views and Visions" making its last stop at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Hodler has become a "rediscovery."
Another decade and the Swiss Symbolist -- who made an international reputation without leaving home (unlike Henry Fuseli, Karl Bodmer, Giacometti and Klee) -- should be in the top register along with van Gogh, Gauguin, Klimt, Munch and other contemporaries.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Marching Ladies
THE ladies of East Hampton are marching next weekend.
To celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Ladies Village Improvement Society, its members decided to hold a parade.
It could be the highlight of the summer season.


Let's Keep the Arts Endowment but Give It a Drastic Overhaul
To the Editor:
In "Arts for Our Sake" (Op-Ed, June 21), Hillary Rodham Clinton offers a heartfelt sermon about the importance of arts in American life, and their need for public and private support.
I agree.
But I do not believe that continuing the National Endowment for the Arts as currently organized fills that need efficiently.


Sex Business: Tallies Are In On Zoning
The city's community boards have spoken on Mayor Giuliani's plan to curb sex-related businesses, and in Manhattan -- which has most of the establishments -- most boards oppose the plan in its present form.
In other boroughs, more boards favored it, city officials said.
Their tally is not finished, however, and about 30 percent took no stand.


Sabrina A. Zook, Marc Brotman
Sabrina Anne Zook, an associate at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, is to be married today to Marc Brotman, an associate at Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, the New York law firm.
Rabbi Martin Rozenberg is to officiate at Temple Shaaray Teflia in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 28, graduated from Wesleyan University.
She received an M.B.A. degree and Mr.
Brotman received a law degree, both from Columbia University.


Symphony for the Devils


Lemieux Helps Start New Tradition
The last time a team experienced the feelings the Devils discovered tonight, Claude Lemieux was far, far away.
"I was somewhere in Jamaica," he remembered, "and when I watched the Rangers skate around with the cup, I was crying like a baby. It took a year, a lockout, you name it."


Libby Verrill, Laughlin Macdonald 2d
Elizabeth Handy Verrill, a daughter of Charles O. Verrill Jr. of Washington and the late Mary Ann Verrill, was married yesterday to Laughlin Cedric Francis Macdonald 2d, the son of Paula and Thomas G. Macdonald of North Andover, Mass.
Msgr.
James McMurtrie performed the ceremony at the Dahlgren Chapel at Georgetown University in Washington.
The bride, 27, is known as Libby.
She and her husband, 29, are teachers at the Langley School in McLean, Va.
She teaches preschool, and he sixth-grade English and drama.
The bride graduated from Kenyon College and received a master's degree in education from Marymount University.
Mr.
Macdonald graduated from the University of Vermont.


Jason Duchin and Audra Avizienis
JASON DUCHIN's resume reads like a run-on sentence.
At 29, he is an actor, a novelist, a film producer, a video director, a screenwriter, a carpenter, a bike messenger and a founder of a nonprofit company, the Dreamyard Drama Project.
Dreamyard is a group of artists who teach everything from poetry to movie making in New York public schools with fledgling art programs.
Mr.
Duchin recently spent several months rewriting "Romeo and Juliet" with a class of eighth graders at the Wadleigh Secondary School in Harlem.


Music in the Open Air
Caramoor Center, Katonah, N.Y., June 15


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Adrienne Bagno, C. C. Robinson 2d
Adrienne Amelia Bagno, the daughter of Robert J. Bagno of Grosse Pointe, Mich., and Sherry Dunsmore Bagno of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., was married yesterday to Christopher Champlin Robinson 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Davis Rowland Robinson.
The Rev.
William Billow performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Robinson, 25, is a project coordinator for Orascom of America, an export management firm in Arlington, Va.
Mr.
Robinson, 27, is a financial adviser with Prudential Securities in Washington.
The couple graduated from Denison University.


Revaluation Appears Imminent
WHEN Paul J. Feiner, Greenburgh's Town Supervisor, opened a letter from the state two years ago that called for a revaluation of all property in Westchester's largest municipality, his first reaction was anger.
"The issue was not whether to reassess, but when and how," Mr.
Feiner said.
"There was no question that it had to be done.
"But we were also talking costs of well over $1 million, and in my mind, it was just another example of the state butting into our lives."


Another View of Belmar: It's Clean and It's Safe
To the Editor:
As secretary of the Belmar Tourism Commission, I resent the description of Belmar in your front-page article "Greetings From the Shore" (May 28).
The reference to Belmar as "the beast of the northern shore" was particularly objectionable.
Belmar does not have bars on Main Street; we have fine restaurants on Main Street that have bars in them.


Out West? Drive a Pickup
Anyone heading for the South or West this summer will find it much easier to pass as a local, thanks to Hertz, which is offering rentals of Ford Ranger pickup trucks in 16 cities.


Pulling Out of the Presidio


Counterattacks, Early and Deadly, on Slugs
FIRST-TIME gardeners often wonder what type of critter is making large holes in the leaves of plants.
There never seems to be evidence of an insect, just those holes.
Experienced gardeners know.
Slugs.
When the culprits are sought, they are rarely found as these mollusks hide during the day and feed at night.
If they finally are spotted, it is usually underneath, on the backs of leaves or at the bases of the plants the slugs are planning to climb for a meal.


E. M. Boelhouwer, A. J. Kressley
Dr.
Elisabeth Marijke Boelhouwer, a daughter of Ingrid Boelhouwer of Wethersfield, Conn., and the late Dr.
Cornelius Boelhouwer, was married yesterday to Dr.
Andrew James Kressley, the son of Nancy and Dr.
Vernon Kressley of Allentown, Pa.
The Rev.
Theodore C. Schlack performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Chatham, Mass.
The bride, 29, is a fellow in child psychiatry at the Institute of Living, in Hartford.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received her medical degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father was the director of psychiatry at Hartford Hospital.
Her mother is a landscape designer and horticulturist in Wethersfield.


Youth Troupe Learns on Stage
THE Intimate Realities program sponsored by the after-school group Youth Theater Interactions here offers young people some enviable opportunities.
If they pass the audition and join the acting program, they will immediately be caught up in one of the county's longest-running hit productions, "Risky Business."
A partly improvisational primer on AIDS written in 1989 by and for teen-agers, the play has been staged in Detroit and Los Angeles and at schools and community centers in Westchester.
On Tuesday, "Risky Business" -- which has no connection to the movie -- will be the featured presentation at a statewide health conference at St.
Lawrence University in Canton, near Plattsburgh, N.Y.
The conference, called the Lakeside Health Promotion Institute, is a program of the State Education Department.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  THE U.N.'s CHANGING IMAGE  At 50 the United Nations, formed by World War II victors pledged to prevent aggression and assist those in need, no longer means what it did for many Americans.  1  NEW ROUND IN TRADE TALKS  The top trade negotiators for the U.S. and Japan agreed to join talks in Geneva in a last-ditch effort to forestall auto sanctions.  1


News About New Jersey? See It on Cable Network
To the Editor:
In your article about television news coverage of the state ("No News, Most of the Time," June 4) you overlooked the Cable Television Network of New Jersey, a programming service owned and operated by the New Jersey cable industry.


Checketts Takes A Trip to Utah
While two candidates for the Knicks' coaching job are out of the country, the man responsible for finding Pat Riley's successor is out West, and may be meeting with another contender for the job.
Dave Checketts, the president of Madison Square Garden, is in Utah this weekend, where his friend Rick Majerus is the head coach at Checketts's alma mater, the University of Utah.


From Primavera To Pig Heaven
ERMINIA * (212) 517-3410; 250 East 83d Street; $$$$; American Express


June 18-24: Genetic Research; Scientists Pinpoint a Culprit In Hereditary Cancers
Until now, scientists had been able to identify only those cancer genes that affected 1 in 1,000 Americans -- those at special risk for hereditary breast or colon cancer.
But scientists kept searching for genes more widely distributed in the population, and now their search has paid off.
In a report issued last week, an international team of researchers said that more than a decade of intense effort had allowed them to isolate a cancer gene that is carried by about 1 percent of Americans, or about 2.6 million people.
The gene is called A.T.M. (for ataxia telangiectasia mutated).
Those who have it are thought to run a three- to eightfold increased risk of developing a variety of cancers, including those of the breast, lung, skin, stomach, and pancreas.


Hannah Weeks, Fred W. Fogg 3d
Hannah Amelia Weeks, a daughter of Annabel Caner of Laurel Hollow, L.I., and Howard Coxe Weeks of Alstead, N.H., was married yesterday to Fred William Fogg 3d, the son of Marjorie A. Fogg and Mr.
Fogg Jr., both of Newton, Mass.
The Very Rev.
William Hale performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated cum laude from Colgate University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Duke University.
She is a manager of the managed health care marketing division of Bristol-Myers Squibb, the pharmaceuticals company, in Princeton, N.J.
Her father is the owner of Darby Brook Farm, an organic farm and bed-and-breakfast in Alstead.
Her mother is a sales representative in Laurel Hollow for Primerica Financial Services, an insurance company.


Karen S. Levitt, Robert Springer
Karen Sue Levitt, a daughter of Marlene Levitt of Montville, N.J., and Arnold Levitt of Las Vegas, Nev., is to be married today in Livingston, N.J., to Robert Mark Springer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Springer of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Dr.
Asher Krief is to officiate at the Livingston Country Club.
Ms.
Levitt, 28, received a teaching certificate earlier this month from the University of California at Northridge.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father is a vice president of the Wico Gaming Supply Corporation in Las Vegas.
Her mother is the president of Tri-Tech Associates, an executive and technical recruiting company in Parsippany, N.J.


Evyan L. Metzner,Nicholas D. Street
Evyan Louise Metzner, a daughter of Jeffrey Metzner of New York and Merrile Green of Oakland, Calif., was married yesterday to Nicholas Davenport Street, the son of Nicholas Street and Susan Jordan, both of Gastonia, N.C.
The Rev.
Joan Kahn-Schneider, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the bride's father's house in Chatham, N.Y.
Mrs.
Metzner Street, 30, graduated from the College of Wooster.
She is a senior fashion editor at Mademoiselle magazine in New York.
Her father owns Metzner Productions, which produces television commercials in New York.
Her mother is a buyer for Self Care, a fitness and health products catalogue in Emeryville, Calif.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Sheila Metzner and of Norman Green.


CLICHE WATCH: The Trials of the Century
The O. J. Simpson trial has gone on for five months.
A few other trials have been celebrated for their lengths.
They include:
"The longest and most expensive trial in Irish history," 107 days, of three members of an I.R.A. offshoot.
The Associated Press, Dec. 13, 1978.


Foreign Affairs; The Twilight Zone
The snail-paced Israeli-Syrian peace negotiations are about to move another millimeter.
In a rare and revealing encounter, the Chiefs of Staff of the Israeli and Syrian armies will meet in Washington on Tuesday to discuss security arrangements for an Israeli-Syrian peace accord on the Golan Heights.
But don't try to catch a glimpse of their talks.
The Syrian and Israeli generals will be holding their widely advertised meeting at a secret location somewhere around Washington, but their spokesmen will brief reporters on the substance afterward.
This weird half-secret, half-public twilight diplomacy tells you everything that is right and everything that is wrong with the Syrian-Israeli peace track.


Touring the Cotswolds: Lessons in Life
THE market town of Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, was a popular 19th-century English spa.
Its mineral springs were supposed to be good for you.
This was before the invention of bran.
In the 20th century Cheltenham grew into an active municipality.
It also became home to a somewhat underfurnished college that rents itself out during the summer to groups indifferent to comfort.
One July in the 1980's a British early music society held a four-day viola da gamba workshop there.


No Modernist
To the Editor:
In his article "Restoring Windsor Castle: Still Gothic to Its Garters"  [ May 28 ] , Peter Watson says I am a "modernist architect" who produced "radical plans for striking new structures at Windsor Castle using glass and other modern materials. These would have had a similar visual effect on the building that I. M. Pei's glass pyramid has had on the Louvre in Paris."


Joe Franklin's Office: Skip the 'White Glove' Test
The Joe Franklin Show ran for 21,425 episodes before WOR/Channel 9 its host signed off last Aug. 6.
Today, Joe Franklin holds court from his office, at least five rooms of uncatalogued clutter on the sixth floor of 300 West 43d Street.
Claustrophobics need not visit.
In one breath, Mr.
Franklin claims he's trying to bring order to 43 years of "irreplaceable" show-biz history; in the next, he talks of the "indescribable thrill of finding something irretrievably lost." These are a few finds one recent morning:
Al Jolson contract (1937) with Lever Brothers, sponsor of Rinso Lifebuoy Radio Show. ("When Jolson was the greatest star in the world, he made $2,000 a week, $4,000 tops. Now Sly Stallone makes $20 million.")
Letter from Rudy Vallee (1968). ("Rudy's house was the biggest one on Mulholland Drive. I always stayed there. The doorbell played 'My Time Is Your Time.')
Hundreds of Dixie cup ice cream tops, circa 1935-38, with pictures of (to name but a few) Dagmar, Bing Crosby, Jane Withers and Tyrone Power.
Copper bas-relief trinkets of Egyptian women, scarabs and serpent's heads from Cecil B. De Mille. ("I wish I'd asked him for more.")
Red glass beads from the actress Veronica Lake. ("One of my closest friends but never popular with the press. She made $10,000 a week in her prime and died penniless.")
Sheet of Fred Allen's stationery with Al Hirschfeld's caricature of the comedian. ("Even when he was a great radio star, Allen never forgot the people who worked with him in the early days.")
"Uncle Don's Nursey Songs," 33 1/3 r.p.m. album of songs by Don Carney, host of a popular children's radio show in the 30's. ("When I was 9, he was my idol of idols. He broadcast every night from the top floor of the New Amsterdam Theater in Times Square.")
Letter from Ronald Reagan (1993). ("In 1940, I'd wait outside Loew's State Theater every Thursday after the vaudeville show. All the other stars would bolt past, but Ronald Reagan stood in the rain and signed autographs. I knew then he'd be great.") JOAN NASSIVERA


When Elevator Etiquette Takes a Dive
IN the modern sanctum that we call the elevator, decorum is the rule.
Passengers are expected to face forward, maintain a proper distance from one another, stare blankly up at the lighted numbers and pretty much keep their traps shut.
But many Americans observe the rule of silence by breaking it.
Though every tall building invites its own variety of elevator gaffes, surely the worst kind take place in hospitals.
There, on occasion, one may overhear doctors and nurses insulting their patients' bodies, giving away their patients' medical secrets, talking blithely about life and death matters and suggesting, in short, just how little they really care.
The occasions for pain and humiliation are rife.


Visions of the Future, Relics of the Past
RON HOWARD'S NEW film, "Apollo 13," may represent a return to the earliest heroic view of NASA, but watching it and a number of old astronaut movies is a bitter experience for enthusiasts of manned space exploration, an endeavor that now belongs firmly to the past.
Most of the astronaut films from the 60's through the 80's, like "Capricorn One," "Marooned," "Countdown" and, of course, "The Right Stuff," now seem like historical costume dramas.
Playing the chief of manned space in "Marooned" (1969), Gregory Peck makes his big speech: "The trip to the Moon was just a walk around the block. We're going to the stars, to other worlds . . . " But of course we're not.
Less than 30 years ago we leaned into the cosmos and then quickly pulled our heads back through the window.
The budget of an already unadventurous National Aeronautics and Space Administration has been slashed, and the shuttle does no more than spin its orbital wheels.
Space movies remind us of our own downsized dreams.
It's not the pictures that got small; it's us.


Let's Keep the Arts Endowment but Give It a Drastic Overhaul; And Before the N.E.A.?
To the Editor:
From the monolith of flimsy arguments in Hillary Rodham Clinton's "Arts for Our Sake" (Op-Ed, June 21), one misguided notion protrudes: Public support for the arts "is an investment in the values we claim to honor and in the cultural traditions in which democracy has flourished for 218 years."


Correction
An architectural rendering last Sunday with an article about a housing project in Astoria, Queens, carried an erroneous credit.
The artist was Richard C. Baehr.


Journal; The Comeback Kids
The best thing about being a celebrity in America is not that you get to cut lines at movies and restaurants -- it's that you get to cut 12-step programs down to a more convenient 3.
Step 1: Announce that you are indeed guilty of crime or sin and have done time in either court-ordered house arrest or at the Betty Ford Clinic to prove it.


Backyard Pizza
Who among us doesn't respond with unmitigated desire to the aroma of baking bread?
The smell of anchovy and onion pizza cooking over hardwood fires in the south of France, the scent of rosemary bread emanating from an Italian oven, a whiff from the brick pizza ovens in stylish California all summon a sense of well-being.
It's a smell that arises from something as basic as wheat, as resourceful as the human hand and as powerful as fire.
For summer entertaining, grilled pizza offers a casual -- and irresistible -- centerpiece to a buffet of salads or cold grilled vegetables, meat or fish.
In other words, grilled pizza can provide a note of freshness and renewal to a spread that was prepared and chilled hours, even days, before the company arrives.


Elevator Crushes Man
A New Jersey man was crushed to death in a midtown Manhattan parking garage early yesterday when he became entangled in a conveyor belt, the police said.
The man, Bill Benson, 19, of Bogota, N.J., and several friends were at the Myers Parking Garage at 340 West 31st Street, where their car was parked, about 2:30 A.M. when he wandered toward an elevator restricted to employees, Detective Dwight Cunningham, a police spokesman, said.


Here's the Money. Now Go Make Some Art.
OF THE 458 PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN awarded MacArthur Fellowships, the so-called genius grants from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, relatively few have been members of the cultural vanguard.
But when this year's awards were announced 13 days ago, among the sociology professors, the journalists and the public-health scientists were five avant-garde creative artists, well known within their fields but much less so to broader audiences.
The artists are Richard Foreman, Elizabeth LeCompte and Meredith Monk, all New York experimental-theater veterans; the photographer Cindy Sherman, also a New Yorker, and Allison Anders, an independent film maker in Los Angeles.
The awards come at a time when public money for support of the arts through the National Endowment for the Arts is under renewed attack.
Was the foundation making a political statement by awarding fellowships to these artists?
"It is a coincidental benefit that we have the artists that we do on the list when the question of arts funding is being so vigorously debated yet again," says Catherine Stimpson, the program director.
The grants are given, she said, to people who "put something new in the caldron of consciousness."


Collins Whaling, Samuel Baker
Collins Ann Whaling, a daughter of George and Suzanne Whaling of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Samuel Parnell Baker, a son of Philip and Cornelia Baker of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Msgr.
Timothy McDonnell performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy in Port Chester, N.Y.
The couple graduated from Colgate University.
Mrs.
Baker, 28, is an associate marketing manager at Time Inc. in New York.
Her father owns the Petty Printing Company in New York.


Summer Musings
ON THE WAY TO A SUMMER'S sabbatical, I've been rummaging in a file marked "Media Thoughts Rarely Examined in the Media." Here are some of the seeds that I wish I had brought to life over the last nine months.
Policy Rut: "When Social Security was enacted, life expectancy was only 62 -- three years less  [ my emphasis ]  than retirement with full benefits. Today, life expectancy is 76 and still climbing. With the same relationship today, retirement would be set at almost 80!" -- Jessica Mathews in The Washington Post.


'When I Asked For a Raise, He . . .'
Square those shoulders.
March into the boss's office.
Demand the pay you deserve!
The Times seeks notable tales of, gulp, asking for a raise and of, ha-ha, replying to those requests.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, 10036.
Or E-mail, to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Jan Levin, Erwin David Rose
Jan Levin, a daughter of Shirley and Seymour Levin of Owings Mills, Md., is to be married today to Erwin David Rose, a son of Joan and Arthur Rose of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Melissa F. Crespy is to perform the ceremony at the Inn at the Colonnade in Baltimore.
Until recently, the bride and the bridegroom were in Quito, Ecuador, where they taught English with the Experiment in International Living, a cultural exchange program.


Corrections
An article on June 11 about business magazines' rankings of mutual funds misspelled the surname of the editor of Smart Money.
He is Stuart Emmrich.


Fears of Losing 'MacArthur'
When Bushwick High School's graduating seniors marched down the aisle at graduation last year, the pride of parents and students mixed happily with the new-found optimism of teachers and administrators.
Many regarded the speaker, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, as their Chancellor, the man who kept coming back to the overcrowded school with new proposals to alleviate its woes.
Now that Mr.
Cortines has resigned, some of that optimism is giving way to uncertainty as the school prepares for this year's graduation on Tuesday.


Ex-Planning Commissioner Accused of Co-op Board Fraud
To some, James C. Jao is a respected city servant, particularly dedicated to the Chinese immigrant population.
As the first Chinese-American member of the City Planning Commission, he began the first comprehensive zoning and planning study of Chinatown and the first zoning study of downtown Flushing in two decades and was closely allied with prominent politicians.
As an architect and a businessman, he has garnered billions of dollars in contracts to design projects in cities throughout China.
But Mr.
Jao's reputation is far less respected among board members at Walden Terrace, a cooperative apartment complex on 64th Avenue in Rego Park.


Word for Word / Antique Recipes; They Did Things Martha Stewart Can Only Dream About
WASH on Monday.
Iron on Tuesday.
Mend on Wednesday.
Churn on Thursday.
Clean on Friday.
Bake on Saturday.
Rest on Sunday.
Until this century, woman's work ranked a notch above lead mule.
Exhortations from Martha Stewart, the latest guru on the labor-intensive life style, pale next to curing beef in a hogshead of brine or shucking 100 oysters for a pie.
Mary Randolph's 1824 cookbook, "The Virginia House-wife," was the first "truly American cookbook," said Karen Hess, the culinary historian who edited it in 1984.
Her early bible of how-tos revealed the privileged palate to anyone who aspired.
Of course, slaves, not Mrs.
Randolph, maintained her life style, and, Mrs.
Hess said, "the African influence in a very beautiful and extraordinary way transmuted everything."


Priscilla Almodovar, Eric R. Dinallo
Priscilla Almodovar, a daughter of Epifanio and Fredesvinda Almodovar of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday to Eric R. Dinallo, the son of Gregory and Gloria Dinallo of Santa Monica, Calif.
The Rev.
John E. Halborg performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Ms.
Almodovar, 28, is keeping her name.
The bride is an associate at White &amp; Case, the New York law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hofstra University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Columbia University.


Corrections
An article about Longleaf Partners misspelled the surname of the fund's founder and co-manager in some references.
He is O. Mason Hawkins.


To Russia With Caution
IN the old days, traveling in Russia was difficult because of the bleakness and the oppression.
Today, even in the cherished summer, some of the bleakness remains.
But the main risk is the chaos born of new freedoms.
Whether it's the organized gang of taxi touts that greets you as soon as you retrieve your suitcase or the gang of kids and teen-agers that can swarm around you on a busy street, clutching at your clothes and grabbing for your purse or wallet, Russia is no longer the safe Soviet haven for tourism.


Achieving a Milestone
I recently attended a graduation for students receiving their high school diplomas after many years of struggle without one.
Adults who achieve this are just as important as the youngsters who sail or row through.
I believe those who achieve this milestone, no matter what age, should be given the respect they deserve.
CLAIRE GIBBONS Greene, N.Y.


A League of Their Own on Sundays
UNTOUCHED by human hands, the slowly traveling baseball went through the legs of one player, under the glove of another and on into left field.
A third player, without a glove, made a futile attempt to stop the ball with her hat, which she had been holding while chatting with the shortstop.
Everyone -- the players and about three dozen people in the grandstand at Sam Testa Field in the rear of Norwalk High School -- laughed.
And why not?
Until a few weeks ago, most of the girls and boys in this game, from synagogues in Norwalk and Stamford, had never played in an organized baseball game, and this one was not to be taken seriously.


Cortines Says He Quit Because Giuliani Forced a Choice Between Two Leaders
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines ultimately decided to resign because Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was asking New Yorkers to make a choice between two leaders trying to repair the schools.
The city was asked "to choose between one R or another R," Rudy or Ray, Mr.
Cortines said in a wide-ranging hourlong interview on Friday.


In Tune
To the Editor:
The impression created by Edward Rothstein in his article "Made in the U.S.A., Once Gloriously, Now Precariously"  [ May 28 ]  that Steinway &amp; Sons is in decline stands the truth on its head.


Now Playing: Invasion of the Multiplex
THE movie industry is riddled with angst these days.
Costs are skyrocketing, there's a glut of products, movies are under attack for mindless violence, and mergers, management buyouts and executive defections are causing musical chairs at the top.
But apparently, the anxiety has not filtered down to movie-theater owners.
Even in the metropolitan area, home of some of the country's most cramped and expensive real estate, every new project, from the redevelopment of Times Square to shopping malls in Long Island to sprucing-up attempts in downtown Brooklyn, seems to include a movie theater.


An Art Is Born
A SONG IN THE DARK  The Birth of the Musical Film.
By Richard Barrios.
Illustrated. 493 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Cloth, $45.
Paper, $21.95.


For Youths Who Dream Of Fashion, a Peek Inside
The small group of seventh and eighth graders sat at a long mahogany table in the gleaming conference room, with its cream-colored walls and plush carpet, and listened to the fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger tell them about the rewards of hard work.
"I come from a family of nine kids, and I understand what hard work is all about," said Mr.
Hilfiger, as he recounted his beginnings in the fashion industry and his rapid rise to success in the world of designer sportswear.


No Headline
Summer in Los Angeles is made up of the month of June, locally referred to as the June Gloom -- overcast, with the sun often waiting until midday to appear, and then fleetingly -- followed by the perfect weather one can generally count on in July and August.
Tourists, who tend to be surprised by June's cool gray skies, when temperatures average in the mid-70's, will find the city in July warmed up and bursting with cultural activities and outdoor life.
For all the trauma of recent years, from earthquakes to floods to fires to riots, this is still a city of carefree pleasures -- more than one of which can be found along the Pacific shore.
Santa Monica offers beach volleyball games (sometimes fiercely competitive), and the South Bay Bicycle Trail runs 22 miles from Santa Monica to Torrance Beach.


Jail Uprising Leaves Many Sad and Bitter
The incessant clang of metal smashing into walls and windows roused Balaranjini Ratnam from her brief sleep shortly after midnight last Sunday.
Then she heard the shouts of men -- in too many languages to understand -- growing louder as they approached the women's dormitory of the immigration jail in Elizabeth, N.J., where Mrs.
Ratnam had lived since trying to enter this country illegally nine months ago.
With fear in their faces, the women asked the lone security guard what was happening, but all they could hear above the din was an alarm's painful shriek.
The guard grabbed a fire extinguisher and headed to an emergency exit, only to return moments later and clamber atop a chair in a desperate attempt to find a hiding place in the ceiling.
Unable to do so, she traded her uniform for light blue prisoner's garb and slid under the covers of a bed.


Bettina Shapiro, William Cisneros
Bettina Lynn Shapiro, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Shapiro of Manhattan, is to be married today to William G. Cisneros, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Genaro Cisneros of Niagra-on-the-Lake, Ontario.
Justice Leslie Crocker Snyder of State Supreme Court in Manhattan is to officiate at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 31, is the director of marketing and sales planning in New York for C-Net, a cable programming and computer on-line service.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University.
Her father owns City Center Real Estate in New York.


Role of North Shore Community Arts Center
In response to your mention of the North Shore Community Arts Center in "New Center Tries to Recapture Great Neck's Arts Heritage"  [ April 30 ]  on the Great Neck Center for the Visual and Performing Arts, we'd like to set the record straight.
From 1949 to 1983 the North Shore Community Arts Center was a major school of the arts and presenting organization in western Nassau County and eastern Queens.
The faculty and the artists who performed at the center were legendary.
While no longer serving in that capacity, we continue to serve the arts, artists and audience on the North Shore of Long Island as a support and advocacy organization.
We are not a foundation.
We have never presented programs at Great Neck House, splendid as that facility is.


When a Deck or Patio's the Place to Be
HIT the deck seems to be the credo of many Connecticut restaurateurs, as each summer more and more of them feature outdoor dining.
A recent idyll in Norwalk on the perennially popular deck of SILVERMINE TAVERN (284 Silvermine Ave., Norwalk, 847-4558), overlooking the Silvermine River, led us to compile a small, non-comprehensive guide to some of the newer places that make outdoor dining such a pleasure.


Deirdre Metcalf, Granger Whitelaw
Deirdre Tilford Erickson Metcalf, the daughter of Teresa D. Metcalf of New York and Charles G. Erickson of Brighton, England, was married yesterday to Granger Brewster Whitelaw, the son of Carolyn B. Whitelaw of Vail, Colo., and Edmund R. Whitelaw of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
George's-by-the-River in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Whitelaw, who graduated from Simmons College, is a senior corporate banking assistant at ABN-Amro Bank in New York.
Her father is a graphic engineer in Brighton.
Her mother is a film and television director and producer, in New York.


A Bedtime Story
Hugs, kisses and profound indecision about what to wear to the party.


Tracy Himmel, Jonathan Isham Jr.
Tracy Lynn Himmel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Karl Himmel of Richmond, was married yesterday evening to Jonathan Trumbull Isham Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isham of Newport, R.I.
Rabbi Harold S. White officiated at Oakland Green Farm in Lincoln, Va.
The Rev.
Samuel H. Speers, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Himmel Isham, 28, is a program manager at the American Forest and Paper Association in Washington.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a director at Reynolds International, the metal products company in Richmond.


On Base Closings, Some Experts See Opportunity Lost
When it began deliberating last week on what may be the last round of military base closings, a Presidential commission faced an obvious challenge.
The nation's most bloated, inefficient bases had, with few exceptions, already been eliminated in three previous rounds..


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Great Asian Steeple Chase
THE skyscraper was born and raised, and raised some more, in the United States, defining the nation's proudest cities, enshrining its largest corporations and giving airline pilots the willies.
But just as skyscrapers are leveling off here, they are reaching their gawky maturity in the Far East.
Of the world's 10 tallest buildings finished in the 1990's or under construction, only one is in this country -- the headquarters for an overambitious Atlanta bank whose finances turned so shaky a few years ago that it was swallowed by a hostile buyer.
The other nine are in Asia, including twin towers in Malaysia that, when completed next year, will be the world's tallest.
In the Far East, every few years a new building claims the Tallest-in-Asia title: the Kompleks Tun Abdul Razak Building in Penang, Malaysia, in 1985; the Overseas Union Bank Centre in Singapore in 1986; the Bank of China Tower in Hong Kong in 1989; Central Plaza, also in Hong Kong, in 1992, and next year, the Petronas towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.


Rabbi Objects To Shirt of Reader
The Torah is Judaism's most sacred object since it is the record of the Divine encounter between God and Israel.
In reading from the Torah, a person must be physically and morally clean as well as appropriately dressed.
It seems to me that the shirt worn by the Torah reader in the photograph of page 3 of your June 4 issue  [ Long Island Journal ]  was not only inappropriate but even sacrilegious.
RABBI GILBERT S. ROSENTHAL Executive Vice President New York Board of Rabbis


Sara J. Ledes, Robert K. Aiken
Sara Jennings Ledes, a daughter of Sally and John Ledes of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Kenneth Aiken, a son of Robert Aiken of Ballymena, Northern Ireland, and the late Sarah Aiken.
The Rev.
Terence Elsberry performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Aiken, 34, is a financial control manager at MCI Telecommunications in Reston, Va.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and received a master's degree in accounting from American University.
Her father is the publisher of Beauty Fashion, a monthly trade magazine and weekly newsletter in New York.
Her mother is the executive director of the American Friends of Blerancourt in New York, a restoration and fund-raising organization for the Musee de Blerancourt in Blerancourt, France.


CHILD WELFARE: Growing Up in New York
In a report, "Keeping Track of New York's Children," the Citizens' Committee for Children of New York Inc., measured the risks to children in each community board (for education, the surveys were based on community school districts).
Overall, the report found, "in virtually every category, New York City children continue to fare worse than their peers at the state and national level." Low birth weight, high infant mortality, violent deaths, teen pregnancy, high drop-out rates and poverty are among the problems that disproportionately affect children in the city, according to the report.


The World: ...Or Else; Hostage-Taking Is a Weapon Of War Whose Time Is Now
WHEN their citizens are taken hostage, most nations start out talking like Clint Eastwood.
We won't negotiate with terrorists, they say through clenched teeth.
Go ahead, make our day.
It usually turns out to be bluster.
The fact of life in modern democracies is that television pictures of handcuffed, blindfolded prisoners exert an inexorable, sapping effect on political will.
Cutting a deal is almost always easier than explaining away bungled commando raids.


Hotel Owners Prepare for a Possible Strike
Five days before the labor contract between New York City hotel owners and union workers expires, both sides are preparing for a strike or a lockout that could severely hamper the city's tourist business this summer.
After weeks of stalled and aborted meetings between the Hotel Association of New York City, which is representing about 75 hotels at the bargaining tables, and the 22,000-member New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, intensive negotiations began on Thursday.


Reds' Johnson May Be a Lame Duck, but His Feathers Aren't Ruffled
Davey Johnson most likely will finish this season as the manager of the National League Central Division champions and the active manager with the best career won-lost record.
Once the season is finished, though, Johnson no longer will be the Cincinnati Reds' manager.
What a way to run a pennant race, but that's the way the Reds are doing it.
Fortunately for them, there's nothing lame about the lame duck.


Security Stepped Up At Manila Airport
The Philippines Government has tightened airport security in recent months, resulting in delays for travelers passing through Manila's Ninoy Aquino International Airport.
Filipino officials said that passengers should arrive at the airport about two hours before their outbound flights and also expect delays when they arrive.
The tighter security measures include metal detectors, baggage screening and frisking of passengers at various checkpoints (female and male security personnel will search passengers of the same sex).


No Headline
"I recognize the most difficult job in this city is being mayor, especially in these economic times." RAMON C. CORTINES, Schools Chancellor.  [ 32:1. ]


On Fire I., Beach Erosion Takes Heavy Toll
WHEN he built his house in Kismet, Fire Island, 21 years ago, Warren Lem may have thought that it would be well protected.
There were 150 feet of dune in front of the house and 300 feet of beach in front of the dune.
Then came the December 1992 storm that washed away four-fifths of the dune.
Three months later, on March 13, 1993, another storm took away Mr.
Lem's 9-foot-wide front deck.


BEST SELLERS: June 25, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
150
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
2
1
9
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
3
3
4
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
4
5
144
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
5
4
7
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
6
6
69
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
8
6
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight "politically correct bedtime stories."
8
9
53
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
9
10
9
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
10*
7
5
MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.
11
11
3
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
12
1
MYSTIQUE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $21.95.) A medieval English warrior, on a search for a crystal that will make him the master of new lands, finds love.
13
15
12
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
14
13
18
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
15
12
3
THIN AIR, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $21.95.) The private eye Spenser investigates the kidnapping of the young wife of a Boston cop.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
37
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
8
26
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
3
3
4
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
4
2
4
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
5
5
68
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
7
19
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
7
6
9
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
8
9
79
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
9
4
3
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
10
1
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
11
1
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
12*
10
10
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
13
13
6
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
14
11
3
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
15
15
42
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
109
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
14
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
55
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
4
6
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An English poet's perfectly persuasive memoir of his father, a man both overbearing and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.
THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY: New Views on the Nature of Life, by Natalie Angier. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Essays and excursions by a New York Times science reporter who deals gracefully with current ideas about the innerest workings of us organisms.
COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University, $27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the mercy of organized crime.
EMBLEMS OF MIND: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics, by Edward Rothstein. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Sure they are alike, as everybody knows; however, they are totally different!
A New York Times critic schooled in both explores paradoxes as old as Pythagoras.
THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg. (Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct under the old regimes.
INDEPENDENCE DAY, by Richard Ford. (Knopf, $24.) Frank Bascombe, angst-ridden hero of Mr.
Ford's 1986 novel, "The Sportswriter," approaches middle age with an unmanageable son, an unrepentant ex-wife and a sense of the "observance of human possibility," which doesn't, he fears, apply to him.
THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr.
Amis's cool and brilliant novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
LYTTON STRACHEY: The New Biography, by Michael Holroyd. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A substantially reworked version of Mr.
Holroyd's two-volume biography of Strachey, which appeared in the 1960's, this painstakingly researched portrait contains new disclosures about the lives and loves of Strachey and his Bloomsbury contemporaries.
THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991 memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves behind.


This Is Not a Memo
To the Editor:
To the parade of "Memorable Memos We'd Like to Forget" (On the Job, Earning It, June 4), I would like to add a long standing beef I've had with memoranda: the practice of using the word memorandum as a heading for an interoffice communication.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Highways: Vote on an amendment to a bill to provide $6.5 billion for improvements to the national highway system that would retain current Federal speed limits for trucks and buses.
Approved 51 to 49, June 20.
2.
Highways: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill to provide $6.5 billion for improvements to the national highway system that would retain the Federal speed limits of 55 or 65 miles per hour, depending on the highway.
Approved 65 to 35, June 20.
3.
Highways: Vote on an amendment to a bill to provide $6.5 billion for improvements to the national highway system that would end the Transportation Department's authority to penalize states that do not require motorcyclists to wear helmets.
Rejected 64 to 36, June 21.
4.
Highways: Vote on an amendment to a bill to provide $6.5 billion for improvements to the national highway system that would require states to impose "zero tolerance" of alcohol use by drivers under age 21 rather than judge them by adult intoxication standards.
Approved 64 to 36, June 21.
5.
Foster Nomination: Vote to cut off debate and vote on the nomination of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General.
Failed, with 57 in favor and 43 opposed (3 votes short of the 60 needed), June 21.
A second vote on June 22 failed by the same margin with no vote changes.
1
2
3
4
5
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
Nay
Moynihan (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
House
1.
Corrections Day: Vote on a bill establishing a legislative procedure called "Corrections Day" that would set aside the second and fourth Tuesdays for fast action to repeal Federal regulations that are deemed unnecessary or ill-advised.
Approved 271 to 146, June 20.
2.
Technology Office: Vote on a compromise amendment to 1996 fiscal year appropriations bill for the legislative branch that would cut the budget of the Office of Technology Assessment and make it part of the Library of Congress.
Approved 220 to 204, June 22.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Nay
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
Nay
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
Nay
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Nay
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Nay
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Yea
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
Nay
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
Yea
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
Nay
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
Nay
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
A
6. Flake (D)
A
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Nay
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
A
A
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Yea
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Yea
13. Molinari (R)
Yea
Nay
14. Maloney (D)
A
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Yea
16. Serrano (D)
A
A
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Yea
19. Kelly (R)
Yea
Nay
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
A
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Nay
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Giving Madison Square Park a Face (and a Facelift)
Washington Square Park calls forth images of street performers, N.Y.U. students and pot dealers.
Tompkins Square Park, a violent clash between police and the homeless in 1989.
But for many people, Madison Square Park draws a blank.
The long-neglected park, which sits between 23d and 26th Streets from Broadway to Fifth Avenues, lacks, well . . . an identity.
"There are business owners right across the street from the park that didn't know it was Madison Square Park," said Jane R. Crotty, executive director of the 23d Street Association, a civic group that appreciates the economic ripple effect created by recent renovations of Union Square Park, Tompkins Square Park and Bryant Park.


Anthony Is No. 2 Of the Secaucus 27
The Vancouver Grizzlies may have found some tantalizing trade bait today in the National Basketball Association expansion draft.
As for the Knicks, they lost more memorabilia from the Pat Riley Era.
Greg Anthony, the Knicks' reserve guard, was picked No. 2 over all by Vancouver.
He was selected behind B. J. Armstrong, the Chicago Bulls point guard chosen first by the Toronto Raptors.


Mayor Opposes Lifting Certain Rent Curbs
For the last 25 years, the board that controls rents for New York City's 900,000 rent-stabilized apartments has generally approved annual increases loosely based on increases in landlords' costs, applying them equally to the cheapest and most expensive apartments.
This year, however, the Rent Guidelines Board is considering a proposal that would for the first time establish a two-tier increase, allowing landlords to impose much higher rents on the cheapest apartments, those that cost less than $400 a month.
In a still more sweeping change, the proposal would also grant landlords steep increases for vacant apartments.


Where Dogs Fought Rats, and Fallen Women Gathered
Looking at it now, covered with scaffolding, marred by graffiti, its windows bricked up, no one would guess that the small, sagging four-story brick structure at 273 Water Street had such a lurid past.
The Captain Rose House, the third oldest building in Manhattan, has been, among other things, a brothel, a "home for fallen women," an apothecary and the Kit Burns's Sportsman Hall, a bar where raffish men paid to watch dogs fight rats and one another.


EVIL'S BACK
At first, I was very excited to see your cover.
I misread it to say "Elvis's Back." Wow!
If The New York Times were reporting it, and not The National Enquirer, something exciting was on the horizon.
How disappointed I was to learn that the story was about the return of evil.
I don't see how evil could possibly return.
I don't think it has ever been away.
Elvis on the other hand. . . .
LOUIS PHILLIPS New York


She Runs, She Jumps, She Renounces Love
Batman Forever  Val Kilmer, Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey, Nicole Kidman, Chris O'Donnell Directed by Joel Schumacher PG-13 121 minutes


Out of the Attic, A Show Is Born
IN 1991, WHEN KENNETH JOEL Zogry became a curator at the Bennington Museum here, he was asked to inventory the furniture collection.
The museum had steadily built its holdings since it had moved into permanent quarters in 1928, and space was at a premium.
"The attic needed editing," recalled Mr.
Zogry.
That task took less than a month, but it led to an even bigger job.
He knew that furniture produced in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and New York from the mid-18th century to the mid-19th century had distinctive characteristics.
So how about Vermont?
But when he asked experts, Mr.
Zogry said, they answered: "Vermont furniture? What's that?"


'Half Old Master, Half Old Maid'
WALKER EVANS A Biography.
By Belinda Rathbone.
Illustrated. 358 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $27.50.


Russia's Rancorous Politics
The unruly state of Russian politics was captured aptly the other day on a television talk show when Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the nationalist leader, tossed a glass of orange juice in the face of a reformist governor after he suggested Mr.
Zhirinovsky had syphilis.
Then there was the member of the Russian Parliament who turned up in the Duma chamber toting a toy gun to protest Government bargaining with Chechen fighters as a loss of Russian honor.
His fellow lawmakers agreed, approving a nonbinding motion of no confidence in the Government of President Boris Yeltsin.
Russian politics, never short of intrigue or combat, has rarely been crazier or crankier.
If the potential consequences for Russia and the rest of the world were not so serious, the fractious behavior might merely make for entertaining theater.
Unhappily, it reflects powerful centrifugal forces that continue to tear at Russia's efforts to create a democracy.
There is likely to be more turbulence ahead, not only within Russia but in Russia's relations with the United States and other countries.


The Lyrical Side of Idle Curiosity
AROUND 4:30 every afternoon, two or three men arrive for cocktails at a black iron fence across the street from my house.
They are obviously working men coming off shift.
They neatly hang their jackets, hats and bags on the spikes of the fence, then pass out paper cups into which they pour orange juice and vodka.
Unlike the homelies in the neighborhood who favor the same drink, these men are steady in their pouring, relaxed with each other and coherently ribald in their conversation, often about the stupidity of their bosses.
Obviously, they are chilling out before going home.
But why here, even in winter?
Where do they work?
Who are they?
These questions nagged at me for a year, challenged me, especially after my attempts to answer them were rebuffed.
They would not return my cheery hellos, they shut down when I approached.
I even thought of showing up with chips and dip.


Tracie Sundack, Eric D. Coburn
Tracie Ann Sundack, the daughter of Shirley and Nathan Sundack of Far Rockaway, Queens, is to be married today to Eric Dean Coburn, a son of Judith and Paul Coburn of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln is to perform the ceremony at the Plaza in Manhattan.
The bride, 29, is an associate at Virag &amp; Virag, a Manhattan law firm.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received her law degree from American University.


Abhorring a Vacuum, 2 Create Ferret Journal
What the world needs now, Eric and Mary Shefferman decided, is more news about ferrets.
And not just a perfunctory mention in the occasional newspaper article.
No, the Sheffermans were thinking a lot bigger than that.
They wanted probing features, in-depth profiles, revealing centerfold shots.
Nothing less than blanket coverage of every aspect of ferret ownership, providing the kind of worshipful attention that has long been denied the ferret by the mainstream pet media.


A Saxophonist Looks Beyond Jazz to Redefine It
David Murray doesn't buy the romantic notion that a jazz musician must disappear from the scene to find a new sound.
He is reinventing himself the only way he knows how -- going full bore in public.
The man who is widely considered one of the most important saxophonists since John Coltrane says he isn't interested in making any more jazz albums.
Instead, Mr.
Murray, 40, has put together a funk group, called Octofunk, that in his words "plays real pop music." And, with a second group, he has released two new albums -- "The Tip" and "Jug-a-Lug" -- that include songs by Sly and the Family Stone.
In recent months, he has played with African drummers in Ghana, jammed with the Grateful Dead in Oakland, Calif., and led a gospel choir in Paris.
He is writing a Broadway musical, scoring a PBS documentary and leading his big band on Monday nights at the Knitting Factory in Manhattan.
And this evening, his quartet concludes a weeklong engagement at the Village Vanguard.


Hospitals Executive Had Tickets Dismissed
The chairwoman of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Maria Mitchell, arranged for dismissal of nearly $1,300 in parking tickets issued to her official car in recent months, though 17 of the tickets were written in the early morning hours near her residence on Central Park South.
A spokeswoman for the Health and Hospitals Corporation, Audrey Kelly, said the tickets were dismissed because Ms.
Mitchell's car must be available for official business around the clock.


June 18-24: Military Cutbacks; An Air Force Lab Defies the Odds
If Rome Laboratory in upstate New York were closed and its functions relocated, at other military bases, how long would it take to recoup the move's cost?
In its latest base closings, the Air Force put the lab on its hit list and tried to find out.
In October, it estimated the payback would take a century.
Three months later, it slashed that to four years.
In May it said six years.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  A growing number of companies are letting investors bypass the broker and buy stock right from the source.
By Leah Beth Ward.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 8  The fund prospectus may be one of America's most impenetrable, and least read, documents.
Help may be on the way.
By Edward Wyatt.
SPENDING IT /Page 9  Mediation is often a better, and cheaper, alternative to having your day in divorce court.
Minding Your Business, by Laura Pedersen.
VOICES /Page 13 A state securities regulator looks to Congress and sees dark days ahead for investors.
Viewpoint, by Mark Griffin.


June 18-24; The Pope's New Neighbor
Relations between Christians and Muslims have always been troubled, which is why the opening of a mosque last week, here in the heart of Christendom, was such a remarkable event.
But even as the two religions mingled at the opening of Rome's Islamic Cultural Center, an elaborate complex that took 20 years to build, there were ample signs that neither fully understands the other.
The Roman Catholic Church, which still regards this city as its own despite the increasingly secular nature of the Italian state, clearly saw itself as the generous host.
That gave Pope John Paul II license to issue a stern rebuke to certain Islamic countries -- by which he meant principally Saudi Arabia, the new mosque's chief benefactor -- for failing to practice religious tolerance at home.


219th Birthday Exhibit At Library of Congress
In celebration of the 219 years since the signing of the Declaration of Independence, the Library of Congress will display the only surviving fragment of its earliest-known draft.
The fragment is part of an exhibition, "Declaring Independence: Drafting the Documents," that will be on display for five days, beginning this Thursday.
The exhibition also includes Thomas Jefferson's original handwritten, four-page draft of the Declaration of Independence.
The draft has 86 revisions inscribed by a committee consisting of Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, Robert Livingston, Roger Sherman and the Continental Congress.


Dole vs. the Hairarchy: A Lost Commencement Address
I'm proud to be here today in Canonsburg to salute the 1995 graduating class of the Perry Como Barber College.
When I was a young boy back in Kansas, we couldn't afford real haircuts.
Just a bench out there on the prairie and the hired hand going at your hair with a scythe.
Straightforward, honest, clean American work.
That's why, unlike some Washington politicians, I don't understand sitting in a plane on some runway for a couple of hours, waiting for a hundred-dollar trim from some show-business pal.
Because as you can see, I'm no Hollywood longhair or some effete esthete.
Just an ordinary American Wildroot cream oil Charlie, with an ordinary American head of hair.
And do you know what?
I'm proud of it. (SUSTAINED APPLAUSE)
There isn't a week, two weeks at the outside, when I don't settle into my favorite chair in the Senate barbershop for a shave and a haircut.
So I'm proud to be here today among some of the finest young tonsorial talents in America as you take up your shears and combs and whisks on behalf of a more decent, more clean-cut, more American society.
You are the barbers of tomorrow.


Can't Be Misquoted if Photos Do the Talking
WHO NEEDS MUSIC JOURNALISTS?
They take quotes out of context, follow agendas that have nothing to do with public taste and are more concerned with impressing their peers than conveying information and ideas.
That's probably what some musicians think after reading what they believe to be an unfair article about themselves.
So why should a pop star who has little to gain and a lot to lose by an interview risk being poorly portrayed in print?
Lately, they haven't.
Pop stars have chosen to present themselves in magazines not through interviews but through photographs.
The advantage of photographers is that they can't misquote anyone.
And pop stars can demand photo approval (something they can't do so easily with the printed word), which means that only pictures they like will end up in a magazine.


Phnom Penh's Faded Beauty
AT sunset, when the reddish tropical sun begins to melt behind the gabled gold-green rooftop of the Royal Palace, it is possible to imagine just how lovely Phnom Penh must have been.
There are still touches of that beauty in the Cambodian capital -- the crumbling ocher villas that are the legacy of the French colonialists, the bougainvillea spilling over the old stone fences like purplish lava; the fleets of rickety one-man fishing boats as they bob in the sun-dappled waters of the Mekong, the monks parading barefoot along the palm-lined river bank, clutching their black lacquer bowls in search of their daily offerings of rice.


A Rare Point of Unity for SoHo: Motophobia
Much divides SoHo: Some residents dread the late night outdoor cafes and bars that have sprouted up along West Broadway in the last two years.
Others think the night life adds a welcome vibrancy to a once funereal neighborhood.
Some folks detest the proposed 370-room SoHo Grand, the first hotel to be built in the community in one hundred years.
Others think the hotel represents "progress."


Mia Manzulli, John A. Ajemian
Mia Manzulli, a daughter of Michael and Rosemary Manzulli of West Brighton, S.I., was married yesterday to John Andrew Ajemian, a son of Carl Ajemian of Boston and Mary Ajemian of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
James Kiernan, the senior vice president of St.
John's University in Queens, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Church in Grymes Hill, S.I.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Stanford University.
She received a master's degree in English and American literature from New York University, where she is a doctoral candidate in those subjects and is a teaching fellow in the English department.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Richmond County Savings Bank in West Brighton.


Credit Is Lax, So Why Buy Banks?
Sometimes the news you get from opening junk mail is more important than the information that makes headlines.
Last week there was a bit of a stampede into bank stocks on the news of the biggest bank takeover yet, of New Jersey's First Fidelity by First Union, the North Carolina-based bank holding company.
Lots of people were searching for the next bank to be bought for twice book value.
We wish luck to those doing the searching.


Lesley Dormen, Quentin B. Spector
Lesley Dormen, the writer of the "On Your Own" column at Glamour magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Quentin Byrne Spector, the executive director of the Municipal Assistance Corporation in New York.
Rabbi Charles G. Agin performed the nonsectarian ceremony at the couple's home in New York.
Ms.
Dormen, who is keeping her name, is also a contributing writer at Redbook magazine and an author.
She graduated from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.
She is the daughter of Lee Zentner of New York and Max Hanford of Buffalo.


Future Indefinite


Off to See the Wizard
I graduated from Jonathan Dayton Regional High School in Springfield, class of 1981.
The girl who graduated as valedictorian had titled her address "We're Off to See the Wizard," and likened our commencement to the Wizard of Oz.
We kept yelling, "I'm melting!" The microphones picked it up and had everyone in the bleachers laughing too.
LOU KLUBENSPIES Bayville


Better Than the Dewey Decimal System: Libraries You Can Visit Without Leaving Home
The Bergen County library system is now available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
This month the Bergen County Cooperative Library System, a non-profit group committed to sharing resources among the county's public libraries, unveiled its public-access computerized system.


Ruth Colp And Eric Haber
Ruth Colp, a daughter of Drs.
Charlotte R. Colp and Ralph Colp Jr. of New York, is to be married today to Eric Haber, a son of Elaine and Joseph Haber of New York.
Rabbi Miriam Ances is to perform the ceremony at the New York Society for Ethical Culture.
The bride, 35, is a partner in Wharton Property Advisers, a commercial real estate firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is an assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at Columbia University in New York.
Her mother is the chief of the pulmonary clinic at Beth Israel Medical Center and an associate clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, both in New York.


Celebrity Photographer Puts Bob Dylan Images on CD-ROM
OF all the people I've met and photographed my association with Bob Dylan has special meaning," Daniel Kramer said.
On Fire Island in the summer of 1963, Mr.
Kramer was looking for a new subject to photograph.
He saw Mr.
Dylan for the first time on television as he sang "The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll."


Ideas &amp; Trends; Get on Line for Plato's Cave
"Bombardier beetle" seems an apt name for an animal that fights its enemies by shooting a burst of chemicals that explode with a tiny bang.
But what if the beetle had been discovered before anyone had ever heard of bombardiers?
It would have been known by some other name.
Every age sees the world through the lens of its own obsessions, using its latest inventions as metaphors.
For Rene Descartes to see animals as machines, there first had to be machines.
It takes nothing away from Charles Darwin's observation that species compete and adapt to note that Darwin himself came from an industrializing society whose members were being forced to compete and adapt.


Cheater's Crime Didn't Pay
To the Editor:
While we respect Karen Jaehne's indignation over an incident at the American Institute of Banking in which a student apparently opened a textbook during a closed-book exam ("Answer to This Problem Is Not in a Textbook," From the Desk Of, June 4), I want to assure her and the other 1,500 students who enroll in classes each semester at the American Institute of Banking of Greater New York, a 95-year-old educational institution, that A.I.B. does not in any way condone cheating.


A Businesslike Balancing Act
To the Editor:
Your article on May 7 about the Landmarks Preservation Commission, headed "At Landmarks, a Businesslike Balancing Act," truly reflects the unenlightened and self-interested resistance that continues to be held by the old-line traditionalists in our real-estate industry.


Brett Averill; Newspaper Editor, 37
Brett Averill, who was the editor of The New York Native, a gay newspaper, during the early years of the AIDS epidemic, died on Tuesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 37.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Bill Weintraub.


Correction
An article on June 11 about the recovered 10 minutes of Greta Garbo's silent film "The Divine Woman" misidentified Bruce Goldstein, who compared the find to the discovery of the Elgin marbles.
He is the director of repertory programming at Film Forum, not the director of Film Forum.


A Life on the Ramparts
CHOICES By Mary Lee Settle. 376 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $24.95.


The Morale Crisis In the Workplace
SHE was earning $85,000 a year as an officer of a large company, but as the company reduced its staff and reorganized, a man being groomed for the president's position got the position she felt she deserved.
So the woman resigned.
"I won't ever work for a corporation again," she said.
"I think you sell yourself out."
The woman, who spoke on the condition that neither her name nor her former employer's name be used, said she had been excluded from the powerful clique of male executives during the many years she worked with the company.
In order to keep her job, she said, she was forced to compromise her values.


Carlene J. Moffitt and John S. Pruitt
Carlene Joy Moffitt, a daughter of Shirley and John A. Moffitt of Seattle, was married yesterday to John S. Pruitt, a son of Shirley and Peter T. Pruitt of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Ayars performed the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Pruitt, 28, graduated from Seattle Pacific University.
She is the manager of public relations for L'Oreal, the cosmetics manufacturer in New York.
Her father is the principal of the Dunlap Elementary School in Seattle.


D. B. Lamoreaux, Jonathan Searle
Denise Bauer Lamoreaux, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
S.
Lamoreaux 3d of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday on Martha's Vineyard to Jonathan Moran Searle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Searle of Edgartown, Mass.
Michael Achille, a civil marriage celebrant and a friend of the couple, officiated at the Old Whaling Church in Edgartown.
Mrs.
Lamoreaux Searle, 28, teaches the third grade at the Tisbury (Mass.) Elementary School.
She graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is the senior producer of "CBS News Sunday Morning."


Heated Words
To the Editor:
You ran a letter in your May 28 issue from Michael Oppenheimer, of the Environmental Defense Fund, asserting that my book "A Moment on the Earth" contains errors.
Two of the three claimed mistakes are not errors.


Italy's 'Clean Hands' Judges Bite Their Nails
There was a time when Milan's prosecuting magistrates were national heroes who could do no wrong.
Nicknamed the "clean hands" team, they swept through Italy's political system in the early 1990's like a whirlwind, rooting out so many dirty politicians and businessmen that in the end they brought down the system itself.
Since those early, heady days, the prosecutors of so-called "Tangentopoli" -- or "Bribe City" scandal -- have hit periodic obstacles.
But until recently, the magistrates proved more adept at protecting their role than politicians have been at controlling them.


Exceedingly Odd
Sarah Bernhardt liked to play dead for photographers, arranging herself in a tasteful rosewood coffin.
As an infant, William S. Burroughs saw tiny men romping among his alphabet blocks.
The inventor Nikola Tesla feared women who wore pearl earrings and, like Howard Hughes, was so frightened of germs that he avoided shaking hands.
The stories of these and 60 other eccentrics are set out by Carl A. Posey, a novelist and an editor at Time-Life Books, in THE BIG BOOK OF WEIRDOS (Paradox Press/ DC Comics, paper, $12.95) and illustrated, in black and white, by 63 graphic artists.
The weirdos in question can be as benign as Stephen Tennant, the languid English professional beauty who spent many of his last years in bed, visited by the rich and famous, or as malign as Hitler.
Among lesser-known figures, my personal favorite is Cyrus R. Teed, who, around the turn of the century, founded a religious community on the belief that the earth was actually a gold-plated sphere, and that, to quote his motto, "We live inside." Mr.
Posey's dialogue is often flippant -- "Terrible? Moi?" says Ivan -- and frequently funny, in a silly sort of way.
The graphics are as various as their subjects, ranging from pastiche (Van Gogh) to near-abstraction (King Farouk).
Among the artists, special mention must go to James Romberger, whose scary Hitler, decomposing from frame to frame, is in the highest horror-comics tradition; to Craig Hamilton, for the elegant full-page Art Nouveau designs that curl around Isadora Duncan; and to Frank Quitely, in particular for the panel that shows his Salvador Dali sitting at a cafe table in company with a Cubist Picasso and a Pointillist Seurat.
An appendix to the book lists Mr.
Posey's biographical sources.
If some are less than reliable, so what.
How could any right-thinking person not depict J. Edgar Hoover in a little black cocktail dress and fishnet stockings?
SARAH FERRELL


Peggy Wilson, Andrew Hersam
Margaret Elizabeth Wilson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Wilson of Hagerstown, Md., was married yesterday to Andrew Richard Hersam, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
V.
Donald Hersam Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Jeffrey J. Newlin performed the ceremony at the Noroton Presbyterian Church in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Hersam, who is known as Peggy, is an account manager at Gourmet magazine in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a senior vice president in Hagerstown for Wheat First/Butcher Singer Securities.


Corrections
The Minding Your Business column, about internship programs, mischaracterized a program run by Bell Labs.
Many of the high school students in the program do go on to college.


She Runs, She Jumps, She Renounces Love
The Incredibly True Adventures of 2 Girls in Love  Laurel Holloman, Nicole Parker Directed by Maria Maggenti R 95 minutes


Bright and Lush Sri Lanka
IN the days when Sri Lanka was known as Ceylon, its postage stamps conjured up images of richly plumed birds and caparisoned elephants, of pristine beaches, forested mountains and deep jungles.
For a schoolboy pasting stamps into an album amid the grayness of 1950's England, Ceylon formed the image of a tropical paradise.
Nearly 25 years have passed since a post-independence government eager to shed the vestiges of British colonialism gave the island a new name.
But the postage stamps have barely changed, nor, in its physical bounties, has the country.
In several visits to Sri Lanka in the last year, it proved to be as lush and lovely as in my boyhood imagining.


Susan Upton, P. L. Buttenwieser
Susan Helen Upton, the daughter of Joanne and Robin Upton of Cambridge, Mass., was married there last evening to Peter Lubin Buttenwieser, a son of Ann and Lawrence Buttenwieser of New York.
Rabbi Robert Miller performed the ceremony at the Charles Hotel.
The bride, 30, is an associate at Warren, Alpert, Beigelman &amp; Nardelli, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University and received her law degree from Boston University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Paddock Upton, planning consultants, formerly in Cambridge.
Her mother is a clinical social worker in Cambridge.


With Jackson Interview, ABC Made a Choice
To the Editor:
Re "In the Tank" (column, June 22): When it comes to news shows, Americans have demonstrated a willingness to sacrifice journalistic integrity for entertainment.
If 60 million people chose not to watch the "Prime Time Live" interview with Michael Jackson, Frank Rich could have devoted his space to serious news.
Yet they did watch, and ABC, Sony and Mr.
Jackson will all make a lot of money, which may reveal why "Prime Time Live" can posture as news.
BRIAN CHIAPPINELLI New York, June 22, 1995


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Yanks Getting in Shape And Can See Sox Again
The Boston Red Sox, showing their Achilles' heel to the rest of the American League East in recent weeks, had to wonder if any team was willing to take advantage of their struggles.
The Yankees finally are sending quiet signals that they may be ready to respond to the opening being left by the East leaders.


Mexico Deports 3 Priests, Saying They Incited Trouble in South
Three Roman Catholic priests, including an American parish priest from Los Angeles, have been expelled from Mexico by Government authorities who accused them of inciting violence in the troubled southern state of Chiapas, where talks to end a 17-month old Indian insurrection are scheduled to resume on July 4.
By asserting that the priests had been deported because their presence threatened the peace effort, Government officials repeated allegations of the Church's role in the Chiapas conflict that have made since fighting there broke out on Jan. 1, 1994.


14-Year-Old Girl Receives Four-Year Ban
A South African girl who was the world's youngest track and field athlete to test positive for steroid use has been banned from competition.
LIZA DE VILLIERS, 14, was banned by Athletics South Africa for four years and three months at a disciplinary hearing Friday.
De Villiers tested positive for an anabolic steroid, nandrolone, and a stimulant, fencamine, during the South African junior track and field championships in April.
She won a bronze medal in the long jump and also competed in the 100- and 200-meter dash. (AP)


Ideas &amp; Trends: Hup, Two, Three, Snore; Sure, It's a Parade. But Is It Pizazz?
NOW that the Supreme Court has effectively barred self-proclaiming gay and lesbian marchers of Irish heritage from St.
Patrick's Day parades, the New York contingent might consider taking their banner over to the West Indian Day parade down Brooklyn's Eastern Parkway.
It's not Fifth Avenue and it's not Irish, true, but the Caribbean marchers are wonderfully more playful and tolerant, all bright feathers and proud stepping.
They exemplify the fresh-off-the-boat blood and emotion that parades seem to need in America to look vital.
As parades go -- and in the United States they step to shifting ethnic and political histories -- the rhythmic West Indian rejoicing now attracts the million-plus crowds that the Hibernians used to on St.
Patrick's Days past.
The free-speech court victory -- in which Boston parade sponsors won the constitutional right of deciding what should not be expressed -- may only compound the air of ossification that was already overtaking formal St.
Paddy's marching.
There's been griping about the March 17 overtime bills for New York's police, many of them Irish-American cops commuting in from the suburbs and standing idly by in their forebears' city while the old heritage is summoned.
A truly gay Irishman could be better imagined hornpiping into line as a Brooklyn steel drum band goes by playing, "It was love, love alone, caused King Edward to leave the throne."


Duly Noted
To the Editor:
The article by Jon Pareles "Michael Jackson Is Angry, Understand?"  [ June 18 ] , about the singer's new album, requires a clarification.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 25, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
35
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
2
13
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
3
7
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
4
6
ALL THAT GLITTERS, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) From plantation house to shanty: Ruby's marital ordeals continue.
5
7
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
3
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
7
2
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
8
1
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
9
4
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $6.99.) V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
10
24
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
11
5
UNTIL FOREVER, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) A 10th-century sword enables a woman to take a romantic journey through the past.
12
10
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
13
2
TALK BEFORE SLEEP, by Elizabeth Berg. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Four women rally around a friend who has breast cancer.
14
8
THE KEY TO MIDNIGHT, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A 1979 novel about a man who helps a troubled nightclub singer in Japan.
15
1
ASSAULT AT SELONIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The second volume of the "Star Wars" Corellian Trilogy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
40
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
7
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
3
13
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) Dangers that beset teen-age girls.
4*
76
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
5
39
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
6*
5
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
607
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
28
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
9
2
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
10
119
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
11*
42
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) A study of monotheism.
12
18
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
13*
42
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14*
6
SELENA! by Clint Richmond. (Pocket, $5.99.) A bilingual account of the singer's life and career.
15*
7
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, by Jim Carroll. (Penguin, $10.95.) Coming of age in New York.
16*
16
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
17*
9
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
18*
8
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
39
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
8
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
5
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
217
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
In current thrillers about Russia, the K.G.B. is, of course, out.
The Mafia is in.
So it is with SASHA'S TRICK, by David Rosenbaum (Mysterious Press/ Warner, $21.95).
Mr.
Rosen baum, a skillful writer whose first novel was entitled "Zaddik," tells us about Sasha, a Russian hustler who is released from a gulag, travels to New York, resumes his trade in Brighton Beach, works in the shadow of powerful Russian mobsters, gets involved with someone linked to a cache of plundered art and has to use whatever wits he has to emerge alive.
In some respects, this is a black comedy -- tough, realistic, wry, full of sharp observations about corruption in Russia and New York.
During a drunken orgy in a dacha, one man says: "Right now, Russia is, as it has always been, a kleptocracy -- rule by the thieves. But if we're to have order by the millennium, the thieving must stop. And there's only one way to do it: whatever can be stolen should be stolen as quickly as possible. Then, when the thieves have stolen everything, they will cease to be thieves. They will be capitalists, and they will protect the capital they have."


Sports of The Times; Knicks Need a Coach To Stay on Sidelines
WE really need to stop obsessing about the coach around here.
It isn't the Or Else predicament people think it is.
At least it doesn't have to be.
Nowhere is it written that the Knicks must have a Pat Riley or a Chuck Daly on the bench.
Rudy Tomjanovich is the two-time defending coaching champion of professional basketball, remember?
A year ago, Jerry Buss was scribbling zeros all over his contract offer to Rick Pitino.
Buss wanted someone sexy to coach his Los Angeles Lakers.
He settled for dull Del Harris, who, after being dismissed in Milwaukee several years before, circulated a personal brochure, which was the closest he had come to being colorful, like Daly, or published, like Riley.


INSIDE
Ex-Juror's View of Simpson
In a new book, a former juror says that O. J. Simpson will be convicted and that tensions in the jury have been misperceived.
Page 20.
Haitians Go to Polls
More than 10,500 candidates from 28 political parties are competing for some 2,220 positions in a historic election in Haiti today.
Page 10.
The Summer Bind
Working parents in New York struggle every summer to keep their children safe and occupied.
Budget cuts are making matters worse.
Page 27.
South Africa Wins in Rugby
As Nelson Mandela watched in national green, South Africa defeated New Zealand in the rugby World Cup final.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Theodora Shafer And Gavin Curran
Theodora Marigot Shafer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Q. Shafer of New York, was married yesterday to Gavin Thomas Curran, a son of Jane Curran of Norfolk, Conn.
The Rev.
Herbert Florer performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Saugerties, N.Y.
The couple graduated from Clark University.


A Shrinking Military Casts Long Shadows
Post-cold war reductions in the defense industry are hitting home in Bayonne, N.J., and Groton, Conn., where military jobs are a vital part of the local economies.
Residents of Bayonne are coming to terms with the looming demise of the Military Ocean Terminal and its 2,183 civilian jobs.
And even as employees of General Dynamics celebrated the launch of a new nuclear submarine in Groton, they expressed worry about the prospect of lost jobs at the shipyard, where 14,500 people work.
Articles, page 31.


Coverage of Hunger Strike In Chinatown Is Faulted
To the Editor:
I was greatly disturbed by the brief "Hunger Strike" item (June 11), which deviated sharply from the objective journalistic presentation of other neighborhood controversies in Manhattan Minute.
As a reader of The New York Times, I expect to be given the facts, at least as each side sees them.
Given the mocking tone, characterizing one side's presence as "bad enough," the article would have been more appropriately placed on the editorial page.
MINI A. LIU, M.D.
Manhattan


EVIL'S BACK
At last someone has the courage to plumb the depths of evil's rising tide, explore the key issues and discuss them honestly.
I, too, am sick of Hallmark card responses to tragedy.
Ron Rosenbaum's article "Staring Into the Heart of the Heart of Darkness" (June 4) was an effective antidote.


To Tell or Not to Tell: A Therapist Faces Cancer
To the Editor:
Having just disclosed my own breast cancer diagnosis to colleagues and patients, I read with mixed feelings "Fear, Self-Pity: A Therapist's Ordinary Life" (June 18).
I applaud Kathy Conway for taking a risk all too rare in our profession.
I've heard of patients who found out only after the fact, from a note on a dead analyst's door.


Isaac Babel's Vision
To the Editor:
In his effort to enlist Isaac Babel as a Holocaust writer avant la lettre, Harold Bloom works hard to dismantle my father Lionel Trilling's reading of Babel as a man struggling to balance his Jewish heritage and introspective nature against his fascination with the violent ethos of gangsters and Cossacks (review of "1920 Diary," June 4).
One cannot read such stories as "My First Goose," "The S.S. Cow-Wheat," "Di Grasso" and "How It Was Done in Odessa" without recognizing that the sensitive Jew who is fascinated as well as repelled by violence is, at the very least, an extraordinarily consistent and powerful literary creation.
Even if Babel never intended it as more than a fictional device, it is far too central to his vision to be brushed aside in the interest of a more humane, more conventionally "Jewish" reading of his work.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'TEMPEST' AT BOSCOBEL
Shakespeare's romantic drama "The Tempest" opens the ninth season of the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival on Saturday at the Boscobel Restoration in Garrison.
Previews will be presented on Thursday and Friday.


Refinement
MARK'S ** (212) 879-1864; The Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


White House Traffic Ban Earns Mixed Reviews
In the weeks since President Clinton announced the closing of Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House, tourists and native Washingtonians have had to make numerous adjustments.
About 26,000 cars and trucks drove that part of Pennsylvania Avenue between 15th and 17th Streets every day.
Now, traffic snakes out in all directions, clogging downtown streets and making drive-by tourism a thing of the past.


The Moral For Mets: Close Isn't Enough
Spotting the Atlanta Braves five runs in their ball park with John Smoltz on the mound is not a healthy proposition for any team, especially a team that's been struggling like the Mets.
So perhaps it was a moral victory that they battled back for four runs only to lose, 5-4, when Braves right fielder David Justice stopped a sliding Jose Vizcaino with a beautiful throw to the plate to end the game.


News Group Is on Verge of a Victory in Postal Staple Battle
Stop the presses!
After a long struggle, Pioneer Press Newspapers seems about to have its second staple returned -- courtesy of the United States Congress.


A Modern Master of Bottles, Scraps and Squares
THE NEXT TIME YOU GO TO Grand Central Terminal, take the escalators two flights up to the elevator lobby of the Met Life (previously Pan Am) Building.
Turn around.
There, over the escalators, is a tremendous abstract mural (28 feet high by 54 feet wide) of black, white and red strips arranged in interwoven columns.
Like the Pan Am Building itself, the 1963 mural is a relic from the heyday of modernism.
There is no plaque to identify the mural, but it was done by Josef Albers, best known for the spare, geometric paintings of his "Homage to the Square" series.
The Pan Am mural, entitled "Manhattan," is based on a 1928 glass painting called simply "City." A selection of these glass paintings, on view at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum through Sept. 17, throws new light on the development of an artist who is in many ways the quintessential modernist.


The Phoenix Counters Today's Trend
SUCH is the state of the arts that survival depends on the power of thinking small, common wisdom has it.
Shrinking funds dictate the scaling down of productions -- in size and number.
It's only logical.
But real wisdom is not common, and logic has nothing to do with running a theater, certainly not a nonprofit professional theater in Westchester County, which has a daunting mortality rate for such uncommon pursuits.


Vote Today a Turning Point for Haiti
The ballots have been stacked in a corner of a dark, bare room, 420 to a box in a pile that reaches almost to the ceiling.
Guarded by an armed police officer, they are waiting to be shipped off to polling places in this rundown Haitian port on the north coast and in the nearby countryside, where eager voters are expected to begin lining up at 6 A.M.
Sunday.


The Nation; Productivity Is All, But It Doesn't Pay Well
IT is a principle as old as capitalism and the antithesis of Marxism: workers should reap according to their labors.
Yet over the last six years, compensation for American workers seems to have stagnated even as they have worked ever more efficiently and produced ever more goods.
The trend is especially striking because it breaks one of the most enduring patterns in American economic history.
Workers have fairly consistently collected about two-thirds of the nation's economic output in the form of wages, salaries and benefits.
Owners of capital, like stocks or bonds or small businesses, have collected the other third, in the form of dividends, profits and investment gains.


How Redemption Fees Can Distort the Picture
MANY funds impose redemption fees to penalize people who sell their shares soon after buying them.
The argument is that frequent sales cause fund managers to shuffle their holdings and raise transaction costs.
Redemption fees, therefore, can help compensate long-term fund owners and keep them from having to pay the price for others' rapid-fire trading.
But the accounting treatment of these fees is not uniform.


June 18-24; Sun Roof Not Optional


Poor Parents' Summertime Blues; Choices for Children: Enforced Boredom or Street Roulette
Gregory Swenson, 9 years old, will be out of school this week, but his freedom could be short-lived.
His mother, Veda, has already told him that her job and the likelihood that there will be no summer camp means he might have to be locked up in their Bronx apartment four days a week.
Rasheba Watkins, a 16-year-old student at DeWitt Clinton High School, has already abandoned hopes of a summer spent working and attending school.
Her mother's work schedule and the lack of an affordable summer program for her two younger brothers has required that she serve as the household's unpaid, unhappy, full-time monitor.


Pain and Sadness
I am the second member of my extended family to graduate from college, so it was to be a grand event.
Robert Kennedy was shot in the hallway of a California hotel the night before my graduation ceremony, and he died the day of it.
My friends and I were all active against the war in Vietnam, so our graduation celebrations were deeply colored with pain and sadness at the passing of this man who held out some hope.
BOB GRANT Denville


The Key Word in the Summer Is Water
Fertilize broad-leaf evergreens when they finish blooming.
Trim faded flowers from spring-blooming shrubs, roses and perennials.
Continue to water newly planted shrubs and trees deeply if the weather remains dry.
Keep the lawn tall (about three inches) to help grass retain moisture.


DIARY
SECURITIES FRAUD Crash Landing for Brennan "Come grow with us," the ads said, and Robert Brennan's trademark helicopter hammered home the idea that First Jersey Securities, his penny-stock firm, could transform mere mortals into high fliers.
For a decade, though, the S.E.C. has tried to prove that Mr.
Brennan and his brokers did all the growing, while customers' accounts did a vanishing act.
Mr.
Brennan held them off, with one delay coming after he named a horse after a judge and the irate judge quit the case for fear of seeming biased.
And all the while he built his sports empire, and his reputation as a philanthropist.
But the S.E.C. kept at him, and last week Mr.
Brennan's charmed life crashed into a wall: a Federal judge ruled that Mr.
Brennan and his firm had engaged in "a massive and continuing fraud" and imposed damages of at least $71.5 million.
PUBLIC SPEAKING What's That, Mr.
Greenspan?
Clarity is a rare and wondrous thing.
It sparkles.
It illuminates.
It sends all doubt scurrying to life's dusty, cobwebbed corners.
So Alan Greenspan, one of the most powerful humans alive, avoids it like the plague.
"I worry incessantly that I might be too clear," he said last week.
Don't you worry yourself about that, Mr.
Greenspan; you didn't even come close.
The Federal Reserve chairman -- who could move the financial markets with a mistimed cough -- had just given a Big Speech with an unmistakable message: The Federal Reserve might lower interest rates in early July, or it might not.
The economy might slip into a mild recession, or it might not.
And to make his calculated obfuscation complete, he stated unequivocally that July's rate-setting meeting would be "most engaging." Any questions?
THEME PARKS In Orlando, Real Mice When you think of Disney and animals, you think of a grossly overworked mouse, an adorable lion or some ridiculous number of Dalmatians.
Disney wants to change that, in its usual oversized way.
Last week it announced plans for a Wild Animal Kingdom, at 500 acres its largest park yet, right in the thick of Disney World.
It'll be a habitat for more than 1,000 animals, some of them endangered, and untold thousands of humans, all hot and grumpy.
Disney overflowed with talk about preserving species and educating the public about wildlife.
But if that sounds too educational, don't worry: one section will be devoted to mythical beasts, like unicorns, and another to extinct ones. (Are Disney's magicians off somewhere busily turning ancient amber into velociraptors?) As one observer put it, "They can say all they want, but this park is to make money." THE DONALD Did He Lose a Gold Sled?
Donald Trump has this thing about gold.
It's as if he fancies himself some latter-day Midas, gleefully bestowing his touch on a sadly gray landscape.
Look at the Grand Hyatt.
Look at Trump Tower.
And soon, like it or not, you'll be looking at something called the Trump International Hotel and Tower if you get anywhere near Columbus Circle.
In its drab, pre-Trump incarnation, this was the Gulf and Western Building, but last week work began on its Trump rebirth -- same size and shape (no public scrutiny needed), but gold-tinted glass from head to toe.
Never fear, though -- this is no quickie gilding: one designer is none other than Philip Johnson.
Goldfinger would be impressed.
TOBACCO A Recall Hazardous to Logic Philip Morris recalled seven billion cigarettes last month, but now no one seems quite sure why.
At first it said there was some irritant in the filters that could cause "temporary discomfort." But last week it said the filter problem was small and involved only a bad taste and odor.
The irritant may have been in the packaging.
But Westvaco, which supplied the packaging, denied that "minute trace amounts" of the irritant could be linked to the problem -- and, indeed, the existing packaging is not being destroyed.
So let's see: it's not the filters, it's not the packaging, and the cigarettes inside, of course, continue to be harmless.
What's the problem?
THE ENVIRONMENT No Oil Rig Is an Island The next time you agonize over insulting the environment by discarding plastic bottles, say, or junk mail, just be thankful you don't face this rather more sizable disposal problem.
Royal Dutch/Shell has this old oil rig in the North Atlantic that it wants to get rid of, and it planned to sink it.
But Greenpeace charged in, calling the rig -- with its 100 tons of sand, oil sludge, and radioactive materials -- an environmental time bomb.
The company backed down, but then last week said it had no idea what to do with it.
It could cost $70 million to dismantle it on land, vs. $16 million to sink it -- and to top it off, it wasn't clear that land disposal would in fact be safer.
An Austrian financier offered to turn it into a floating casino, but that doesn't seem likely.
So for now this 450-foot-long orphan wanders at sea.
CAR WARS Wrong Side?
Detroit Did It The clock is ticking toward Wednesday, when those crippling tariffs on Japanese luxury cars could kick in, and negotiators in Geneva are doing the usual dance -- with no one likely to give in til the last minute.
But here's an interesting side issue: Japan has all those Lexuses and Infinitis made with America in mind; they'd be tough to sell in Japan, because the steering wheel's on the wrong side.
Japan has long scolded Detroit for trying to sell wrong-side cars in Japan, so it'll be awfully strange to say now that wrong-side Lexuses are just fine.
Even a Toyota spokesman said, "It's a very funny idea." Of course, they could always call them Fords, sell them at a discount, and then blame Detroit.
THE BUDGET A Bumpy Road Ahead?
In a family's budget, "discretionary" spending is the extra stuff, the frills -- vacations, dinners out, marble Pocahontas lawn ornaments.
To Congress, though, the label is applied to things many would consider more basic: roads, schools, the environment.
But these become "discretionary" because they lack law-given formulas, and are thus ripe for the Republican knife.
So when House and Senate leaders agreed last week on $245 billion in tax cuts over seven years -- the final piece of the mad budget-balancing dash -- the plan included $190 billion in cuts from projected discretionary spending.
A "historic step," said Newt Gingrich.
"Tax cuts to those who don't need them," said Leon Panetta.
DETENTION Capitalism as Jailer A lot of people say the Government botches things the private sector could handle easily.
But when a privately run immigration jail erupted in violence last week in New Jersey, it raised the opposite question: should human detention be at capitalism's mercy?
The head of Esmor, the prison company, put the blame for the revolt on the immigration service, saying it took too long with its paperwork, and said Esmor had fulfilled all its obligations.
But a former warden at the center said that he could find no doctor who'd work for the wages offered and that he'd been told that $1.12 a day was too much to pay for an inmate's meals.
"They don't want to run a jail," he said.
"They want to run a motel as cheaply as possible."


Lisa A. Mark and Thomas McLoughlin
Lisa Ann Mark, the projects coordinator at the Rosenthal Center for Alternative/Complementary Medicine at Columbia University, was married last evening to Thomas McLoughlin, an associate brand manager at Lever Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
Diane Brook Gusic, an interfaith minister, performed the ceremony at the Wainwright House, a holistic learning center in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 30, graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in health education from Columbia.
She is the daughter of Arlene and Reuben Mark of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the chairman of the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York.
Her mother is a music therapist at Public School 191 in New York.


Let Those Shoulder Drivers Stew in Their Own Juice
To the Editor:
Hooray for the Bergen County Police and their crackdown on drivers who try to bypass traffic jams on Route 208 by driving on the shoulder (In Brief, June 11)!
There is nothing more infuriating than watching these shoulder drivers whiz by, especially since you know that you will have to wait that much longer when they work their way back into your lane.
Several years ago I was driving in the right-hand lane on the New Jersey Turnpike during a major back-up when cars started passing on the shoulder.
I pulled onto the shoulder, proceeding at exactly the same slow speed as the rest of traffic.


She Runs, She Jumps, She Renounces Love
The Glass Shield  Michael Boatman, Lori Petty, Richard Anderson, Ice Cube Directed by Charles Burnett PG-13 109 minutes


Savvy Travelers' Rules of the Sky
*
If you have 50,000 or more points with Continental Airlines and are willing to expend 35,000 points instead of 25,000 for one free round-trip ticket in the continental United States, you bypass the limits on seating the airline sets for passengers' flying free.
But you are still subject to blackout dates, mostly around major holidays.
You need 80,000 points if you want to travel to Europe without a Saturday-night stay and bypass the limit on seats; the blackout dates still apply.
*
For best selection of free flights, make reservations for free travel two to three months in advance.
They can always be canceled and the points returned to your account.


U.S. Asserts Iranians Plotted To Disrupt Rally in Germany
Iranian diplomats working out of their embassy in Bonn plotted to disrupt a huge opposition rally in Germany last week, perhaps with the intention of assassinating a leading Iranian dissident, American intelligence officials said today.
At about the same time, Germany asked two Iranian intelligence officials to leave the country because of evidence that they were planning potentially lethal operations from German territory, the American officials said.
The expulsions did not appear to be specifically linked to the plot.


STOP NITPICKING A GENIUS
The Studio, Part I
IN THE OLD MASONIC HALL BEING USED AS A RECORDING STUDIO, WYNTON Marsalis tells the band to take a 10-minute break, steps down from the podium, comes over and gives me a hug.
We sit down in the old theater seats.
"Man," he says, "I am tired of all this stuff they're writing about me. It has nothing to do with music."


Terry S. Hurst, William Sanders
Terry Sara Hurst, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley D. Hurst of Elmira, N.Y., was married yesterday to William John Sanders, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Sanders of Pittsburgh.
Village Justice William Gold of Great Neck, L.I., officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Sanders, 31, was until recently an associate at Schwarzfeld, Ganfer &amp; Shore, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received her law degree from Syracuse University.


George Barley, 61, Everglades Protector
George McKim Barley Jr., a real estate developer and leader of efforts to preserve the Everglades, died on Friday morning in a plane crash near his home in Orlando, Fla.
He was 61.
Mr.
Barley, Florida's leading opponent of price supports for the sugar industry, was on his way to Jacksonville to meet with the Army Corps of Engineers to discuss the restoration of the Everglades when his chartered twin-engine Beechcraft 58 went down.
The Federal Aviation Administration said engine failure might have caused the crash.


EVIL'S BACK
Rosenbaum's article, with its slick incorporation of cultural icons, contemporary philosophy and classy illustrations, creates the impression that evil is something profound, mysterious and even grand.
"Transworld depravity"?
Give me a break.
Turn away from the booming voice and special effects of brain-dead theology, and what you find behind the curtain is . . . just little old us.
In truth, human depravity is pathetic, tawdry and all too familiar -- what Hannah Arendt called "the banality of evil."


Blond Like Me
Beautiful blondes, from Marilyn to Madonna, have come in all shapes and sizes.
But African-Americans with blond hair are a new twist.
What began as merely outlandish -- a platinum-tressed RuPaul, a yellow-haired Dennis Rodman -- has hit the black mainstream.
Years ago, the black poet and activist Audre Lorde asked her Afro-wearing sisters, "Is your hair still political?" The answer then was a strident yes.
The answer today is less prone to rhetoric.
Yes, no, sometimes.
Jada Pinkett, the actress, sports a satin-blond marcelle that makes her look a lot like the model Nadja, except shapelier and with a better tan.
Nikki Giovanni, who was once called "the princess of black poetry," has also gone stark raving blond, proving that the revolution will not only be televised but colorized as well.
Homegirls like the rapper Pepa of Salt-N-Pepa buy their blond hair by the yard, weaving it into stylish shoulder-length braids.
As a host on the Sci-Fi Channel, the futuristic songstress Grace Jones wore a plasticized bright yellow wig.


Natasha S. Lance, Kenneth S. Rogoff
Natasha Susan Lance, the executive producer of "Sesame Street" for Russia, is to be married today to Kenneth S. Rogoff, a professor of economics and international affairs at Princeton University.
Rabbi Arnold Gluck is to perform the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The bride, 35, is also an independent film maker.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Sheldon Lance of Rye, N.Y., and the late Charlotte Lance.


When the Sun Shines in Paris, Dining Moves Outdoors
WHEN I moved to Paris 16 years ago, I marveled at the Parisian appetite for the sun.
Even in the dead of winter, at the sight of the slightest patch of blue sky, tiny marble-topped cafe tables tumble out onto crowded sidewalks, as Parisians toss back their heads to expose faces to the sun.
The practice no longer astonishes, for the always fickle, often gray northern skies make all of us cherish sunshine.
To assuage this passion, the city offers literally hundreds of outdoor spots -- ranging from a few square feet of sidewalk in the direct line of auto exhaust, to full-fledged gardens, where the city can be left behind.


Colombian Striker Says Parma Is Out
FAUSTINO ASPRILLA, a Colombian striker, has vowed he will never play for Parma again.
"It is over between Parma and me," Asprilla said in an interview published yesterday in Gazzetta dello Sport.
"I will never play for that club again."


The Shark Shows His Cutting Edge Again
Greg Norman must not have been dwelling on all of his second-place finishes when he teed off up today in the third round of the Canon Greater Hartford Open.
Yes, the 40-year-old Australian had finished second to Corey Pavin in the United States Open last week, and a year ago he was the runner-up to David Frost here at the Tournament Players Club.
In fact, the Shark has finished second 51 times, with seven of those coming in Grand Slam events.
But he has also won more than 65 tournaments, including two British Opens and 15 PGA Tour events.
And this afternoon, Norman played superbly, posting a five-under-par 65 to go into Sunday's final round at 14-under-par 196, three strokes ahead of Fuzzy Zoeller, who shot 66.


VALUES: Thrifty, Brave, Solvent
A Boy Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, clean, brave and reverent, according to the Scout Law.
And he may well make more money than a non-Scout when he grows up.
Among men who had been scouts for at least five years 33 percent report annual household incomes of $50,000 or more, compared with only 17 percent of non-Scouts, according to a new national survey.
It also found that while the "ethical and moral values" of American boys in general were deteriorating, current Scouts who had served five years or more had higher standards.


Developer And a Town Dispute Dump
PETER D. GACHE claims that he has lost everything from his dispute with the town of Harrison.
Once the owner of 104 acres of valuable undeveloped land in this town's exclusive Purchase section, along with properties and homes elsewhere in the United States, Mr.
Gache says he now has no assets and can barely pay for his own lunch.
His financial ruin came at the hands of Harrison town officials, who he says knowingly created a hazardous dump on a five-acre parcel of Mr.
Gache's property, rendering the rest of land -- on which he had planned to develop multi-million dollar estates -- valueless.
All of this has given rise to a web of lawsuits.


When We Were Racing With the Moon
OF THE NINE APOLLO VOYAGES TO THE Moon a quarter of a century ago, only threestand out in my memory.
The others that I reported on achieved their goals with impressive regularity, but the memorable three stirred especially deep emotions.
Apollo 8 came as a refreshing surprise to a beleaguered nation at the end of 1968, a year of assassinations, burning streets and inflamed political passions.
This was the first time men had gone so far out in space, and the destination was visible to all.
Astronauts circled the Moon 10 times, each time disappearing from radio contact.
It was a mission that held the world -- and us reporters at Mission Control in Houston -- in thrall.
For me the story had everything: science fiction coming to life, complete with hardware; man's lofty aspirations; nasty global politics, and a race with a feared adversary.


Varied Produce Offers Tempting Alternatives to Coleslaw
WHAT is slaw?
Culinary historians trace the term to the Dutch "sla" for salad.
Coleslaw is so named because the Dutch word for cabbage is "kool."
Indeed, coleslaw is the mother of all slaws.
But the produce stands are filled with other inspirations for one of the most versatile and inviting salads.


Tara E. McGivern, Robert N. Lynn 2d
Tara Ellen McGivern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen McGivern of New York, was married on Monday to Robert Norman Lynn 2d, a son of Michael E. Lynn 3d of Wayzata, Minn., and the late Linda Hazelwood.
The Rev.
Eugene J. O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Lady Chapel of the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride is an assistant manager at Todd Oldham, the clothing designer's store in New York.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father retired as the presiding justice of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in New York and is now counsel to the law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine in New York.
Her mother is an associate interior designer at Ellen McCluskey Associates in New York.


Habitats/City Island; Love Shack, Minus Heat
EVERY night, a young gallery owner named Daniel Silverstein steers his old burgundy Pontiac station wagon through the chic streets of SoHo, through the South Bronx under the Bruckner Boulevard -- where he is usually hit up for money by men carrying cardboard signs announcing they are homeless -- and across the turquoise bridge to City Island.
That's when he starts to smell the salt water, warm and pungent as a steaming pot of clam chowder.


In the 90's, Advice Is the Hottest Commodity
IF you have money to invest -- or even if you do not -- you may have noticed an amazing new fact of American life: Hardly anybody wants to do anything so, well, crass as selling you investments anymore.
Instead, practically everybody, from Wall Street stockbrokers to the retired teacher down the street, wants to be your "trusted financial adviser." And they are not volunteering to do it for free.


In the Region/Connecticut; Hartford Trying to Rebound From a Long Recession
FOR five years, Hartford has been in the depths of a recession even worse than the one it experienced in the mid-1970's.
Loaded with excess real estate built during the 80's, it is still struggling to recover.
But city officials say that in the last eight months, a growth of interest from both within and beyond the immediate region, buoyed by cheap rents and a trained labor pool, indicates that the situation may be on the cusp of change.


Costumes That Say 'Look'
THE SUMPTUOUS CLOTHES THAT DONNA Murphy wears in "Twelve Dreams" are more than a fashion statement.
They are the haute couture plumage of a creature in despair, the society woman undergoing psychoanalysis that Ms.
Murphy plays in James Lapine's drama at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center.
"You look for things that define the character," said Martin Pakledinaz, the production's costume designer, whom critics have singled out for praise in reviews of "Twelve Dreams." His sketches show the heedless profligacy of great wealth, signaled by the furs Ms.
Murphy wears.
"With the leopard hat -- which is fake," the designer said, "I wanted the audience to see the most negligent that people could be. Leopard is a very ostentatious fur. It says, 'Look at me!' You have to wear that hat with attitude.


Hartsdale School Is Astir Over a Corner
WHEN Jason Davis, a popular custodian at the Highview Elementary School here, was seriously injured by a car in front of the school in April, the accident highlighted how hard it can sometimes be to remedy a dangerous situation.
School officials have made many requests for a traffic light at the site, where the school driveway meets a heavily traveled part of North Central Avenue.
But Chief John A. Kapica of the Greenburgh Police Department said there are not enough cars turning into the driveway from Central Avenue, a state road, nor have there been enough accidents at the spot, to warrant a light.


Gift of Music


Excerpts From Giuliani Interview
Following are excerpts from an interview with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in his City Hall office on Friday, as recorded by The New York Times.
Q.
Do you believe that you encounter opposition at every turn when you try to change things like the budget and the schools?


With Jackson Interview, ABC Made a Choice
To the Editor:
Re "In the Tank" (column, June 22): Frank Rich is right on target.
ABC's credibility is like the theme of Wagner's "Ring" cycle.
One can have wealth and power or love, but not both.
ABC's "Prime Time Live" must determine whether it wants ratings and money or journalistic credibility.
ABC may have made that choice by promoting Michael Jackson's new song.
We are now left with only PBS's "Frontline" for pure journalism.
ARTHUR WHITE New York, June 22, 1995


IN BRIEF
A Young Shell Collector And Her Deadly Discovery
A 7-year-old girl was strolling along the beach at Sandy Hook last week, gathering seashells, when she spotted a metal object and added it to the collection in her sand bucket.
Back home in Hillside, her father took one look and called the police.
She had found a hand grenade.


Once a Perk, Now a Collectible
IT used to be you had to fly to earn frequent flyer miles.
Now you can earn mileage for doing your dry cleaning.
Fifteen years after American Airlines introduced the first frequent-flier program, miles have become a commodity with a life of their own.
And like other sought-after collectibles, they have attracted droves of the obsessed who think nothing of going an extra mile to get a mile.


Now, the Party Is Staying Uptown
Behind red velvet ropes on East 60th Street, between Park and Madison, Randy Scott, a dapper young Hugh Grant look-alike, is kissed by tall blondes in little black dresses, hugged by brown-eyed brunettes wearing skintight Prada pants and given hearty handshakes by men in navy Paul Stuart suits carrying Cuban cigars.
Mr.
Scott, who controls the late-night door at Le Taxi, is one of the new players in a neighborhood fast becoming the midweek playground for the young and chic of the Upper East Side.
The same set that goes to black-tie junior benefits, that summers in the Hamptons and the south of France, that used to party in SoHo but that is finding a new alternative.


Corrections
Because of a production error, page 20 of the Television section today, which is supposed to carry listings for Monday evening, is from an issue last January.
Correct listings will appear on the Television page tomorrow.


Kennedy's Boston
Sites in the Boston area that figured prominently in the Kennedy family's history have been linked on a three-hour tour created by the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston.
J.F.K.'s Boston will be offered Friday through Sunday until Oct. 8.
The tour, on one of the trolley buses familiar to Boston visitors, includes stops at President Kennedy's birthplace in Brookline; his Beacon Hill apartment; Boston's North End, birthplace of Rose Kennedy, and the New Museum at the Kennedy Library, which focuses on the Kennedy presidency.


EVIL'S BACK
Why all the mystery about evil?
It can easily be explained by evolution.
Was it not Arthur Koestler who said that the human brain is one-third human, one-third horse and one-third crocodile?
Evil is the Koestlerian crocodile that still governs us to an extent, the killer instinct of my tomcat, who is gentle and kind with my grandchildren but tortures mice to death while playing with them.
Fortunately, humans can often be satisfied with make-believe, rather than real, aggression.
Witness the fascination with computer games, competitive sports, police stories on television, the novels of Anne Rice and Stephen King.
However, replacing real evil with make-believe first requires an admission that we humans are animals.
Once we know and accept that our genes have blood lust in them (among many other things, of course), then we can start playing with the mouse without killing it.


U.N., in Debt, Seeks Arrears From U.S. and Others
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali is bound for the celebration of the United Nations 50th anniversary in San Francisco next week bearing a gloomy message: The United Nations is going broke.
Speaking to a working group on the organization's financial problems on Thursday, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said that only 48 of the 185 member states had fully paid their regular budget contributions by the end of May.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
CONGRESS HALL, CAPE MAY Christopher O'Reilly, pianist.
Today at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for the elderly and $6 for students.
Congress Hall, Beach Drive and Perry, Cape May. (800) 275-4278.
DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission starts its free summer concert series with a program of 60's and 70's music performed by the Sensational Soul Cruisers.
Sunday at 7 P.M. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Yanni.
Thursday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22.50 to $45.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.
GIRALDA FARMS "A Salute to the Allies" is the theme of the 12th annual Giralda Concert with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Today at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $8, or $3 for children under 12.
Route 124, Madison. (201) 377-6622.
FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The 35th annual festival kicks off today at 8:30 P.M. with the Symphonic Concert Band.
Next Sunday at 8:30 P.M., enjoy community dancing to the music of Tubby Tubello.
Free, but bring your own chairs.
Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.
MEMORIAL PARK, MAPLEWOOD Arts Maplewood presents C. J. Chenier and the Red Hot Louisiana Band with their New Orleans zydeco music.
Saturday at 7:30 P.M.
Free. (201) 378-2133.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series.
Thursdays at 12:30 P.M.
Through Aug. 10.
Free.
Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
OCEAN COUNTY LIBRARY The Garden State Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus present a free concert in the courtyard celebrating American heritage by performing patriotic songs, light classics and popular tunes.
Saturday at 7:30 P.M.
Free, but bring your own chair. 101 Washington Street, Toms River. (908) 349-6277.
OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERTS The eighth annual "Great Sousa Concert" with the Allentown Band, conducted by Ronald Demkee.
Tickets: $12.
The Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY The first annual Princeton Invitational Choir Festival concludes with a Gala Final Concert with all the participating choirs.
Today at 8 P.M.
Free.
Richardson Auditorium of Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 896-9330.
RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest presents four free Thursday night concerts spanning a spectrum of musical tastes.
First up, the Hanover Wind Symphony.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
The Bandshell, 505 Ramapo Valley Road.
Off Route 17 and 202 in Mahwah. (201) 529-7612.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest continues with Marian McPartland, today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Keyboard Extravaganza!
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Summerfest Chamber Players.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Red, White and Blue! with Frederick Urrey, tenor.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Music From Aston Magna, Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
TINICUM PARK, BUCKS COUNTY The Riverside Symphonia's second annual outdoor concert, on Saturday at 8 P.M., will feature a mix of light classical music and American show tunes.
Tickets: $10 or $3 for children.
Route 32, 10 miles north of New Hope, Pa. (215) 862-3300.
VETERANS' FIELD, EDGEWATER The New Jersey Pops Symphony Orchestra, directed by Michael Buglio, performs classical works, Broadway show tunes and patriotic music.
Friday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
River Road, Edgewater. (201) 744-1700, extension 52.
WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, RIDGEWOOD The Metisse Piano Quartet with Carol Rodland, violist; Jennifer Kloetzel, cellist; Chul-In Park, violinist, and Priya Mayadas, pianist.
Today at 7 P.M.
Free. 6 South Monroe Street, Ridgewood. (201) 652-1966.
THEATER BECKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed through a lifetime of correspondence.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.; next Sunday at 2 P.M. and July 6-9.
Tickets: $17.50. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
CAPE MAY WELCOME CENTER The Cape May Stage presents "Cape May on Fire," with Eric Hissom and John Alvarez.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 405 Lafayette Street, Cape May. (609) 884-1341.
EAST LYNNE COMPANY "The Woman Question" features Susan Glaspell's "Supressed Desires," Marie Jenney Howe's "Anti-Suffrage Monologue" and George Middleton's "Unknown Lady." Today at 3 P.M.
The Meadowlands Center for the Arts, Rutherford.
Also, Wednesday through July 8 at 8:30 P.M. at Lyle Hall of the First Methodist Church, Cape May.
Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly. (201) 863-6436.
FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Through July 9.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly.
Burlington County College.
Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.
GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "I Hate Hamlet." Thursday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Through July 9.
Tickets: $17.
Monmouth University, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.
McCARTER THEATER "Family Secrets," with Sherry Glaser.
Monday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $30.
A solo piano concert with George Winston.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22 to $32.
Sweet Honey in the Rock, a tradional African-American congregational choral quintet, performs Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17 to $27. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Harold Pinter's "Homecoming." Today at 2 and 7 P.M., Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
"Julius Caesar" begins July 5.
Tickets: $16 to $30.
Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995.
"Into the Woods." Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
"The Sound of Music" begins on July 12.
Tickets: $3.
Edison. (609) 548-2884.
THEATERFEST "Lost in Yonkers," with Doris Belack.
Today at 2 and 8 P.M.
"On Golden Pond." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 9.
Montclair State University, Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color photographs, opens Thursday.
Through Aug. 20.
Free.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Princeton. (609) 258-3788.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze.
Through July 16.
"John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton.
Through July 30.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet Engeman and Dwight Hiscano.
Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M.
Through Aug. 10. 300 Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.
BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by all members of the center.
Through Aug. 20.
Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover. (201) 328-9628.
COOPER GALLERY "Tangible Insites," textural paintings and clay vessels by Susan Hogan.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 7 P.M. 295 Grove Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-1074.
CORYELL GALLERY Oil paintings by Albert Bross, watercolors and acrylics by Vincent Ceglia and watercolors by Charles Ross.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through July 5. 8 Coryell Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0804.
CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings; Elaine Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Through July 14.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 340 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.
EVERHART GALLERY Abstract paintings by Jim Fuess.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Through July 12. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.
EXTENSION GALLERY "Hug the Noise," an exhibition of cast metal sculpture and drawings by Sean Poreda.
Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.
GALLERY JUPITER "Recent Works," paintings by Evelyn Leavens.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 25 Church Street, Little Silver. (908) 530-8035.
GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE "Displacement," a collage by Peter Jacobs, and "Home," a collage in mixed media by Valerie Sivilli, are on display.
Today, 1 to 4 P.M.
Baird Community Center, 5 Mead Street, off Ridgewood Road, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.
GALLERY AT GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES Color photographs by H. Lisa Solon and sculptures and paintings by David A. Angelini.
Opens Saturday.
Through July 30.
Free.
Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 100 Interpace Parkway, Parsippany. (201) 263-6684.
GUILD OF CREATIVE ART "Rhythms of Nature," a collection of landscapes, watercolors, pastels and collages by Fran McIlvain.
Through July 6.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.
HOUSE OF BRATA ART GALLERY "So Big, So Little," five paintings by John Krushenick.
Through Saturday.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. 46A Fairfield Street, Montclair. (201) 783-7348.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER A faculty exhibition of painting, sculpture and mixed-media collages; "Sculpture and Collage," assemblage sculptures and photo collages by Carol Rosen.
Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880.
JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration.
Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
LEBANON MUSEUM "Details," color photographs by H. Lisa Solon.
Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 57 Muscanetcong River Road, Hampton. (908) 537-6464.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Choice Collection -- Crafts 1995," an exhibition and sale, and "LBI Art Foundation Faculty Exhibition." Monday and Tuesday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., 120 Long Beach Blvd., Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "From Darkness Into Light," paintings and drawings by Howard Lerner, through Friday.
"Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a solo show of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman, starts Saturday.
Through Aug. 4.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.
MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights: Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Starts Tuesday.
Through February 1996.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilites" includes paintings, photography, printmaking and sculpture.
Opening reception today, 3:30 to 5 P.M.; the exhibition begins Tuesday.
Through Aug. 17.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College campus, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Through today.
"Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to 19th centuries.
Through next Sunday.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through next Sunday.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEWARK PUBLIC LIBRARY "Lasting Impressions: The Jewish Legacy of Greater Newark" showcases the development of neighborhoods and culture in Newark by Jewish residents.
Through next Monday.
Monday, Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8:30 P.M. 5 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 733-7798.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters.
Through Aug. 7.
"Baseball in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PALMER SQUARE, PRINCETON Strictly Art in Princeton at Palmer Square features the works of more than 75 local artists.
Watercolors, pastels, oil and acrylic paintings, paper collages, sculptures, photographs and mixed-media creations will be on display and on sale.
Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Palmer Square, downtown Princeton. (908) 874-5247.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its sixth annual Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art.
Through July 30.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism.
Through July 9.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown.
Through July 20.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.
RABBET GALLERY "Five Sculptors: Clay, Wood, Metal." Through July 7.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 120 Georges Road, New Brunswick. (908) 828-5150.
RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "50 Years Retrospective Art Exhibition" features the works of Arthur J. Barbour in the Barn Gallery.
Through July 9.
"Printmaking and Sculpture" offers the works of Barbara W. Frazier and Helene Hirmes in the West Wing Gallery.
Through next Sunday.
Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M., with a reception next Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M.
Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "New Insights -- Rising Talent," an exhibition of the work of John Bingham, glass craftsman; Andrew Braitman, painter, and Lisa Gralnick, metal- smith.
Through July 8.
Monday through Wednesday and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
SHOE-STRING GALLERY "Presence by Absence," paintings by Peter Siegel.
Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. or by appointment. 111 First Street, Jersey City. (201) 420-5018.
STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia.
Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend.
Through July 20.
Tuesday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER.
The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show photographic prints in the upstairs gallery.
"Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery.
Free.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
WILLIAMS GALLERY "The Changing Landscape: Contemporary Interpretations of Landscape Painting and Photography," by David Scott Leibowitz, Marlene Lenker and Rena Segal.
Through July 8.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 8 Chambers Street, Princeton. (609) 921-1142.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The George Riabov Collection of Russian Art includes medieval icons, 19th-century landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage design.
The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence on Western art.
Free.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
SPOKEN WORD BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE "New Jersey Politics in 1995 -- What Is Right and What Is Wrong?" with Tom Byrne, state Democratic chairman; Virginia Littell, state Republican chairwoman, and Bobbi Horowitz, president of Hands Across New Jersey.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 536-9078.
REEVES-REED ARBORETUM Michael Olohan of the water resource management department of the Rutgers University Cooperative Extension Service presents "Watershed Workshop," an illustrated lecture on how individuals can improve their environment at home and in the community.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free. 165 Hobart Avenue, Summit. (908) 273-8787.
FOR CHILDREN FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE CENTUR "In Search of the Giant Bullfrog," a pond ecology workshop for children, invites youngsters 4 to 12 to take a closeup look at frogs, tadpoles, fish and other aquatic life.
The workshop for children 6 to 12 is from 1 to 2 P.M.; children 4 to 6 attend the workshop from 2:30 to 3:30.
Fee: $5, and registration is required. 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood. (201) 567-1265.
MEADOWLANDS AREA The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.
Today at 1 and 4:30 P.M.
Tickets: $9.50, $14, $18.50 and $30. 50 Route 120, East Rutherford. (201) 935-3900.
MEADOW THEATER "Behind the Scenes" offers a hands-on tour of the theater that will allow children to try on costumes and makeup, operate sound effects and lights, and rehearse and perform a scene on stage.
Today at 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week with audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short plays.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Through Aug. 26.
Tickets: $5.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Today.
"The Power" and "African Skies" begin next week.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "Native American Crafts" allows children ages 6 to 8 to create Indian designs on clay pitchers and in seed bead necklaces and sand paintings.
Fee: $32, with all materials provided.
Tuesday and Thursday, 3:30 to 5 P.M. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian Grand Canyon in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn about the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through next Sunday.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Gingerbread Players present "Mozart, Monsters and Matisse," a production combining puppetry and music to tell the tales of "Little Blue," "Tamino and Dorabella" and "Why the Willow Weeps." Today at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $6 and $7.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who Stole the Night," a show that is part legend, fairy tale, science documentary and classic mystery yarn, for the entire family.
Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16.
Admission: $4.50.
Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch. (908) 231-8805.
WEISS ART CENTER The Summerfun Sampler Series presents Allyn Gooen, a balloon artist who offers a balloon version of "Snow White." Wednesday at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Lloyd Road and Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
ETC.
CONGREGATION B'NAI TIKVAH It's that time of the year again: garage sale time.
The public is invited to come and sift through a collection of the congregation's "treasures" and cast-offs.
Today, 9 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Finnegan's Lane, just west of the intersection of Route 1, North Brunswick. (98) 297-0696.
COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS The mini-foreign film festival concludes with "Sweetie." Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Dragonetti Auditorium in the Student Center, 214 Center Grove Road, Randolph. (201) 328-5024.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER The 1995 Spring Heritage Festivals conclude with the Irish Heritage Festival today.
A piping competition with 20 piping bands from the tristate area starts the day off at 9 A.M.
Other activities include an Irish shopping village with sweaters, crystal, food and other imported goods.
The Celtic Cross, Richie O'Shea, Willie Lynch and Mike Bryne perform in the mall at noon.
Tickets: $10.
Exit 16 on the Garden State Park Way, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.
GREATER NEW JERSEY STAMP EXPO A chance to learn about postal history and purchase stamps, postcards, postal supplies and other memorabilia.
Today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Holiday Inn Springfield, Route 22 West, Springfield. (201) 379-3779.
FLEA MARKETS The Englewood Flea Market offers food, old and new toys, clothes, crafts and a performance by the EX-ZIB-ITS Jr.
Steel Band.
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
First and Fourth Streets parking lots, Englewood. (201) 567-5354.
The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens, books, children's clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves, handbags and other accessories.
Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M, through Dec. 19.
Beginning next Sunday.
Free.
West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in downtown Dover. (800) 555-6263.
MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION A series of night hikes for families will have an emphasis on summer insects.
"Firefly Parade," the first hike of the series, will allow participants to explore the Watershed Reserve and to observe the light show provided by several species of fireflies.
Thursday, 8:30 to 10:30 P.M.
Advance registration is required.
Program fee: $7.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Exotica," July 7, and "New Jersey Media Arts Exhibition," July 8.
All show times 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.
Sounds of Summer Petula Clark performs her past and present vocal hits, including "Downtown," "My Love" and "A Sign of the Times," in the ummer concert season opener.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
Spanish Dance Alan Tjaarda Jones, dancer, demonstrates "From Fencing to Fandango: Dance in Imperial Spain."  RUTGERS ARTS CENTER Saturday at 6 P.M.
Free. (908) 932-7511.
A Fairy Tale The Pushcart Players present "Once Upon a Time," a musical collection of children's tales with a contemporary spin for children ages 4 to 10.
MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERISTY Thursday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $7.50.
Valley Road, Upper Montclair. (201) 857-1115.


Carolyn Ballan, D. H. Wasserman
Carolyn Ballan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Ballan of Fair Lawn, N.J., is to be married today to David H. Wasserman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Wasserman of Orleans, Mass.
Cantor Kerry Ben David is to officiate at the Blantyre inn in Lenox, Mass.
The bride is an associate at Hale &amp; Dorr, a law firm in Boston.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a lawyer in Fair Lawn.
Her mother, Sally Ballan, is an administrative assistant at the SCOR U.S.
Corporation, a reinsurance company in New York.


Judging the Judges
To the Editor:
It was with dismay that we read the reviews by Hazel Rochman and Selma G. Lanes of this year's Newbery and Caldecott winners (May 21).
Instead of discussing just the books, both reviewers took the opportunity to vent against the award committees' surprise decisions.


With Coast Guard Help, Peace Threatens the War of the Harbor Pilots
Standing on the bridge of an 800-foot Norwegian oil tanker that had just pulled out of the Bayway Refinery along the Arthur Kill, Charles White and James Tuthill did not look much like rivals as they chatted about their families and traded maritime anecdotes picked up over years of guiding ships in and out of the harbor.
But Mr.
White is a federally licensed docking pilot, while Mr.
Tuthill is with the Sandy Hook Pilots of New York and New Jersey, whose members are licensed by those states.
Their groups are locked in a struggle nearly as old and complicated as the harbor itself: who gets to pilot which ships in which waters.


Melissa Patack, Michael Berenbaum
Melissa Beth Patack, the legal counsel to Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, is to be married today to Dr.
Michael Berenbaum, the director of the United States Holocaust Research Institute in Washington.
Rabbi A. Nathan Abramowitz is to perform the ceremony at Ohr Kodesh Congregation in Chevy Chase, Md.
The bride, 38, graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Sandra and Marvin Patack of Albany.


Corrections
The captions with three photographs with a front-page article last Sunday about the effectiveness of people who work long hours omitted the names of the photographers.
The picture of Cori Zywotow-Rice was taken by Andrew Itkoff; Bob Israel by Marissa Roth, and Kenneth E. Glover by Linda Rosier/The New York Times.


Noelle A. Giroux, Bruce D. Corwin
Noelle Alexia Giroux, the daughter of John and Vera Giroux of New York, was married yesterday to Bruce Davidson Corwin, a son of Drs.
Howard and Jeannette Corwin of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Corwin, 28, teaches fourth grade at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in special education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a senior partner in Dumler &amp; Giroux, a law firm in New York.


Surgery Is Done On Wrong Side Of a Brain
Responding to a botched brain operation, officials of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan have instituted new operating-room procedures, a hospital spokeswoman said yesterday.
On May 26, Rajeswari Ayyappan, the 59-year-old mother of the Indian actress known as Sridevi, underwent surgery for a malignant tumor on the left side of her brain.
The tumor, however, was left intact because her neurosurgeon took another patient's X-rays into the operating room and operated on the wrong side of Mrs.
Ayyappan's brain.


Lauren Hochberg, Ross Benthien
Lauren Kim Hochberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin N. Hochberg of Wyckoff, N.J., was married yesterday to Ross Alan Benthien, a son of Wilda Vandermay and Ken Benthien, both of Bellingham, Wash.
Judge Susan Larabee of Family Court in the Bronx officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Benthien, 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Ridgewood, N.J.
Her mother, Lois Hochberg, is a school psychologist at the Child Development Center at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Paterson, N.J.


Dulcey Heffernan, Matthew Connon
Dulcey Elizabeth Heffernan,a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Heffernan of Rye, N.Y., was married there on Friday evening to Matthew Ryan Connon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Connon of Cotuit, Mass.
Msgr.
Robert McCormick performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Connon, 26, graduated from Boston College, as did the bridegroom.
She received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Until recently she taught the first grade at Our Lady of Good Counsel School in New York.
In September she expects to teach at the Dexter School, a day school in Brookline, Mass.


Fine Art, Fine Wine
A preview and a benefit party at the Whitney Museum.


Birth Control in China: Coercion and Evasion
From the highway, it takes 40 minutes to walk down a dirt road and then a long red-clay rut to where the "wild people" of these hills in southern Hunan Province have been living in isolation for nearly 30 years.
Ever since the Government smashed their houses in 1966 and cut them off from social services because they refused to abandon their ancestral lands, now partly inundated by a reservoir, 10 families -- scarcely 60 people -- have fended for themselves on this scruffy hillside, 15 miles southwest of Chenzhou, a city that itself was long regarded as the end of the line in this part of China.


MARKET TIMING
Monday  Most U.S. auto makers report sales of cars and light trucks for April.
The Commerce Department reports personal income and spending for March.
The House of Representatives returns from a three-week recess.
Brooklyn Union Gas, Reliance Group, Tyson Foods and Wendy's report quarterly earnings.
Tuesday  First day of a White House Conference on Aging.
Figures are released on new-home sales for March.
Newt Gingrich is to testify at a House hearing on proposals to create a "corrections day," on which to repeal rules and regulations deemed unnecessary.
Earnings reports due from Burlington Industries, Cigna, Pepsico and Value Health.
Wednesday  Ford releases its U.S. car and truck sales for April.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Technology Conference in San Francisco.
House hearings on the proposed privatization of government-sponsored enterprises like the Student Loan Marketing Association.
March leading economic indicators and factory orders released in Washington.
House hearing on legislation that would merge the S.E.C. and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Energy Department issues its weekly report on U.S. petroleum stocks.
Centocor, CNA Financial, Duff &amp; Phelps, and Ply-Gem report earnings.
Thursday  A House Banking subcommittee holds a hearing on proposals to create a dollar coin.
The Labor Department reports on weekly unemployment insurance claims.
Earnings due out from Browning Ferris and United Healthcare.
Friday  Report on the nation's employment picture in April.
The Federal Reserve reports consumer credit figures for March.


Amada Sandoval, Roger C. Wood
Amada R. Sandoval, a daughter of Antonio and Maud Sandoval of Fort Collins, Colo., was married yesterday to Roger C. Wood, a son of Roger and Valerie Wood of Plainfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Cynthia Briggs Kittredge performed the Episcopal ceremony at Coolidge Point in Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass.
The bride, 29, graduated from Harvard University and is to begin a doctoral program in English literature at Princeton University in the fall.
Her father retired as a chemistry professor at the University of Missouri at Kansas City.
Her mother retired as a biology teacher at Bishop Hogan High School in Kansas City, Mo.
The bride's father is the president and her mother is the board secretary of the Children's Educational Fund, which provides instruction in the sciences in rural public schools in Weld County, Colo.


Patrick Mahoney, Wheaton Bullock
Wheaton Archer Bullock, a daughter of Mary Colgate Bullock of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Rufus Bullock, was married yesterday to Patrick Francis Mahoney, a son of Mary Ryan Mahoney of Palm Beach, Fla., and Terrence King Mahoney of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Kim Mislin-Reed performed the ceremony at the Keene Valley Congregational Church in Keene Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Mahoney, 24, is a photographer based in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father was a founder of the Edgewood Management Company, an investment advisory concern in New York.
Mr.
Mahoney, 26, is the president of Vineland Productions, a publishing company in New York.
He graduated from St.
John's College in Santa Fe, N.M.
His mother owns Mary Mahoney Enterprises, a gift boutique in Palm Beach.
His father is the chairman of Storval Inc., a computer hardware developer in Minneapolis.


Extinct No More
THE COMPANY OF WOLVES By Peter Steinhart.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Alice C. Pisani, DeWayne Hurdle
Alice Caitlin Pisani, a daughter of B. Michael Pisani of Short Hills, N.J., and of Edna O. Bonsal of Millburn, N.J., was married yesterday to DeWayne Clinton Hurdle, a son of Dan and Dorothy Hurdle of Geneva, N.Y.
The Rev.
Douglas Milewski officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills.
Mrs.
Hurdle, 23, graduated from William Smith College.
Her father retired as the chairman of Troster Singer, over-the-counter traders in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Shelden O. Pisani.


Simpson Lawyer Apologizes for Remark
On his best behavior, Robert L. Shapiro spoke at a gathering of Chinese-Americans here on Thursday night.
Over spicy chicken with noodles and sauteed rock cod, he made self-deprecating jokes and avoided the fortune cookies at all costs.
In April, Mr.
Shapiro, one of the main defense lawyers in the O. J. Simpson case, found himself at the center of a furor after he handed two reporters fortune cookies, saying they came from a restaurant called "Hang Fung." That mocking reference to Dennis Fung, a principal evidence collector for the Police Department in the case, who was then undergoing a blistering cross-examination by one of Mr.
Shapiro's colleagues, soon led to Mr.
Shapiro's being taken to task.


Cari Traister And Daniel Schiff
Carolyn Beth Traister, a daughter of Sandra F. Traister of Auburn, Me., and the late Barry M. Traister, is to be married today to Daniel Frederick Schiff, the son of Helen F. Schiff of Kew Gardens, Queens, and the late Ernest T. Schiff.
Rabbi David Posner is to perform the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride, 28, is known as Cari.
She is a partner in Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, a law firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received her law degree from Columbia Law School.


Ex-Juror Predicts Conviction of Simpson
In the latest word from what has surely become the most loquacious jury in history, a former juror in the O. J. Simpson case has predicted in a book that despite some instinctive sympathy for a black hero, the largely black jury will convict Mr.
Simpson of murder.
The juror, Michael Knox, also said that while racial divisions existed on the panel, they were grossly exaggerated by Jeanette Harris, another former juror who, he said, had her own self-aggrandizing, divisive agenda.
Blacks were nearly as divided among themselves as they were with whites, Mr.
Knox said in the book -- torn by everything from class differences to jealousy, sexual orientation and even bad breath.


Book Project Links Old and New Generations
DONTE BUTTS, 2 years old, had a doctor's appointment at the Children's Center at the County Medical Center here and was passing the time in the children's waiting room.
"Would you like to hear a story?" said Bob Gillin, a volunteer at the center.
A minute later Donte was sitting in his mother's lap, engrossed in a modest tale about a mouse, which Mr.
Gillin was reading to him with great feeling.


Correction
The What's Doing column on June 11, about Luxembourg, carried an outdated reference to a planned outdoor photographic exhibition and misstated a population figure.
The exhibition, of large-scale reproductions of Edward Steichen's works, has been canceled.


EVIL'S BACK
Rosenbaum mentioned a poem left at John D. Long Lake for Susan Smith's murdered children.
The disturbing idea of the poem -- that God took those children to heaven because of their beauty -- is an old one.
The Iliad tells the story of Ganymede, a youth so lovely that the gods snatched him from Troy so he could pour wine for Zeus.
STEVEN E. F. BROWN Danville, Calif.


For at Least One District in Illinois, Plans to Cut U.S. Budget Play Well
Forget Washington's money, people in the prosperous suburbs ringing Chicago are saying these days.
If the Republicans slash Federal spending, Lombard will still get the extra police officers it needs, Addison will still operate its programs for the elderly and the handful of poor people who come to Alexian Brothers Hospital in Elk Grove will still be cared for.
Much of the debate over the recently passed Republican plan to balance the Federal budget by cutting $1 trillion or more in spending has focused on the effects on the poor.
Here in the comfortable and overwhelmingly Republican Sixth Congressional District, represented by Henry J. Hyde since 1975, the feeling seems to be, go ahead and cut.


New Tennessee Waltz? McMullen Sidesteps It
John McMullen, your New Jersey Devils just won the Stanley Cup. Where will you go next?
Nashville?


Wendy P. Stevens, Thomas McLean
Wendy Parker Stevens, the daughter of Penelope Stevens of Fairfield, Conn., and the late Wayne Stevens, was married yesterday to Thomas Prescott McLean, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. McLean Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Spollet performed the ceremony at the First Church Congregational in Fairfield.
Mrs.
McLean, 23, is a strategic planning analyst at People's Bank in Bridgeport, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father was a consultant to the International Business Machines Corporation in Southbury, Conn.
Her mother is a graphics coordinator at the James River Corporation, the paper manufacturer in Norwalk, Conn.


Does a Reporter Have the Right Stuff?
ON Tuesday, I face my moment of truth.
After more than 30 years as a business journalist, including more than 15 years of writing and broadcasting about personal finance, I will be put to the test.
On that day, I will take the examination for certified financial planners.


No One Emerges As No. 1 in Deep Draft
The consensus about the 1995 National Basketball Association draft, which will be held Wednesday night at the Skydome in Toronto, is that there is no consensus No. 1 pick.
Take a big bag, drop in the top five prospects -- Joe Smith of Maryland, Jerry Stackhouse and Rasheed Wallace of North Carolina, Antonio McDyess of Alabama and Ed O'Bannon of U.C.L.A. -- shake them up, reach in and take your pick.
They're all good players, but none of them has the marquee value of Shaquille O'Neal, Chris Webber or even Glenn Robinson, last year's top draft choice.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE SEX REVOLTS  Gender, Rebellion, and Rock 'n' Roll.
By Simon Reynolds and Joy Press.
Harvard University, $24.95.


Finding Good Food With Easy Rail Access
A TRAIN stopped at the Southampton Station of the Long Island Rail Road and the passengers spilled out.
Most went to waiting cars, but more than a few headed for nearby Savanna's, a new restaurant serving Southern Coastal cuisine in a lovingly restored historic building.
A group of diners seated near the windows facing the train station talked about how convenient it is to take a train, disembark and after a walk of 15 minutes or less arrive at a rewarding restaurant.


A Loss for Fassero but Still $1.5 Million
Montreal left-hander JEFF FASSERO, the last player to go to arbitration this year, lost his case yesterday.
Arbitrator ANTHONY SINICROPI ruled the pitcher would have to settle for the club's offer of $1.5 million instead of the $2.45 million he had sought.


Counterattacks, Early and Deadly, on Slugs
FIRST-TIME gardeners often wonder what type of critter is making large holes in the leaves of plants.
There never seems to be evidence of an insect, just those holes.
Experienced gardeners know.
Slugs.
When the culprits are sought, they are rarely found as these mollusks hide during the day and feed at night.
If they finally are spotted, it is usually underneath, on the backs of leaves or at the bases of the plants the slugs are planning to climb for a meal.


Huge Spill of Hog Waste Fuels an Old Debate in North Carolina
The worst hog-waste spill in state history sent 25 million gallons of waste gushing into the New River this week, killing fish and taking the battle over the hog industry to a new level.
A dike surrounding an eight-acre receptacle for hog waste at Oceanview Farms in Onslow County collapsed on Wednesday afternoon.
Knee-deep red, soupy waste rushed over roads and tobacco and soybean fields and into two nearby tributaries of the New River until the waste lagoon, which is 12 feet deep and held waste from more than 10,000 hogs, was virtually empty.


With Jackson Interview, ABC Made a Choice
To the Editor:
Re "In the Tank" (column, June 22): To suggest that the controversial and hurtful lyrics of Michael Jackson's release are a hoax in the P. T. Barnum tradition discredits the founder of the "Greatest Show on Earth." Barnum's pranks were harmless and never insulted any racial, ethnic or religious group.
Barnum promoted hype and not harm.
Can Michael Jackson claim the same?
LINDA ALTSHULER Exec.
Director, Barnum Museum Bridgeport, Conn., June 22, 1995


Dark Side of Privatization: The Tax Bounty Hunters
To the Editor:
Your May 28 On Politics column and the article "Privatization: Leaner Government, or Just Another Fad?" fail to mention a darker side of privatization -- tax bounty hunters.
These are private third-party agents who ferret out businesses and individuals, chiefly from outside the state, who are suspected of evading taxes on New Jersey income.


On Scandinavian Links
Scandinavians have to endure winters of near-constant darkness, but the golfers among them might think it's worth the wait until summer, when they can be out on the links almost 24 hours a day.
Intergolf, a tour company in Atlanta, is taking advantage of Scandinavia's round-the-clock tee times by offering a 12-day golf tour to Finland and Sweden that departs July 11.
For $3,995 a person, based on double occupancy, the tour includes six rounds of golf, air fare, ground transportation, deluxe accommodations with daily breakfast and some dinners.
When travelers are not touring the Scandinavian pine forests with a nine iron in their hands, they can take sightseeing tours in Helsinki and Stockholm and a cruise through the Aland Islands.


The Politics (or Not) of Watching the Pump
AT first, 77-year-old Jerry Ferrara looked a little put out when asked where he learned politics.
"I don't think we're talking politics here," groused Mr.
Ferrara, the executive director of the New Jersey Gasoline Retailers Association -- the man generally credited with blocking the oil industry's vigorous efforts to overturn New Jersey's 46-year-old ban on self-service gasoline stations.


Inside a Gospel Choir
SINGING in a gospel choir is complicated business.
Just ask the four dozen regulars in the gospel chorus of the Bridge Street African Wesleyan Methodist Episcopal Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
They will tell you that you need the voice and you need the spirit, but you also need the time.
You have to rehearse almost every day at home, in your car, in the bathroom at work.
You have to care for your robes.
You have to attend a weekly formal rehearsal at church.
You have to make special engagements.
You have to take unexpected phone calls from the chorus director informing you that the soloist for tomorrow has measles, and now you're the soloist.
You have to sing every Sunday at the main 11 A.M. service -- and hope that you don't blank out on your lines.
And, of course, there are jobs, families, errands, avocations -- in short, there is also living to do.
Sometimes, you need to lie down with an ice bag on your head.


Lifting Bosnia Arms Embargo Would Be Folly
To the Editor:
Your June 19 front-page article on the horrors in Sarajevo portrays a dismal and seemingly hopeless situation.
But if Congress has its way, the carnage of innocent civilians will likely increase dramatically throughout the region.
The abrupt unilateral lifting of the arms embargo could estrange our nation from our allies and also cause the Bosnian Serbs to start a major offensive while time is on their side.
And the war could spread to Kosovo, Macedonia, Albania, Greece and Turkey, tempting Russia to come to the aid of its Serbian ally, with no plan to contain the wider conflict.


Minority Advocates Focus Too Narrowly
To the Editor:
Re "The Gloved Ones" (column, June 18): When Frank Rich notes that gay people can still be legally fired for being gay in most states, he is distracted by a particularly striking tree and thus misses the massive forest of which it is a part.
As my contracts professor at Rutgers Law School delights in pointing out to the incredulous, it is perfectly legal in the United States for an employer to fire an employee because he does not like the color of said employee's necktie.
Thus the average American, if unprotected by a contract, can have his or her life turned inside out at whim.


The 'Homecoming' of Hostility
NO time to pause.
The New Jersey Shakespeare Festival brings a bracing new venom to "The Homecoming," Harold Pinter's family play from hell.
Only nine performances remain.
Before "dysfunctional" became a generation's buzzword and victimization a universal defense, Mr.
Pinter created an artist's hostile place for acting out and a new form for the unsayable.
As soon as one character blurts out a lifelong-held dirty little secret, an awful truth, he collapses.
He is a chauffeur.
One of his nephews looks at the body on the floor with sudden inconvenience.
There goes his ride to the airport.


This Stock May Need an Infomercial
HE'S the Ed Sullivan of the insomniac set.
Long after Dave and Jay have said good night, and even after Tom and Conan have signed off, Mike Levey, the king of late-night infomercials, is still working the airwaves.
In the last few years, Mr.
Levey has found fame in hosting these extended advertisements dressed up as talk shows.
Clad in his trademark sweater, Mr.
Levey has sold untold quantities of car wax, tooth polish and memory training kits on shows with such catchy names as "Amazing Discoveries" and "Ask Mike." The infomercial industry has showered him with awards.


Happiness and Sorrow
Back in 1975, graduating from Eastside High School in Paterson, I remember "Pomp and Circumstance" playing for an inordinate amount of time as about 700 of us strolled into Hinchliffe Stadium.
Four years of high school seemed like a blur as I wondered to myself, "Where did all the time go?" Graduation day was a day of happiness and sorrow.
I couldn't go back and I wasn't sure where my life would lead.
SHIRLEY FRAZIER Paterson


Laurie A. Miller, Robert B. Hornik
Laurie Ann Miller, the daughter of Susan and Alan Miller of New York, is to be married today to Robert Bernard Hornik, the son of Edith L. Beer and Josef B. Hornik, both of New York.
Rabbi Larry Freedman is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Moritz Hotel in New York.
The bride, 26, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Lesley College.
She teaches third grade at the Ethical Culture School in New York.
Her father, a former director of E. F. Hutton, is a financial consultant and an author of financial books in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of Langer Associates, market-research consultants in New York.


Technological Curve Ball for Cuomo
Mario M. Cuomo, an Old World politician who has always preferred the ballpoint pen to the word processor, was haunted by technological demons today during the three-hour premiere of his live call-in radio show.
Three times during a half-hour interview, the show managed to cut off the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, a man whom Mr.
Cuomo described as "possibly the next President of the United States of America." Mr.
Dole finally got back on the air in time to announce, "I'm going to have to go."


Irene Langlois, M. A. Greenberg
Irene Marie Langlois, a daughter of Margaret Langlois of the Bronx and the late Henri A. Langlois, is to be married today to Mitchell Albert Greenberg, the son of Ettie and Dr.
Joseph Greenberg of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne is to perform the ceremony at Crabtree's Kittle House, an inn and restaurant in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Ms.
Langlois, 35, will keep her name.
She is a foreign exchange sales representative in the New York office of the Bank of Tokyo.
She graduated from the State University College at Buffalo.
Her mother is an education consultant in New York.


Finding Some Joy in Numbers
Brenda Furtick didn't ever want another child.
She had strived to safeguard her son, Bernard, 17, from the violence of the streets by sending him to Tennessee to live with her mother-in-law, but he was shot and killed on a Harlem street during a trip home in July 1989.
She had no intention of ever trying to replace him.
"I had one and I lost him," said Mrs. Furtick, 43. "I was finished with kids."


House of Blues Buys Some Time By Losing Some
Faced with a hostile community, the House of Blues has gained a two-month delay of a public hearing by agreeing to a moratorium on construction.
The House of Blues called it a cooling-off period, but the chairman of Community Board 5, Nicholas Fish, said he hoped the club would use the delay to seek out alternative sites.
The community board public hearing, set for tomorrow, was expected to bring fiery denouncements from local residents concerned that the proposed 1,482-capacity concert hall in the former American Savings Bank building at 20 Union Square East would bring traffic nightmares and late-night disruptions.
State regulations make it difficult for liquor licenses to be awarded without community board support.


Laura Elkins, Adam Meltzer
Laura Elkins, the daughter of Carol Berman and the stepdaughter of Walter Berman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Adam Meltzer, a son of Susan and Harry Meltzer, also of Great Neck.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Oheka, the former Otto Kahn house in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
Mrs.
Meltzer, 25, graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and is a candidate for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her stepfather is an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of American Express Travel Related Services in New York.


Helping Students to Be Agents of Philanthropy
AMONG the flurry of class days, athletic award dinners and graduation rituals that characterize this season, a recent recognition ceremony at the Y.W.C.A. of White Plains and Central Westchester represented a different kind of milestone.
The two dozen or so youngsters gathered here were not receiving awards for athletic prowess or academic achievement.
Instead, these high school students were being recognized for their philanthropic and community-service efforts.
Under the aegis of the Youth in Philanthropy program, students at five high schools were chosen in the last academic year to select a community organization, perform hands-on volunteer activities and raise money for the organization.
The schools were Hendrick Hudson High School, Somers High School, School of the Holy Child in Rye, Tuckahoe High School and Yorktown High School.
Youth in Philanthropy is a project of the Volunteer Center of the United Way, the Westchester Community Foundation and United Way of Westchester/Putnam and will match student-generated funds up to $1,000 for each group.


Morandini Hits Fifth Gear As Phillies Beat Cardinals
Phillies 10, Cardinals 9
Mickey Morandini had a career-high five hits and drove in three runs yesterday as the visiting Philadelphia Phillies built an eight-run lead and held on for a 10-9 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Good Moments, Screaming at God
LAST October a dozen teen-age mothers, students at Brandeis High School, began studying children's literature at the Children's Museum of Manhattan.
But in short order, the mothers began writing their own stories.
These are some excerpts.
YUSMARY ECHEVARRIA, 20


Ideas &amp; Trends; Hubris And the Artifice of A Dealer
A FEDERAL judge in Manhattan ruled last week that the case of Robert E. Brennan, the self-promoting penny-stock salesman, boiled down to a massive nationwide fraud of overpriced stocks being foisted on unwitting investors.
But Mr.
Brennan's financial deception is small change compared with his mastery of the grand illusion.


A Financier Who Gave To Both Sides
Robert E. Brennan, the New Jersey financier and sports entrepreneur whom a Federal judge found last week to have engaged in "massive and continuing" securities fraud, has given generously to political parties and candidates in recent years.
Just as his business interests vary from the securities market to horse racing, Mr.
Brennan supports a broad spectrum of political interests.
According to records from the Federal Election Commission, he gave money to candidates as varied as Michael Dukakis and George Bush; to Robert Franks, the conservative Republican Congressman from Union County, and to Harris Wofford, the liberal Democratic former Senator from Pennsylvania.


C. M. VanDusen, Mitchel J. Gross
Carolyn Murray VanDusen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Buick VanDusen of Pennington, N.J., is to be married today to Mitchel Jay Gross, the son of Louise Gross of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and the late Albert H. Gross.
The Rev.
Robert Gentile, a Unitarian minister, is to officiate at the Three Rock Bed and Breakfast in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Ms.
VanDusen, who is 37 and will keep her name, is the development director for Project Renewal, a program offering outreach, employment training and housing to homeless people in New York.
She graduated from Carnegie-Mellon University and received a master's degree in arts administration from New York University.
Her father teaches English at the Peddie School in Hightstown, N.J.
Her mother, Carolyn Perkins VanDusen, teaches kindergarten at the Princeton (N.J.) Junior School.


Hole-Making Culprit: The Voracious Slug
FIRST-TIME gardeners often wonder what type of critter is making large holes in the leaves of plants.
There never seems to be evidence of an insect, just those holes.
Experienced gardeners know.
Slugs.
When the culprits are sought, they are rarely found, as these mollusks hide during the day and feed at night.
If they are finally spotted, it is usually underneath or on the backs of leaves or at the bases of the plants the slugs are planning to climb for a meal.


Transplant From Park Ridge: A Roomful of Richard Nixon
After vacating the Oval Office in disgrace, and after leaving his Saddle River home in favor of a town-house condominium in Park Ridge, former President Richard M. Nixon had an inner sanctum with a good Republican cloth chair -- two of them, in fact.
It was a typical Nixonian work space, small and comfortable, with furnishings chosen by his wife, Pat, that included an elephant collection and books autographed by everyone from Winston Churchill to Dwight D. Eisenhower (though not, it is safe to assume, "Profiles in Courage" or "All the President's Men").
The at-home study was where Mr.
Nixon went after getting up around 5 o'clock each morning.
He would work for a couple of hours, go for a walk, return to the study for another hour or so, then drive to his official but largely ceremonial office in Woodcliff Lake.
Back home after lunch, he would head back to the study.


Forward to Middlescence
NEW PASSAGES  Mapping Your Life Across Time.
By Gail Sheehy. 498 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Tauziat Comes Back to Beat Rubin
Nathalie Tauziat ended Chanda Rubin's shutout streak by rallying for a 3-6, 6-0, 7-5 victory yesterday to win the Eastbourne grass-court title in England.
"I couldn't have had a better preparation for Wimbledon," said the 11th-seeded Frenchwoman.


Gov. Wilson at Last Sets Out on the Campaign Trail, and It Looks Very Long
Sidelined and silenced for more than two months by surgery for a benign throat growth, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California finally hit the Presidential campaign trail this week, finding his voice but not much political footing.
Measured by most campaigning standards -- timing, organizing, fund-raising and, not least of all, every national poll -- it appears he has a lot of catching up to do if he is to win the Republican nomination.


It's All Quiet On One Devils Front
With the Devils clinching the Stanley Cup tonight, some of their players and management figures will enjoy more media exposure as celebrities.
But it's hard to envision Lou Lamoriello, their president and general manager, making the rounds of television shows to bask in the limelight.
Imagine Lamoriello sitting in a chair at "The Late Show," answering David Letterman's wise-guy questions.


Wedding Party Portrait: 'Snide' and 'Obnoxious' . . .
To the Editor:
"Here Comes the Bride. Here Comes Another" (June 11) came across as snide, obnoxious and condescending.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Bistro Cafe in Murray Hill Gets a $600,000 Face Lift
For five years, Jackson Peng's Bistro Cafe, in Murray Hill, served southern Italian cuisine, beer and wine.
He also ran a restaurant downtown, Hudson Corner, on Hudson at West 11th Street.


As Rugged Vehicles Take to the Streets, Gas Prices Take Off
Thanks in part to America's growing love affair with vans and big sport utility vehicles, demand for gasoline is rising across the nation, pushing prices to their highest levels since the Persian Gulf crisis in 1990.
In the last 10 years, the number of mini-vans, pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles sold in the United States has more than doubled, now accounting for more than 40 percent of all vehicles sold.
And in general their gas mileage is much lower than that of the cars they are replacing.


Nancy Schumacher, George Walter
Nancy Anne Schumacher, a daughter of Shirley and Hazen J. Schumacher Jr. of Ann Arbor, Mich., was married yesterday to George Brian Walter, a son of Elizabeth and George W. Walter of Fort Pierce, Fla.
Judge Burton Perlman of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Cincinnati officiated at the Macon Creek Mill in Tecumseh, Mich.
Ms.
Schumacher, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a senior vice president and group media director at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Michigan State University, where she also received her master's degree in advertising.


June 18-24: Trade Disputes; Clinton and Japan, Each Talking Tough, Near the Moment of Truth
If Japan and America agree on one thing, it is this: They can't resolve their trade differences unless a momentous deadline looms.
"The courthouse steps," said Walter F. Mondale, the American Ambassador to Japan.
"That's the only place we've ever gotten anything done."
This time the courthouse is in Geneva, and the deadline is President Clinton's threat to impose sanctions on Japan that, starting Wednesday, would make it virtually impossible to sell a Japanese luxury car in the United States.
Technically, the argument is over foreign access to Japan's enormous auto market.
In reality, it is much more than that, which is why on Monday, Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, and Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's Minister of International Trade and Industry, will go head to head on the neutral ground of Switzerland.


Seven Miles With the Power to Transform
WALKING ALONG FIFTH avenue recently, and then looking at "Fifth Avenue," a show on view through September at the New-York Historical Society, I found myself falling in with those reactionary critics who blame the 1960's for the downfall of civilization.
For that decade did deal a blow to a certain style of sartorial formality that the street used to stand for: Anglophile suits for men, Francophile frocks for women.
That style has never quite made a comeback.
Yes, people still wear these outfits.
But instead of conferring the authority of the timeless classic, they raise the uneasy image of a clock with stuck hands.
The Historical Society's show documents the street with paintings, photographs and such classy artifacts as Tiffany favrile glasses and a spittoon from the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.
Drawn almost entirely from the society's own collections, the show is intended to demonstrate the depth and variety of its holdings; perhaps the point is also to reassure people that the recent auctions, held to get the organization out of its financial hole, have not resulted in liquidation.


Raphael Levy, 86; Mobilized Support In the U.S. for Israel
Raphael Levy, a writer and publicity agent who played a major role in mobilizing American Jewish support for Israel in its early days, died on Friday at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 86.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


A Vision of Eroticism Among the Straitlaced
TWENTY-SEVEN YEARS AFTER IT WAS first released in New York, Luis Bunuel's exquisitely subversive "Belle de Jour" still stands as a monument to the power of suggestion.
During the intervening time it has become possible, if not commonplace, to spell out thoughts much darker than the ones hinted at here.
And yet it is the very gentility of Bunuel's fantasy that remains so astonishingly expressive.
In Bunuel's hands, perfect beauty became more disturbing than the most graphic forms of desecration.
Seen in its rereleased form, which will open on Friday at the Paris Theater, "Belle de Jour" works not only as an elegant, diabolically playful film but also as a reminder of the subtle intelligence movie audiences could once take for granted, intelligence of a caliber now painful to contemplate.
Brace yourself for a look at April 11, 1968, when "Belle de Jour" made its New York debut.


Taking a Chance On Travel
WHEN the United States and North Korea reached a critical impasse in their continuing diplomatic showdown over North Korea's secretive nuclear weapons program last year, South Korea began to panic.
But the reason had little to do with the prospect that its longtime enemy could become a nuclear power.
Instead, the government's biggest concern was the sprouting of giant American television transmission dishes in the parking lots of the city's best hotels.
Within days, the dire-sounding accounts of diplomatic deadlock started zipping across the Pacific, complete with loose talk about a "Second Korean War." Tourists, conventions and business delegations canceled in droves.
Naturally, on the streets of Seoul, nothing much had changed.
South Koreans have been living under threats of devastation from the north for 40 years, all of them a lot more plausible than an atomic attack.
And there are fewer risks getting off the subway at the wrong station in Seoul than there are making the same mistake in Washington.
But try to convince Americans whose image of Korea has been created by reruns of M*A*S*H.
"Every time CNN shows a picture of the demilitarized zone, it costs us another planeload of visitors," one South Korean cabinet official complained.
To his relief, in a few weeks the antennas moved on to the next world crisis, and tourists came back.
It was a familiar phenomenon.
Not so long ago, going to Peru seemed like a bad idea.
And in the winter of 1992 to 1993, Americans who had planned Nile cruises in Egypt wondered if they should stay home instead.
It is not that the world has become a riskier place, it is just that there are more television cameras in more hot spots than ever before.
Even the Internet is jammed with the latest travel warnings.


On the Highways: 14 Trouble Spots
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.


Pamela Sullivan, Bruce S. Ferguson
Pamela Mary Sullivan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Sullivan of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Bruce Stiles Ferguson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Craig M. Ferguson of Darien, Conn.
Msgr.
Donald T. Bennett officiated at St.
Joseph's Church.
Bishop Douglas E. Theuner of the Episcopal Diocese of New Hampshire participated.
Mrs.
Ferguson, 27, is a marketing representative for the Disney Channel in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is a senior partner at Kane, Dalsimer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisele &amp; Richard, a patent law firm in New York.


Would-Be Gang's Fantasy Hits Stark Reality
Four teen-age boys posed here this spring for a snapshot, flashing grins and gang signs.
But they looked more like models in a Benetton ad than thugs -- a tall black youth standing behind three white buddies, fooling around for the camera.
A couple of weeks later, the white boys were found slumped in a car just outside town; each had been shot once in the head.
Two were dead; the third was dying.


New Jersey and the Cup - Perfect Together
The team that hockey's greatest player once called "a Mickey Mouse organization" is the best in the National Hockey League tonight.
The Devils accomplished what they set out to do when they moved into Byrne Meadowlands Arena 13 years ago by winning the Stanley Cup for the first time in team history, wrapping up a four-game sweep of the Detroit Red Wings with a 5-2 victory.


Think Outdoors
Celebrating what's new: a garden, a party site, a season and a Reichstag design.


Sarah A. Buffum, Alex Prud'homme
Sarah Allison Buffum, the daughter of Jane and Charles Buffum of Westerly, R.I., was married yesterday to Hector Alexander Prud'homme, the son of Erica and Hector Prud'homme of New York.
The Rev.
Roger Paine, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at Lopaus Point on Mount Desert Island in Maine.
Mrs.
Prud'homme, 32, is a photographer and is also a photographic assistant for the studio of Victor Schrager, in Manhattan.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College and received a Master of Fine Arts degree from the School of Visual Arts.
Her father is a real estate broker at Buffum-Rossin Realty in Westerly.
Her mother is an artist there.


Q. &amp; A.
Purchase Money Mortgages Q What is a third-party purchase money mortgage? . . .
Janice Walsh-Rowe, Manhattan.
A Bruce J. Bergman, a lawyer in East Meadow, L.I., who specializes in mortgage law, said that the term "third-party purchase money mortgage" is not one that is familiar to him.
But the term "purchase money mortgage," Mr.
Bergman said, is commonly used to describe a loan made for the purpose of financing the purchase of real estate.


Sarah T. Hayne, Robert X. Reilly
Sarah Taylor Hayne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Hayne of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Xavier Reilly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Francis Reilly of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
James Kowalski officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.
Abbot Brian Clarke of St.
Mary's Abbey in Morristown, N.J., took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Reilly, 27, is a marketing representative at Zweig/Avatar Capital Management, a money management company in New York.
She graduated from Colby College.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president in the global institutional banking group at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.


EVIL'S BACK
The close reasoning in Rosenbaum's article was engrossing.
One thing I missed, however, was any reference to deism, the 18th-century belief shared by Ben Franklin and Thomas Jefferson that held that a somewhat indifferent God set the universe in motion and then, as it were, walked away.


The Latter Years of George Inness in 'Presence of the Unseen'
THE life of George Inness began in 1825, at Newburgh, N.Y., and ended in 1894 in Scotland.
It is, however, the work produced in the latter years that dominates "Presence of the Unseen," a small traveling exhibition making its last stop at the Hudson River Museum here.
After Newburgh, there was Newark, where the artist spent his early youth, part of it as an engraver's apprentice, followed by New York City.
This was where he became a painter (with scant training), opened a studio and, in 1848, had his first exhibition at the National Academy of Design.


Over the Hollywood Rainbow to Nowhere
IS THERE REALLY SUCH A creature as a born television actor, a performer who can wrest stardom from the small screen yet can't quite reach big-screen success?
Of course there is.
Think of Raymond Burr as Perry Mason or Andy Griffith as Matlock.
Or look at Lucille Ball who, after a career of supporting roles in movies, became a television classic in "I Love Lucy." Television is particularly hospitable to fine character actors.
Carroll O'Connor is now and forever Archie Bunker of "All in the Family." Candice Bergen's middling film career is overshadowed by her triumph as Murphy Brown.


Michael, Lisa, Diane and a Greek Chorus
THE BEST PIECE OF THEATER I saw last week was the multimedia television docudrama billed as "Prime Time Live: Diane Sawyer interviews Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley Jackson." It drew on every theatrical form from tragedy to bedroom farce.
It dramatized the fates, fortunes and futures of the powerful: the King of Pop, the only daughter of the once and future King of Rock-and-Roll, and the reigning queen of that vast television realm in which one is simultaneously journalist and hostess, dissenter, sycophant and star.
The fate of Michael Jackson's career hung in the balance, we were led to believe.
So did the fortunes of ABC and Sony Records and, it seemed, the future of a marriage of unparalleled psychosexual, sociological and financial complexity.
Media critics like to say that television makes passive drones of us all.
But not this time; we were as important to the drama as any Greek chorus.
We were active commentators and spectators, gossiping, interpreting, judging, knowing that our opinions mattered at least as much as the facts and fictions uttered by the on-screen performers.


James K. Batten, 59, Knight-Ridder Chairman
James K. Batten, a former reporter who rose to become chairman of one of the country's largest newspaper companies, Knight-Ridder, died yesterday at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
He was 59.
He had been fighting a malignant brain tumor for which he underwent surgery last summer.
Because of his illness, Mr.
Batten stepped down as chief executive of Knight-Ridder in March but remained chairman of the company until his death.


One Nation After All
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution.
By Michael Lind. 436 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $25.


Judging the Judges
To the Editor:
It's hard to believe that the timorous and conservative review of "Smoky Night" is by the same critic, Selma Lanes, who in the past has so well understood the need for honesty when writing on Maurice Sendak.
In this case, her failure to understand Eve Bunting's openness in treating the Los Angeles riots as suitable material for a children's book seems quite out of character.


Q and A
Long Live the Beatles
Q.
I will be traveling to London this summer and as a Beatles fan I am interested in poking through Beatles memorabilia, especially fanzines of the early 60's.
Could you tell me where I might find some? -- K. Schwhin, Brooklyn


Carlo Pietrangeli Dies at 82; Director of Vatican Museums
Carlo Pietrangeli, an archeologist and director of the Vatican museums who oversaw the restoration of Michelangelo's frescoes in the Sistine Chapel, died Friday in Rome.
He was 82.
Professor Pietrangeli had been ill for some time.


Mattingly Still Bats 1.000 With Fans
Whenever Don Mattingly walks to the plate in Yankee Stadium, the cheers he receives are by far louder and longer than those afforded any player in pinstripes.
It is the way it should be, for a team captain, for a player considered the last great Yankee, even if many in the crowd are too young to remember the first baseman's truly great days.


The World: The New Symbol of Germany; Faith in a Scrap of Paper
TO this day, Germans of a certain age will throw out a passing remark when someone lights up a Camel, Pall Mall or Lucky Strike.
They remember the days right after the Second World War, when Germany's economy was in ruins and the Reichs mark was nothing but paper.
American smokes were currency then, one of the few pillars of stability that shaken Germans could hold onto.
Then, on June 20, 1948, the Deutsche mark was born -- another offshoot of the Western occupation.
All those living in West Germany were handed 40 marks and told the money would be legal tender the following day.


Stephanie Flack, Marcel de Winter
Stephanie Caroline Flack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Flack of New York, is to be married today to Louis Marcel de Winter, the son of Jeanette and Ido Wolf of Laren, the Netherlands.
Arthur Kimbell, a justice of the peace in Brownsville, Vt., is to perform the ceremony at the bride's parents' home there.
The bride is a senior vice president of human resources for S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received her master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is the founding partner of Flack &amp; Kurtz, a consulting engineering company in New York.


Corrections
A caption with a photograph that accompanied an article about executive dining rooms misstated the location of the room.
The photograph, which showed a table with place settings, was of the dining room at Alliance Capital Management in Manhattan, not Putnam Investments in Boston.
The caption also misidentified the photographer; he is Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times.


Deborah Miller, Adam Strickberger
Deborah Ruth Miller, a freelance television reporter in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Adam Strickberger, an assistant professor of cardiology at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
Rabbi Albert Axelrad is to perform the ceremony at Gedney Farm in New Marlborough, Mass.
The bride, 31, graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
She is the daughter of Annette and Michael Miller of West Newton, Mass.
Her father is the president of the Firestone Financial Corporation in Newton, Mass.
Her mother is an actress.


Developer Given More Time to Finance Renaissance Plaza
A long-delayed proposal to build a hotel and office complex in downtown Brooklyn was extended last week when the city agreed not to seize the hotel's land and gave its developer up to a year longer to finance the project.
Frustrated by the lack of progress in the decade since the developer, Joshua L. Muss, first proposed building Renaissance Plaza, the city had threatened to take back the land if Mr.
Muss did not set a deadline for securing the hotel's financing.
After a flurry of negotiations, Mr.
Muss and the city agreed last week on a set of deadlines, with financial penalties for procrastination.


Dawn Garibaldi, Harry D. Todd 3d
Dawn Marie Garibaldi, a daughter of Linda and Louis E. Garibaldi of Scotch Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Harry Davidson Todd 3d, the son of Sue E. Todd of Aurora, Colo., and the late Mr.
Todd 2d.
The Rev.
Charles J. Hudson officiated at St.
Helen's Roman Catholic Church in Westfield, N.J.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a production operations manager in Baltimore for the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.
In August, she is to become the country transportation and warehousing manager for P.&amp; G. in Guangzhou, China.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.


A Spin Into the Past
THE two-decker carousel on the Steel Pier grabs your attention and pulls you forward, past the ball-toss booths, where huge, brightly colored stuffed animals hang above barkers who promise a winner with every game.
The golden machine gleams in the sunlight, its undersized horses rocking in step to the calliope music, recalling the Ray Bradbury short story of a magical carousel that spins its riders back into time.


Jazz on Line
You've read the articles; now hear the music.
Through @times, The Times's service on America Online, you can hear audio clips of much of the music discussed in these pages; there are also liner notes and personnel listings.
And on Wednesday, from 9 P.M. to 10 P.M., E.D.T., Wynton Marsalis will appear live in the @times Auditorium, answering questions from the on-line audience.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GLOOPY GLOBS
Those slimy, gloopy globs that send shivers down your spine when encountered in the ocean are the subject of an exhibition opening Saturday and continuing through April 1997 at the Norwalk Maritime Center.
"Sting: A Jellyfish Encounter" requires tanks with controlled currents that prevent the creatures from bumping into the glass.
Dozens of them will be pulsing through the water stream constantly.


June 18-24; When Elevator Etiquette Takes a Dive
To this day, Germans of a certain age will throw out a passing remark when someone lights up a Camel, Pall Mall or Lucky Strike.
They remember the days right after the Second World War, when Germany's economy was in ruins and the Reichs mark was nothing but paper.
American smokes were currency then, one of the few pillars of stability that shaken Germans could hold onto.
Then, on June 20, 1948, the Deutsche mark was born -- another offshoot of the Western occupation.
All those living in West Germany were handed 40 marks and told the money would be legal tender the following day.


Julie H. Perkins, J. C. Cordonnier Jr.
Julie Havemeyer Perkins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Perkins Jr. of Topsfield, Mass., was married yesterday at her parents' home in South Dartmouth, Mass., to Justin Caulfield Cordonnier Jr., the son of Mr.
Cordonnier of St.
Louis and the late Mary Paulson Cordonnier.
The Rev.
Frederick Buechner, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cordonnier, 26, is studying graphic design at the Colorado Institute of Art in Denver.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Reynders Gray Inc. in Boston.
The bride's grandfather Mr.
Perkins Sr. was a chairman of the executive committee of Citicorp in New York.
The bride is a descendant of Louisine and Henry O. Havemeyer, whose art collection is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Phone Calls to Zabreb
HAVE A NICE DAY From the Balkan War to the American Dream.
By Dubravka Ugresic.
Translated by Celia Hawkesworth. 241 pp.
New York: Viking. $21.95.


Blocking Sale of A Co-op
DOROTHY OAKLEY thought she had negotiated a fine deal for the sale of her one-bedroom co-op unit in Westchester County.
She had found a ready, willing and able buyer with an all-cash offer that promised a quick, painless closing.
All Ms.
Oakley needed was approval of the sale by the co-op's board of directors.
That was three years ago -- and Ms.
Oakley still owns her apartment, because the board refused to permit the sale.


Young Pianists Will Perform at College Clinic
TWENTY-FIVE young pianists, most of them teen-agers, have been converging on the Bronxville campus of Concordia College, where for the next two weeks they will be steeped in a keyboard clinic.
They will be taking private lessons, taking part in master classes and seminars, attending lecture-demonstrations and panel discussions, going to rehearsals and concerts by faculty and guest artists and, of course, presenting performances of their own.
The project, said its director, Joan Forsyth, is "designed to provide students with a uniquely rewarding experience as well as to give the Westchester community a wonderful opportunity to hear world-class faculty and guest artists."


Ms. Offutt, Mr. Polubinski
Grace Mather Offutt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Offutt 3d of Mentor, Ohio, was married yesterday to Edmund Polubinski 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Polubinski Jr. of Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
Terrence Dautel, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Hubert's Chapel in Kirtland Hills, Ohio.
The Rev.
David Novak, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted.
Ms.
Offutt, 25, is keeping her name.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at the University of Virginia.
Mr.
Polubinski, also 25, coached the novice men's rowing team at the University of Virginia until recently and plans to begin studying for a law degree there in the fall.
The couple graduated from Princeton University.


Cries and Whispers
I SHARED THE DREAM  The Pride, Passion and Politics of the First Black Woman Senator From Kentucky.
By Georgia Davis Powers.
Illustrated. 324 pp.
Far Hills, N.J.:  New Horizon Press. $25.95.


The Odds Were 1 in 175,000. The Furtick Boys Beat 'Em.


And So, Goodbye
THEY roamed the locker-lined halls one last time Monday, and uttered a final pledge of allegiance to the flag.
In the damp heat of morning, the seniors of Woodbridge High School practiced their graduation march with whoops and tears.
Near dusk, all 326 of them glided across the football field in cap and gown, ending their reign as the school's oldest, wisest students.
They were the 39th class to leave the faded brick building, giddily expectant, but somehow aware that the sweet turbulence of high school can never be recaptured.


Varied Produce Offers Tempting Alternatives to Coleslaw
WHAT is slaw?
Culinary historians trace the term to the Dutch "sla" for salad.
Coleslaw is so named because the Dutch word for cabbage is "kool."
Indeed, coleslaw is the mother of all slaws.
But the produce stands are filled with other inspirations for one of the most versatile and inviting salads.


Pang-Mei Chang, Daniel L. Wolfe
Pang-Mei Natasha Chang, a daughter of Drs.
Richard Kounai Chang and Sung-Wen Pu Chang of Hamden, Conn., was married on Thursday to Daniel Lesin Wolfe, the son of Donna and Dr.
Allan M. Wolfe of Dana Point, Calif.
The service was performed by Natalya Burmiskova, an inspector at Wedding Palace No. 4 in Moscow.
Ms.
Chang, 29, is keeping her name.
She is writing a biography of her great aunt, Chang Yu-Yi, who was the vice president of the first women's bank in China from 1927 to 1937.
The bride graduated cum laude from Harvard University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Columbia University.


A NEW DAY FOR AMERICAN MUSIC
JAZZ HAS ARRIVED AT A curious threshold in 1995.
Bred in New Orleans from ragtime, blues and European cotillion music, it has had a history of conflict not unlike America's own -- between progressives and traditionalists, crowd-pleasers and elitists, hot-headed improvisers and hardheaded constructionists.
Jazz has been black and white, hot and cool, mournful and jubilant.
But there is reason to believe that jazz is now on the verge of -- well, something.
To call that something a rebirth would be irresponsible, for a rebirth requires a death, which jazz has never suffered (although some would argue that "free jazz" and jazz-rock fusion were close enough).
To call that something a boom would reduce it to commercialism, which is painful to ponder since jazz was once America's favorite popular music, whereas now it dwells on the margins.


Sports of The Times; Devils Put Garden State On the Map
IN the years when the Soviets first discovered hockey, a conductor on the Trans-Siberian Express confronted an American passenger.
"Tell me about your hockey teams," the conductor said.
"Basta Broons. Chcaga Blikhaks. Tronta Miplelifs. Mintrl Cinidins."


Childhood Memories in Miniature
MEMORIES of childhood visits to the noisy streets of the Lower East Side inspired the miniature scenes in a new exhibition at the Judaica Museum at the Hebrew Home for the Aged titled "Pickles and Egg Cream: A Peek Into the Miniature World of Ruby G. Strauss."
Ms.
Strauss started collecting dollhouses and miniatures when her first granddaughter was born, in 1988, to recreate scenes from her own experiences and pass them down to the next generation.


Sarah Anschutz, Christopher Hunt
Sarah Shaw Anschutz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Fredrick Anschutz of Denver, was married yesterday to Christopher William Hunt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Alexander Hunt Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Canon Joseph O. Robinson performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Denver.
Mrs.
Hunt, 24, graduated from Princeton University.
She is to begin law school at Stanford University in September.
Her father is the chairman of the Southern Pacific Rail Corporation in San Francisco and of the Anschutz Corporation, a diversified company in Denver.


AIDS Babies Deserve Help, Now
Hundreds of babies infected with the AIDS virus will continue to go undetected and untreated every year unless Congress or New York State deal with this vexing public health problem.
The State Legislature, immobilized by a fierce clash between those who want mandatory testing of all newborns and those who prefer a voluntary approach, has been unable to agree on a solution.
Congress, knocked off course when the same fierce clash stopped a Federal survey of infected babies, has yet to take action.
Both bodies have a responsibility to get on with the job.
It is simply irresponsible to let newborn babies go untreated while arguing over the mechanics of how to help them.


Living Legend


Abigail Shapiro,Samuel Snoddy
Abigail Shapiro, the daughter of Michael and Marianne Shapiro of New York, was married last evening to Samuel David Snoddy, the son of William and Jeanie Snoddy of Huntsville, Ala.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Snoddy, 26, is a stockbroker at Merrill Lynch in Tokyo.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude, he cum laude.
Her father is a professor of Slavic languages, and her mother is a professor of Italian literature, both at Brown University in Providence, R.I.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ROALD DAHL: A Biography By Jeremy Treglown.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $13.
This study shows that the man who became famous for his books for children had not only the playful imagination associated with childhood, but also its propensity for tantrums and tactlessness.
The biography "does not at all suffer from being unauthorized," Ann Hulbert said here last year.
She added, "In fact, it is the perfect antidote to Dahl's own triumph at image making."


Filling Some Very Big Shoes
IT was closing time on a March afternoon in a Montclair post office when Christopher Green, a debt-ridden laborer who once dreamed of wearing a police uniform, shot and killed four people and seriously wounded a fifth.
Because the crime occurred in a post office, it was a Federal case and fell to the lot of Faith S. Hochberg, who last year became the United States Attorney of New Jersey.
In many ways, it was her most important proving ground, and in the view of most colleagues, she passed with flying colors.
But the public reaction was more critical.


Starbucks Pours It On
WITH designer coffee bars on almost every corner, terms like "slim grande" and "short latte" have become regular staples of the city's lexicon.
But the coffee bar business itself is far from settled.
In the last year, the national chain Starbucks has descended on the city, opening in 15 locations, with another very likely to be coming soon to a corner near you.
And, in the Darwinian economics of New York's storefront marketplace, the chic coffee bars that only recently displaced the old-time coffee shops are now concerned about being bullied out of business themselves.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE MEMBER-GUEST  By Clint McCown. Doubleday, $20.


Worst of All Possible Worlds
THE BLACK ENVELOPE  By Norman Manea.
Translated by Patrick Camiller. 329 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Rite of Summer: A Neptune King Heats Up the Sea
For many New Yorkers, summer begins with shares in the Hamptons, backyard barbecues and New Jersey vine-ripened tomatoes.
But for the city's avant garde, it does not officially start until after Coney Island Mermaid Parade in Brooklyn and the ritualistic "opening" of the Atlantic Ocean by the parade's newly crowned Neptune King.
Wearing tails and fins that ranged from hip to downright wacky, about 500 mermaids and mermen splashed across Surf Avenue and the boardwalk in the drizzling rain yesterday during the 13th annual event.


Metro-North Will Build It. Who Will Come?
The Metro-North 125th Street station would seem to be a logical stop for many of the line's 100,000 daily riders; there's an I.R.T. station a block away and buses heading west across 125th.
But for years, only about 4,000 people have used the station daily.
Even many of those riders destined for uptown have preferred to ride all the way to Grand Central and take the subway back rather than face the dilapidated station's dank, urine-scented stairwells and forbidding atmosphere.
Now, as Metro-North prepares to rebuild the station as part of its reconstruction of the attached viaduct, riders and area business owners have mixed opinions over a secondary effect: whether improvements will coax suburbanites off the train.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue will be closed today from 52d Street to Washington Square from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. for the Gay Pride parade.


The Politics of a No Vote
WHEN the City Council leadership gathered in a closed room at City Hall earlier this month to discuss the Mayor's proposed budget, Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge had to wait outside the door.
Only later did she find out what had transpired -- when she was finally filled in by junior staffers.
"It was very frustrating and actually enraging to me," Ms. Eldridge said.


Tanya L. Marcuse, James S. Romm
Tanya Lynne Marcuse, a fine-art photographer in Tivoli, N.Y., is to be married today to James Sidney Romm, an assistant professor of classics at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi Jonathan Kligler is to perform the ceremony at the college's Bard Hall.
The bride, 30, is also an instructor of photography at Dutchess Community College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in photography from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Brigid W. Marcuse of New Paltz, N.Y., and Dr.
Donald J. Marcuse of New York.
The bride's father is a psychiatrist in New York.


At a Base in New Jersey, The Time for Denial Is Over
For Lori Starke, who has been an office worker at the sprawling Military Ocean Terminal here for two decades, the specter of the base's closure has been in the air for so long that "it was almost something you didn't think about if you didn't think too hard."
But when she learned yesterday that a Federal commission had recommended shutting down the base -- meaning that the Army might pull out as soon as the end of the summer if President Clinton and Congress accept the plan -- she felt as if she had been told a friend died.


Reform Won't Harm Endangered Species
To the Editor:
Re "The Endangered West" (editorial, June 18): As one who has championed balance and common sense, I was surprised to hear that I am "leading the Senate charge to cripple the Endangered Species Act." That comment is off base, unverified and without foundation.
I remain committed to the restoration of salmon in Idaho and in the Columbia River Basin.
As evidence of this I would submit to you my successful efforts to fund the "fish friendly" turbine to decrease mortality of young salmon on their way to the Pacific.


EVIL'S BACK
Rosenbaum rightly decries the shallowness in our cultural attitudes toward evil, but, in some ways, he ends up being foiled by them.
Everyone quoted in the article, as well as the author himself, addresses evil as something that exists in someone else.
This is a marked divergence from many of the world's great ethical thinkers, who took themselves and their own lives as the starting point for wrestling with the problem of evil.
If we don't begin by looking at ourselves, it's ourselves we'll end up rationalizing.
PETER R. BREGGIN, M.D.
Bethesda, Md.


U.N. Finds Skepticism Is Eroding The Hope That Is Its Foundation
Senator Claiborne Pell, the sole remaining member of Congress to have been present when the United Nations Charter was adopted here 50 years ago this Monday, nurtures vivid memories of a euphoric time.
The Senator, now 76, was among scores of young Americans and Europeans demobilized from the battlefields of World War II and shipped west to be the aides of statesmen pledged to create a new international order.


Major Woos Tories to Stay Party Leader
In a spiffy double-breasted suit and a salmon-colored shirt that would have done justice to a maestro, Prime Minister John Major took to the hustings today and sounded all the notes in a politician's orchestra.
He rattled the drums against the opposition Labor Party, calling it a bunch of politically correct, free-spending ignoramuses.
He bleated trombones at the news media for "a tide of trivia, of rumor, of insubstantial stories and of froth." Evoking a violin, he spoke of his youth, growing up in "a two-bedroom slum" in "the back streets of Brixton," a poor London neighborhood.


INVENTION: Armor Refined
Armor used to do its job just by being there.
But that's now called "passive armor." It's just not strong enough to survive the hardened, high-tech shells and anti-tank missiles.
Thus, reactive armor, which explodes when a shell strikes, blowing the incoming danger out of the way before it can damage the tank.
But this armor lights up radar screens.
The explosive charges are covered by a steel plate that acts like a beacon for incoming radar-guided missiles.


Advantage, Time
Outside, just beyond the garden gate of the secluded Tudor cottage she rents here in sylvan suburbia each year, the as-yet-untrampled lawns of Wimbledon's practice courts were beckoning to a five-time champion.
Inside, just beyond a glassed-in conservatory she has learned to avoid because of the European paparazzi who sometimes lurk in the shrubbery, sat Steffi Graf in uneasy and involuntary repose.
Her mind was willing enough to endure the grind of umpteen more practice hours, but her body was playing tricks on her again.


Internettled
EVERY CULTURE DEVELOPS ITS own vocabulary.
Computer users in 1980, looking for a word to describe the transfer of data from a large computer to a smaller one, came up with download; that's still what it means, though the large computer is now called a host system.
A nice verb, and the transmission in the opposite direction is called, with admirable consistency, upload. (This is on the analogy of the judicial metaphor: to hand up an indictment -- to the bench -- and to hand down a verdict.)
A new vocabulary soon develops barnacles.
Certain words from other cultures are adopted with such frequency that they become cliches.


Lifting Bosnia Arms Embargo Would Be Folly; Give Muslims a Chance
To the Editor:
Western timidity in the face of Serbian aggression over the last three years is truly staggering!


Soviet Dynamics
To the Editor:
In his intemperate response (Letters, June 4) to my essay on Soviet historiography, Stephen F. Cohen unintentionally reinforces several of the points I make.


Mexico Reports Troops Capture Powerful Narcotics Trafficker
Army troops and federal authorities near the city of Guadalajara arrested one of Mexico's most powerful and violent drug traffickers on Friday.
He had been wanted in connection with the assassination of a Roman Catholic Cardinal and the murders of more than two dozen other people.
Government officials said the trafficker, Hector Luis Palma, was arrested in a private home in Zapopan, just north of Guadalajara.
According to radio reports, Mr.
Palma and seven heavily armed men who were also arrested at the house were carrying credentials identifying them as federal police agents.


'A Life in the Theater' Opens Bay St. Season
A REGIONAL theater starts the season with a devotional low-budget play about a regional theater.
All the cast equals two, actors playing actors, traveling across a vastness of styles in tribute to acting.
Isn't it fitting?
Theoretically, yes.


Hate That Gray Mood? Wash It Away (as Usual)
DOWNTOWN -- Some people go shopping.
Some get religion.
Others go trekking in the wilderness.
When the supermodel Linda Evangelista wants a new lease on life, she changes her hair color.
"If I'm depressed, I think about a new color, then I get excited," Ms.
Evangelista was saying on June 19 in a van in the East Village that was serving as her dressing room.
Nearby, at a new nightclub called System, a crowd was getting lathered up to a minor frenzy at a promotional party for Clairol Ultress Gel Colourant (for which Ms. Evangelista recently signed an exclusive contract) and was wondering what her new color would be.


A Fortunate Confluence
Apparently Howard C. DeMartini, the new Suffolk Offtrack Betting president and chief executive, is taking the organization into new horizons with his hosting a Republican political fund raiser at the Hauppauge location  [ "Long Island Journal, G.O.P.? OTB? Wanna Bet?" May 14 ] .
The very idea that an institution devoted to the improvement of the breed could host an affair devoted to political fund raising opens up untold possibilities for its future use.


State Department's Travel Cautions
FOR years, the State Department has offered information sheets keeping travelers abreast of conditions in countries around the world, and these materials now are more widely available than ever before, with a few taps of the computer or telephone keypad.
They are divided into two groups, consular information sheets -- available for the more than 200 countries of the world -- and warnings, recommending deferral of all travel -- now in effect for 22 countries, from Rwanda to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But even after the department's efforts in recent years to make its advisories simpler and more timely, they can vary widely in their usefulness, often serving only as a starting point for research by a traveler who wants to be well informed about a possible destination.


Computer Transforms County Map Making From Glacial to Quick
THE County Department of Planning can now access all sorts of geographic, demographic and zoning information for any street address in the county after installing a high-tech computer map-making system.
Planning officials used to work as long as half a year to prepare a general land use map.
Map making was a painstaking process involving scribing, drafting and four-color inks.


Mary Elizabeth Coudal, And John C. Jones
Mary Elizabeth Coudal, a daughter of Edgar F. Coudal of Sarasota, Fla., and Mary Lou Wade of Honolulu, was married on Friday to John Cristopher Jones, a son of John and Charlotte Jones of Westport, N.Y.
The Rev.
Barbara Lundblad performed the ceremony at Our Saviour's Atonement Lutheran Church in New York.
The bride, who is known as Mary Beth, produces and hosts "Mary Beth &amp; Friends," a cable television show on the Manhattan Neighborhood Network.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received her master's degree in English literature.
Her father is a public relations consultant in Sarasota, and her mother teaches business communications at the University of Phoenix in Honolulu.


Slaws, Glorious Slaws
WHAT is slaw?
Culinary historians trace the term to the Dutch "sla" for salad.
Coleslaw is so named because the Dutch word for cabbage is "kool."
Indeed, coleslaw is the mother of all slaws.
But the produce stands are filled with other inspirations for one of the most versatile and inviting salads.
The main ingredient must have an inherent crispness so it can sop up a dressing without losing its character.
Asian Cabbage Slaw Total time: 20 minutes  6 cups shredded Chinese cabbage (about 1 medium-size head)  1/4 cup finely minced scallions  1 tablespoon finely slivered fresh ginger  2 tablespoons sesame seeds  1/3 cup rice vinegar  1 tablespoon light soy sauce  1/3 cup Oriental sesame oil  1 tablespoon finely minced fresh coriander leaves  Hot red pepper flakes to taste.
1. Put the cabbage in a large bowl.  Toss with the scallions and ginger.
2.
Put the sesame seeds in a dry skillet over medium-high heat and toast until golden, about three minutes.
Remove from heat; set aside.
3.
Mix the vinegar, soy sauce and sesame oil together.
Pour the dressing over the cabbage and toss gently.
Add the coriander leaves and red pepper flakes and toss again.
4.
Transfer to a serving bowl and sprinkle with the toasted sesame seeds.
The salad is ready to serve, but it can wait, at room temperature, an hour or two before serving.
Yield: 6 servings.
Moroccan Carrot Slaw Total time: 10 minutes plus 30 minutes marinating  1/2 teaspoon whole cumin seeds  1/4 cup fresh lemon juice  1/2 teaspoon ground cumin  1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil  1 pound peeled baby carrots (sold in bags), or 1 pound large carrots, peeled  Salt and fresh black pepper  1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh coriander leaves.
1.
Toast the cumin seeds by putting them in a hot skillet over medium-high heat for about 30 seconds until they become fragrant.
Remove from heat and put in a two-quart bowl.
2. Add the lemon juice, ground cumin and oil. Mix well.
3.
Grate the carrots by putting them in the feed tube of a food processor and processing them through a shredding disk. (The reason for using baby carrots is one of convenience -- they come already peeled.)
Alternatively, regular large carrots, peeled, can be used.
Without a food processor, it's better to use large carrots and grate them by hand on a box grater.
Add the grated carrots to the bowl and toss to coat well with the dressing.
4.
Season to taste with salt and pepper.
Fold in coriander and marinate about 30 minutes at room temperature before serving.
The salad can hold longer, but the coriander will turn dull green, so wait until the last minute before adding.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
Warm Fennel Slaw With Bacon Total time: 30 minutes  2 large fennel bulbs  2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil  4 ounces country-style slab bacon, diced  3 tablespoons white wine vinegar  1 tablespoon Dijon mustard  Freshly ground black pepper  1 tablespoon minced fresh chives.
1.
Trim the stems and leaves from the fennel bulbs.
Chop and reserve two tablespoons of the leaves.
Discard the stems.
Quarter and shred the fennel bulbs by hand or on the fine slicing disk of a food processor.
Put the fennel in a bowl.
2.
Heat one tablespoon of the oil in a heavy skillet, add the bacon and saute over medium heat until the bacon is golden.
Pour the contents of the skillet through a strainer into a heatproof bowl.
Spread the pieces of bacon on absorbent paper.
3.
Add the vinegar to the skillet and heat briefly, then stir in the mustard.
Return the reserved bacon fat to the pan and add the remaining olive oil.
Season to taste with pepper.
4.
Pour the dressing over the fennel, add the chopped leaves and the chives and serve at once.
For convenience, the dressing and fennel can be prepared in advance.
Wait until just before serving to reheat the dressing, then toss it with the fennel.
Yield: 4 servings.


WEDDINGS
Sarina Tang, an art dealer and curator in New York, was married yesterday to Martin Garbus, a partner in the New York law firm of Frankfurt, Garbus, Klein &amp; Selz.
Justice Leon E. Polsky of New York State Supreme Court officiated at the Century Association in New York.
The bride specializes in contemporary art.
She graduated from the Ecole du Louvre in Paris.
She is a daughter of Georgette Y. N. Tang of New York and the late Yeh Chu Tang, who was a textiles manufacturer in China and Brazil.


Joseph M. Sugar, 73, Innovative Executive In Film Distribution
Joseph M. Sugar, a movie executive who developed new techniques of film distribution, died at his home in Palm Springs, Calif., last Saturday.
He was 73.
The cause of death was a heart attack, a business associate said.


A Mix Master: His Art Lies In Paint Itself
In the 15 years since Carl Plansky first mixed homemade oil paints for himself and a few fellow artists, his company, Williamsburg Art Materials, has grown into something of a microbrewery of oil paint.
With an eye for transparency and opacity, acutely aware of the undertones of umbers, ochers and siennas, Mr.
Plansky scours the earth in search of the perfect pigment.
His paints, which are now sold out of a storefront on the Lower East Side, show up on canvases stashed in cramped studios, shown at posh galleries, and scrutinized in the Whitney Biennial.


Taunts, Not Sticks and Stones, Break Pazienza's Bones
With each disdainful smirk, with every taunting gesture he made against Roy Jones Jr., Vinny Pazienza paid dearly tonight.
Jones displayed cruel, cool power in the face of that taunting and knocked out Pazienza in the sixth round in an easy defense of the International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight crown.


She Runs, She Jumps, She Renounces Love
Congo  Laura Linney, Ernie Hudson, Tim Curry, Dylan Walsh Directed by Frank Marshall PG-13 109 minutes


For Businesses, Internet Can Open Marketing Doors
LAST year, when Management Information Technologies developed its Readware product, the software company in Hauppauge sent out 120 press releases and received back two replies.
Several months ago the company went on the Internet, listing the same information, a vice president, Richard Hyams, said.
"Within one month, we got 50 leads and closed on 10 of them," Mr.
Hyams said.
"Then we set up an electronic mailing list and within a few weeks had 800 names on the list, from which we made 40 software sales.


Katherine Crouse and David Reed
Katherine Keogh Crouse, a corporate travel consultant at Travel Answers in Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
David M. Reed, a psychotherapist in Wayne, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard D. Mallory, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James Keogh, in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Reed, 50, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father was an executive director of Time magazine in New York and from 1973 to 1976 was the director of the United States Information Agency in Washington.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


The World; A New Terror Stalks Russians: The Weak Ruler
NOBODY knows better than Boris Yeltsin that Russians like their leaders strong.
Their history teaches them that diffuse power is synonymous with chaos -- and only sets the stage for a new cycle of despotism.
Three years ago, the Russian President abruptly cut short a state visit to Beijing to attend to domestic politics.
"The master," he explained, "must return to restore order."


Bittersweet Goodbye
I am a freshman but all of my friends were seniors.
I just went to the ceremony and I can't begin to tell you the feeling of loss.
This year flew by so quickly but I wouldn't give it up for anything.
BRIAN BEDNAREK Hamilton Township


The Nation: Primary Politics; In Congress, It's Nearly 1996
THE Senate majority leader had it all figured out.
He would get the Congress to move quickly on a litmus test issue that would guarantee support from the key element in his party.
That was in 1960, and the Senate majority leader was Lyndon Johnson.
He arranged a Congressional session to follow the party nominating conventions so that a new minimum wage bill could be passed and the Democrats' concerns for the working man demonstrated.


Rebecca Rodman, Mark Kriegsman
Rebecca Jane Rodman, the daughter of Ann and Karl Rodman of New Paltz, N.Y., was married at her parents' home yesterday to Mark Edwin Kriegsman, the son of Betsey W. Farber of New York and Edwin Kriegsman Jr. of Summit, N.J.
Town Justice Bart Wagner of New Paltz performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Rodman, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University and expects to begin studying for a law degree at Northeastern University in August.


The Long and Narrow Shop of Flowers
Encircled in a web of sunflowers, black hollyhock, exquisite violet wisps of smokebush and white love-in-a-mists, Tracy George stood still for a moment in the entrance of Elizabeth Ryan Floral Design, at 411 East Ninth Street.
"It smells so good in here," she sighed.
Elizabeth Ryan, 35, who opened the shop in February, bent over to gather some chartreuse euphorbia from a glass vase.
"It's the lavender," she said, adding to the thick bundle she was cradling in her left hand.
Making her way to the back of the store, she clipped the stems and wrapped the bouquet, first in tissue paper, then in clear plastic, and sprayed the petals with water.


Patricia Talarico, Michael B. Kelly
Patricia Jane Talarico, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Rudolph D. Talarico of Spring Lake, N.J., was married there on Friday to Michael Bruce Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Kelly, also of Spring Lake.
Msgr.
Thomas A. Luebking performed the ceremony at St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Kelly, 25, is an international account administrator at Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark, an investment-management firm in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the senior partner in Talarico, Bellingham, Linn Urology, a medical practice in Neptune, N.J.


Rain on a Special Day
It rained.
For 35 years that's what I've remembered about my graduation from Tufts University.
We sat in a light drizzle and just as the deans were to present the graduates, it started to rain harder and the university officials halted the ceremony.
At our recent reunion, everyone recalled the indignity of plucking that coveted diploma from a stack in a cardboard box.
DOROTHY CORSON JUDD West Orange


Dueling Playwrights At Bertolt Brecht's Berliner Ensemble
"INTRIGUE IS A BASIC structural element in theater," a smiling Heiner Muller asserted after outmaneuvering a rival director a few months ago.
But it turns out that Mr.
Muller's rivals also know a thing or two about intrigue, and he has suddenly found himself in a high-stakes cultural shootout with another of Germany's leading theatrical figures, Rolf Hochhuth.
The duelists seem made to confront each other.
Mr.
Muller, sometimes considered Germany's finest living dramatist, writes dense, multilevel plays tinged with cryptic social criticism.
Mr.
Hochhuth, who burst into worldwide prominence in 1963 by portraying Pope Pius XII as a Nazi collaborator in his drama "The Deputy," is an angry polemicist who rips his plots from the day's headlines.


POSTINGS: Exhibit at National Academy of Design; Architecture, British Style
The problem with British architecture these days, said Peter Murray, curator of the Contemporary British Architecture exhibition at the National Academy of Design, is that so much of it is built somewhere else.
"It's sad," he said, "but it's very difficult to build anything really contemporary there; it's hard to get approvals from town councils."
The exhibit, which opened last week, consists of drawings and models of, among others, a fish restaurant in Tokyo; an airport in Hong Kong; the Maison du Japon in Paris; a bus station in Venice; a sliver of an aluminum tower on Lake Zurich, and projects in Berlin and Prague.


The Birth of a Budget Surprises Its Parents
New Jerseyans have little to fear from the advice that you should never watch laws or sausage being made.
When it came to drawing up a final state budget for tomorrow's Senate vote, everything was pretty much hidden from view anyway.
The Whitman administration and the Republican legislative leadership contend that the final $16 billion package was the result of months of public hearings and debate.
Well, the legislative budget committees did indeed spend the spring dutifully traveling the state and conducting hearings on the Governor's plan.
But the budget that the public got to speak up on is not the one the Senate will pass tomorrow.
No.
The real budget was drawn up at the last minute, and in such privacy that most of the members of the appropriations committees did not know it had been born until state troopers delivered the done deal to their doors on Sunday.


When They Talk About Small and Intimate Schools . . .
IN the Hewlett School yearbook, the head shots are the same size as the heads of the students.
Every senior has a full-page photo.
With only five students in the Class of '95, Hewlett has an abundance of space in its yearbook and in its buildings in East Islip.
Students say that is one of the positives in being perhaps the smallest high-school graduating class on Long Island.


Lorin Lech and James Boswell
Lorin Beth Lech, a daughter of John and Lorraine Lech of Wallington, N.J., was married yesterday to James Danforth Boswell, a son of Jack and Madeline Boswell of Harrington Park, N.J.
Msgr.
Walter J. Gorski officiated at a military ceremony at St.
Cornelius Chapel on Governors Island in New York.
Mrs.
Boswell, 29, is a staff assistant for newsroom technology at The New York Times.
She graduated from Rutgers University.


Soothing Summer's Fiercest Days
Long skirts are back again for long hot summer days.
Fluid bias cuts catch a welcome breeze on 90-degree days.
New this year, the color palette is based on shades of ivory, printed with pale pastel flowers.
Two young women dressed in identical mauve long satin dresses walk along Fifth Avenue, their hems dipping to the pavement.
Their dresses have the languor of the evening dresses worn by Hollywood starlets in the 1930's, updated with today's backpacks.


Washington Memo; Extreme Rhetoric Bedevils Congress
The 104th Congress, which once marveled at its own legislative efficiency, is bedeviled by partisan sniping, wild exaggeration and a bizarre degree of self-confidence.
Its leaders even asserted that there was nothing strange about the Senate's failing to vote squarely on a nomination for an office with only symbolic power.
Instead, they said, it made perfectly good sense to vote twice not to take a vote on confirming a Surgeon General -- and for 57 senators to be insufficient to make the vote happen.


WITH TRADE TALKS STALLED, TOP AIDES AGREE TO STEP IN
Negotiators for Japan and the United States said today that the top trade officials from both countries had agreed to fly here on Monday in a last-ditch effort to resolve their differences on automotive trade before American sanctions on Japanese luxury cars go into effect on Wednesday.
The two officials, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, and Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's Minister of International Trade and Industry, will try to bridge what both sides say is an enormous gulf on how Japan should organize its economy and how its businesses should interact with foreign suppliers.


In War-Torn Chechnya, Trying to Survive


Jason P. Rhodes and Erinn Thoyer
Erinn Thoyer, the daughter of Judith and Michael E. Thoyer of New York, was married last evening to Jason Paul Rhodes, a son of Irene and Philip Rhodes of Kendall Park, N.J.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Rhodes, 25, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride is a fourth-year medical student at the University of Pennsylvania, where the bridegroom will resume studying for an M.B.A. degree in the fall.
Her parents are partners in New York law firms.
Mr.
Thoyer is with Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
Mrs.
Thoyer is with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.


EVIL'S BACK
"Evil's Back" raises the question, "When was it ever away?" Is not the story of the pitiable Susan Smith a variation on the theme of Medea?
We shudder at the artistry of a great actress delivering all the potential horror of Medea's destruction of her children but when the destroyer is an unprepossessing young mother from a small backwater town, we rush to ask of God, "Why was it permitted?" Are not the Menendez brothers a variation on the theme of Oedipus, but without the grandeur and majesty?
ROBERT R. LEDBETTER Cheverly, Md.


Clinton Says Foster's Foes Try to Impose Anti-Abortion Views on the Nation
Accompanied by Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., his failed nominee for Surgeon General, President Clinton today charged that "extreme right-wing" forces were seeking to impose their abortion views on the nation and that the Republican Congressional leaders had given them "the keys to the store."
Delivering his radio address from Pine Bluff, Dr.
Foster's birthplace, Mr.
Clinton said the battle over abortion had just begun with the defeat of the 61-year-old obstetrician-gynecologist and he pointed to restrictions on abortion that have passed or are pending in the Republican-controlled House.


Miss McDermott, Mr. Strupp
Kaitlin Cagney McDermott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. McDermott of Essex, Conn., was married yesterday in Old Lyme, Conn., to David John Strupp Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Strupp Sr. of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
David W. Good performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Old Lyme.
Mrs.
Strupp, 27, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a product associate in men's wear at Polo Ralph Lauren in New York.
Her father owns the McDermott Auto Group in New Haven.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 After the fall: Stripped of power, a Councilwoman tries to survive.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Starbucks casts a giant shadow on the city's smaller coffee bars.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 11 In miniature, childhood memories of the Lower East Side; rooftop jazz at the midtown Y.W.C.A.; interacting with the past in Prospect Park.
MOVIE CLOCK 13 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 14 Touring the East 70's and 80's; the charming Erminia; the homey Etats-Unis; the generous portions at Pamir; the barnyard motif at Pig Heaven.
SOAPBOX 15 Good moments, screaming at God: Teen-age mothers tell their stories.
And letters.


Verdi March


Accessing Frank Lloyd Wright
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT  Presentation and Conceptual Drawings.
Boxed set of four CD-ROM's (Windows).
New York: Luna Imaging/ Oxford University Press.


A Coach Is Accused of Carrying Winning Too Far
In Little League circles, Albert (Moose) Greenfield is legendary for his discipline, aggressiveness and will to succeed.
His teams are, above all else, winners.
Now, Mr.
Greenfield is caught in a squeeze play that is taking on a longevity more typical of the big leagues.
He has been accused of attacking an umpire during a game in May, but the assault case against him was adjourned at his lawyer's request for the second time Thursday night.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TOO SOON TO TELL  By Calvin Trillin. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.


New Orleans Sounds in Storrs
NORFOLK and Music Mountain are the jewels in Connecticut's summer festival crown, but music is also available in several series sponsored by colleges and churches around the state.
The University of Connecticut, for example, has begun Summerfest '95.
Sharing the stage at Jorgensen Auditorium in Storrs on Thursday at 8 P.M. are Taj Mahal, performing songs from his African-American heritage, and Queen Ida, a Grammy winner, offering New Orleans Cajun, Creole and Zydeco music with her own backup band.


Tasty Ways To Divide A Little Pie
BY NOW THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR the Arts has the power to evoke glazed eyes from one group of citizens, outrage from a second and genuflection from a third.
At times, the bill passed by the House of Representatives that would phase out the organization in three years seems a promise of welcome silence.
But the endowment, even in a shrinking condition, cannot be ignored: it influences the nature of artistic patronage in the United States, defining issues, setting priorities, inspiring matching grants.
So a recent two-day public meeting of a music advisory panel here, with its somber assessment of the musical scene, had a resonant significance.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $220,000
252 West 30th Street  1,000-sq.-ft. open-space condo in a loft building; elevator, 1 bath, office area, 3 terraces, 2 exposures, h/w floors; common charge $227, taxes $2,736, listed at $229,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $450,000
622 Greenwich Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse-co-op in a loft building; large modern kitchen, 20-ft. ceilings, fireplace, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $2,000, 40% tax-deductible. listed at $475,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  MURRAY HILL  $306,000
137 East 36th Street  (Carlton Regency South)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a postwar building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,950, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $349,000, 30 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman; Bellmarc)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $547,500
155 East 76th Street  (Queen Anne)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,663-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, remodeled kitchen and bath, optional garage space; maintenance $1,529, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $575,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential/L.B. Kaye; Douglas Elliman)  BRONX
PARKCHESTER  $47,000
1425 Theriot Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 875-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, eat-in kitchen, garage space; maintenance $412, including utilities, 70% tax-deductible, listed at $52,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Heritage First)  RIVERDALE  $370,000
2708 Netherland Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath detached stucco-and-stone Tudor; dining room, sunroom, playroom, fireplace, finished basement, rear deck, 1-car garage; taxes $2,363, listed at $415,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN COLLEGE AREA  $245,000
2721 Bedford Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-full and 2 half-bath detached Dutch colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,900, listed at $269,000, 65 weeks on market (Broker: Wilk)  BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $233,000
66 Orange Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,377-sq.-ft. co-op in a postwar building; elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, common garden; maintenance $1,058, 65% tax-deductible, listed at $265,000, 30 weeks on market (Broker: Harborview)  PARK SLOPE  $382,000
101 Sixth Avenue  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, double parlor, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; full cellar; taxes $2,020, listed at $449,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Elaine Gay)  QUEENS
WHITESTONE  $200,000
147-18 12th Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old frame- and aluminum-sided house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,356, listed at $220,000, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: REMAX/Univeral; First Choice)  STATEN ISLAND
ROSEBANK  $132,000
31 Hylan Boulevard  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; parquet floors, 2 wraparound terraces, Verrazano-Narrows Bridge view; common charge $290, tax abated, listed at $150,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Gateway Arms; Wonica)  WARD HILL  $292,000
110 Nixon Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 3/4-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $1,808, listed at $338,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Turnkey Agency; Vitale-Sunshine)  WESTCHESTER
HARTSDALE  $159,000
424 The Colony  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old condo; corner unit, dining room, 2 balconies; common charge $277, taxes $5,077, listed at $164,900, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Rita Cohen; Century 21 Gold Castle)  MAMARONECK  $175,000
531 Center Avenue  65-year-old 2-family colonial; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; basement, taxes $5,200, listed at $175,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Houghton &amp; Banks)  TARRYTOWN  $130,000
412 Benedict Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old condo; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, deck, dining room; common charge $218.36, taxes $3,133, listed at $139,900, 30 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential Rita Cohen)  VALHALLA  $221,000
10 Pamela Lane  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split-level; entry hall, family room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, 1-car garage, .25 acre; taxes $4,303, listed at $239,000, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff)  LONG ISLAND
AMITYVILLE  $232,500
48 Bayview Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 100-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, office, 2 fireplaces, porch, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000, listed at $249,990, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Manor Gate)
LATTINGTOWN  $710,000
3 Mindy Court  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, sunroom, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $12,000, listed at $775,000, 72 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Brook Hollow Properties)  LAUREL HOLLOW  $490,000
592 Cold Spring Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 190-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, attic, 4 fireplaces, pool, beach and mooring rights, 2 acres; taxes $4,800, listed at $495,000, 32 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes; Daniel Gale Associates)  NEW HYDE PARK  $225,000
14 Park East  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old center-hall Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800, listed at $249,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: U.S. 1 Laffey)  CONNECTICUT
FAIRFIELD  $442,000
341 Orchard Hill Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; cathedral-ceilings, family room, rear deck, 2-car garage, .53-acre lot; taxes $6,475, listed at $439,900, 9 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  NEW CANAAN  $480,000
26 Kelley Green  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 65-year-old cape cod; new baths, dormers, family room addition, 2-car garage, .33-acre lot; taxes $4,529, listed at $515,000, 35 weeks on market (Brokers: Realty Guild; William Pitt)  WALLINGFORD  $150,000
9 Laurel Ridge Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old raised ranch; hardwood floors, fireplace, 2-car garage, .50 acre on cul-de-sac; taxes $1,800, listed at $154,900, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley Co.; Coldwell Banker)  WESTPORT  $334,000
126 Steephill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old wood-frame ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $4,535, listed at $355,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Riverside)  NEW JERSEY
JACKSON  $71,900
504 Larkspur Lane  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 7-year-old town-house condo; large loft, cathedral ceiling in living room; common charges $82, taxes $2,200, listed at $73,900, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  HILLSDALE  $249,900
1 Bradshaw Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath new town-house condo; 2-car garage, fireplace, den; common charges $153, taxes not available, listed at $249,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  OLD BRIDGE  $103,000
30 Lisa Court  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old town-house condo; deck, 1-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; common charges $75; taxes $3,139, listed at $105,500, 4 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  RAMSEY  $428,000
3 Sun Watch Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; 3-story entrance foyer, deck, billiard room; taxes $9,389, listed at $439,000, 2 weeks on the market (Broker: Weichert)


June 18-24; Fallen Stars Rise Again
Both are powerful men who have earned millions of dollars with big hits.
Both committed crimes and became sorry sports figures.
Both came back to New York last week for a second chance.
Darryl Strawberry and Mike Tyson, once loosely connected by stardom, are now paired by their pursuit of redemption.
In their dream worlds, Strawberry will bash homers and save the struggling Yankees and Tyson will bash fighters and save the struggling sport of boxing.
In the real world, there is debate over whether either man should be permitted to return to the public arena at all.


Art of Old Nubia Opens a Window To a High Culture
THE RAISING OF THE ASWAN HIGH Dam in the 1960's gave life to the parched landscape of Egypt and Sudan.
But it turned part of the territory anciently known as Nubia into a vast lake, forever submerging traces of one of Africa's oldest and most enigmatic civilizations.
For art historians, the flooding had a paradoxical payoff.
It generated a burst of salvage efforts that preserved a wealth of archeological material (the Metropolitan Museum's Temple of Dendur is one of the monuments rescued intact).
And it made Nubia and Egypt among the most extensively documented cultures of the ancient world.


Alissa Kaplan, K. M. Blumberg
Alissa Lori Kaplan, a daughter of Vicki Greenberg of Lawrence, L.I., and Stuart Kaplan of Dallas, was married last evening to Kenneth Marc Blumberg, a son of Mrs.
Robert Feldman of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Wulwick, the maternal grandmother and stepgrandfather of the bride, in Old Westbury, L.I.


F.Y.I.
Holidays in Lights Q.  A while ago, you published a list of the days and their corresponding colors for lighting the pinnacle of Empire State Building, but now it seems off.
I'm confused.
Are there new colors and/or days?


Fallen Angel
MAPPLETHORPE  A Biography.
By Patricia Morrisroe.
Illustrated. 461 pp.
New York: Random House. $27.50.


Amey L. Stone, Michael Brewster
Amey Lanier Stone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Lanier Stone of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Brewster, a son of Ann McNulty Brewster of Plattsburgh, N.Y., and Robert Lynn Brewster of Rouses Point, N.Y.
The Rev.
Neely P. Towe, a Congregational minister, officiated, and the Rev.
William J. Kennedy, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a staff editor at Business Week magazine in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is the owner of SOS Technologies in Greenwich, a provider of emergency first-aid training and medical supplies to businesses.
Her mother, Jacqueline H. Stone, is the director of the middle school of the School of the Holy Child in Rye, N.Y.


The Players Ask: Which Side Are You On?
The sides are realigned on the National Basketball Association labor front, but the future of the relationship between the league and the players and the players and their union has grown even murkier.
A players' uprising over the way their union tried to push through a deal with the league has jolted the union leadership into disavowing the "agreement in principle" and asking Commissioner David Stern to return to the bargaining table.


Underground Railroad: Vermont Sites to Open
The cellars, holding rooms and tunnel entrances used as part of the Underground Railroad by slaves escaping to freedom will be on view in several Brandon, Vt., homes on July 2.
Brandon was one of many stops along the Underground Railroad, a well-organized system in use from the mid-1840's through the end of the Civil War that smuggled slaves from the South into the Northern states and Canada.
Of the stations in the Underground Network, at least 17 were known to have been homes in Brandon.
Of those, six were connected by a tunnel that ran from Conant Square to Pearl Street.
And three of those homes were built by members of the prominent Conant family; each had hiding places in the cellars and entrances to the tunnel that ultimately led to the home of Rodney V. Marsh.
An abolitionist and lawyer, Marsh was best known as the chairman of the Dred Scott decision committee, which wrote the report that in 1858 became the law making Vermont the first state in the union to outlaw slavery.
Built in 1853, the Marsh home consists of a maze of rooms, including more than 50 closets that were used for hiding, 8 escape stairways from various floor levels, and a tunnel connecting the cellar to the outdoors.


Look Beneath the Glitz
To the Editor:
In "Looking for an Attorney? Here's Counsel" (June 11), one could add a corollary to "Ask obvious questions": "Question obvious answers." The pit bull who promises to tear out an adversary's liver may chew up your bank account as well.
The charmer who exudes confidence may try to sweet-talk issues that require litigation.
Look for aggressive competence, good judgment, solid knowledge of the law and a modicum of modesty.
LOIS BRENNER  Manhattan, June 12  The writer is a partner in the law firm of Kurzman Karelsen &amp; Frank in Manhattan.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN Cool Sounds Abound Up on the Roof


INSIDE
IN PERSON  The verdict is in.
The new U.S.
Attorney is tough but fair.4 HOUSING  New hope for a decaying hotel -- a symbol of Paterson's heyday.8 ATLANTIC CITY  On the Steel Pier, you can ride a carousel into a city's past. 19 SOAPBOX  A temporary disability becomes an indelible lesson in life.21


... Or a Focused Snapshot Of 'Brooklyn Americana'?
To the Editor:
Although perhaps an eye-opener for some readers, "Here Comes the Bride. Here Comes Another" was a most interesting vignette of Brooklyn Americana portraying the aspects of American pride and multiculturalism.


Stefan Aigner and Betsy Bacot
Elizabeth Gunn Bacot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Carter Bacot of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stefan Aigner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alois Aigner of Nuremberg, Germany.
The Rev.
Orion W. Davis performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
James in Upper Montclair, N.J.
The bride, 32, is known as Betsy.
She is a photographer in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York Company and the chairman of United Way of New York City.
Her mother, Shirley Bacot, is the chairwoman of Wells College in Aurora, N.Y.


Laurie J. Stevens, James A. Dray
Dr.
Laurie J. Stevens, a daughter of Judith A. Stevens of Milford, Conn., and the late Gerald F. Stevens, was married yesterday to James Allan Dray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Dray of Wilmette, Ill.
Jack Coleman, a justice of the peace in Chester, Vt., and a former president of Haverford College, officiated at bride's family's house in Chester.
Dr.
Stevens, 28, is a resident in child psychology at the Child Guidance Center of Southern Connecticut in Stamford.
She graduated from Haverford and received both a master's degree and a doctorate in clinical psychology from DePaul University.
Her father was a lawyer in Milford.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Simon Lake School there.


Norman Escapes Tag of Being Also-Ran
Greg Norman was not about to let a final-round lead slip away for the second Sunday in a row.
But it almost happened today when Fuzzy Zoeller, a longtime rival and good friend, overtook Norman at the 13th hole in the Greater Hartford Open.
The Australian had begun the day with a three-stroke lead over Zoeller and maintained that edge through the front nine at the Tournament Players Club.


A Big Weekend For 'Batman'
The film "Batman Forever," after blazing a box-office record for its opening weekend, cooled this past weekend but still became the first film this year to take in$100 million.
During its opening weekend, June 16 to 18, the Warner Bros. film grossed $52.8 million, surpassing the previous record holder, "Jurassic Park," by $5.8 million.
Total earnings so far, using actual figures through Saturday and projections for yesterday, were $105.9 million.


25 Injured in Flight to San Juan
Continental Airlines Flight 207 from Newark International Airport to Puerto Rico yesterday turned out to be a rough one.
An A300 Airbus carrying 257 passengers encountered turbulence, and at least 25 passengers were injured.
The aircraft was at 29,000 feet when it hit rough air about one hour before its arrival time, Federal aviation officials said.
The plane landed safely at 1:30 P.M., and the injured were taken to San Juan hospitals.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the indictment of garbage haulers accused of using threats and arson to control the industry in New York City misspelled the names of a state judge who froze the assets of the companies involved, and misstated an element of his order.
He is Acting Supreme Court Justice Walter M. Schackman; while he has scheduled a hearing on the issue of appointing receivers to oversee the companies, he has not yet appointed receivers.


Garden Seeks Jones And He Is After Tyson
He will not hold out, or talk back to his coach, or demand money when he isn't performing well.
And the television camera loves him.
In short, Roy Jones Jr. is just the man Madison Square Garden wants to revive boxing at the arena.


2 Killed When Train Hits Car
Two men were killed when they apparently ignored warning signals and their car was split in half early Saturday by a special train transporting people who had attended a rock concert in Madison Square Garden, the police said.
The victims were identified as Michael Yarrington, 21, of Neptune, and his passenger, Justin Bowler, 20, of Sea Girt.
The engineer sounded the air horn and put the train into an emergency stop, but it was traveling at 50 to 55 miles an hour when it hit the car, the police said.


Reputed Head of the Mafia Is Arrested in Palermo Chase
In the end, the tiny automobile, the checked sport coat and the forged driver's license were not enough to mask recognition of Leoluca Bagarella as the anti-Mafia agents hunting him moved in.
After a brief chase Saturday night through Palermo, the Sicilian capital, the investigators captured Mr.
Bagarella without firing a shot.
He had been the reputed leader of the Mafia since the arrest on nearly the same spot in 1993 of his brother-in-law, Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the presumed Mafia "boss of bosses."


Corrections
A picture on Thursday with an obituary of Laurence McKinley Gould, a member of Adm.
Richard E. Byrd's first expedition to Antarctica was published in error. (It was also published in error on May 4, 1930, in a pictorial report on the expedition.) The picture showed another member, Charles F. Gould.


Thousands Celebrate Gay Pride
Under balloon arches as long as a city block and all the colors of a rainbow, thousands of gay and lesbian New Yorkers, their families, friends and allies marched down Fifth Avenue yesterday in a celebration more carefree than confrontational.
There was plenty of toplessness in the annual Lesbian and Gay Pride March, but little involved women.
Article, page B4.


CHRONICLE
JOHN McENROE, who will provide commentary on the Wimbledon tennis tournament for NBC beginning today, says there is not enough competition or emotion to keep him interested in tennis these days.
"If you can't get your No. 1 and No. 2 guys to build some type of rivalry, then you're in trouble," said Mr.
McEnroe, a three-time Wimbledon champion, of the top-ranked men's players, Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras, in the July 1 issue of TV Guide.


Behind Dinosaurs, It's the Mounting Team's Game
When paleontologists pronounced that Tyrannosaurus rex never stood upright, as he had for decades at the American Museum of Natural History, it was the museum's mounting team, not the scientists, that proposed the dramatic stalking pose that has turned rex into New York's newest media darling.
It was also the mounting team that decided to hoist the Apatosaurus's tail high in the air (to critical applause).
And that sneaked in a few esthetic touches no one may ever notice, like a tail and flicking tongue at opposite ends of a frame supporting tiny snake vertebrae.
The mounting team -- consisting of five professional sculptors -- designs and builds the metal armatures that cradle each bone in the manner that a jewel is suspended in a setting, from hip bones weighing a ton to the tiniest prehistoric frog remains.
If done well, their work is almost invisible.
The ancient skeletons appear to float in space.


Visit by Jays Delivers Pick-Me-Up For Yankees
When the Yankees returned to New York after a 5-5 road trip and a lost series in Baltimore, they were stuck in the ranks of the have-nots: they hadn't swept a series this season, hadn't won four straight and hadn't won more than they had lost at home.
They also had not faced in some time what has become a mere shadow of the Toronto Blue Jays team that won the last World Series in 1993.
This weekend fixed all that.
In an elixir of a series, the Yankees completed a three-game sweep with an 8-2 drubbing of the Jays at Yankee Stadium.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Women as Theme Of Jewish Program  Rottenberg Chorale Merkin Concert Hall
The Rottenberg Chorale, established 19 years ago by the Hebrew Arts School to explore Jewish music, presented a mild feminist manifesto on Tuesday evening.
Its program, called "Music By and About Jewish Women," included a few standards -- most notably Naomi Shemer's haunting "Yerushalaim Shel Zahav" ("Jerusalem of Gold") -- as well as recent works and a handful of premieres.


Youths on Racial Slurs: They're Only Words
Stacy Mitgang, a high school teacher who is Jewish, was stunned last May when she learned that the same students whom she had befriended during the school year had sent her an anonymous note with an anti-Semitic slur.
The next day in her office at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan, Mrs.
Mitgang met with the students and asked them a simple question: Why?
"One of them looked me straight in the face and said, 'We wanted to hurt you,' " she recalled.


Change Stops Here, Says Sampras as Wimbledon Starts
Here at staid and stodgy Wimbledon, the winds of change -- known locally as a freshening breeze -- are ruffling the familiar complexion of a Grand Slam venue that had for a century and more seemed able to defy the revisionists.
Thinking ahead toward turning a tennis profit in the 21st century, they've paved over the paradise that once served as the picnic lawn and turned it into a construction site for a bigger and better show court that will, by 1997, send the current Court One into obsolescence.


After Setbacks, Goldman Looks To Technology And the Media
Stung by a series of setbacks and losses last year, Goldman, Sachs Group L.P. is working to restore its fortunes, and is focusing on a particularly hot investment banking area: communications, media and technology.
Late last week, Goldman advised Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom, the European telephone companies, on their much-delayed $4.2 billion investment in the Sprint Corporation, the long-distance telephone company.


Thomas Belmonte, 48, Is Dead; Wrote of Lives of Naples's Poor
Professor Thomas Belmonte, a Hofstra University anthropologist known for a book about the lives of the poor in Naples, died on Thursday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 48 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Dr. Theresa Aiello-Gerber.


Sorry, Ma'am, No Listing for 'enry 'iggins; Voice Recognition Is Improving, but Don't Stop the Elocution Lessons
What if I say "tomahto" and you say "tomayto?" What if some say "probably" and still others say "prolly" and what about all the different ways there are to signify assent: "yes," "yup," "uh-huh," "O.K.," "sure" and "roger?" What's a simple computer supposed to make of it all?
As voice-recognition technologies are making their way from various laboratories into rapidly proliferating commercial applications, more and more of humankind will have to enter into conversation with machines.
To be productive listeners, those machines must be prepared to decipher all the ways people have of speaking their minds.


Yonkers's Troubled Mayor Looks to Run Again
Terence M. Zaleski's tenure as Mayor of New York's fourth-largest city has hardly been easy.
Elected in 1991 with 36 percent of the vote, Mr.
Zaleski, a Democrat, has presided over a deadlocked government in which he and the Republican-controlled City Council have accomplished little together.
Mr.
Zaleski's wife, Lynn, was the target of an investigation involving campaign contributions from city employees.
And in recent months, Mr.
Zaleski has feuded publicly with two former aides.


At Home Abroad; The Italy We Want?
In the transformed politics of Italy the newest voice is that of Prof.
Romano Prodi, leader of a center-left coalition.
His is a politics of ideas -- ideas that do not fit neatly into old notions of left and right.
"We need competition, privatization, decentralization," Professor Prodi said in an interview.
That is a prescription for sharp change in a country with a tradition of state ownership of business and national bureaucratic regulation.
And the ideas have a resonance beyond Italy.


For an anxious newspaper industry, a time of lower expectations and a slide into sameness.
AT their meetings, newspaper publishers have been hearing that they should imitate the country's auto makers.
Just as Detroit has given buyers the cars they want, they are told, publishers should give readers the newspapers they want: the print equivalent of something more zippy to drive.
Maybe some of them were in the back of the room gossiping with old friends and just didn't hear right.
That was car makers, Mr. and Ms.
Publisher, not car mashers.


A Vocal Ally of Giuliani Is Now His Toughest Critic
IT was probably inevitable, given their muscular temperaments.
Maybe it is temporary.
But whatever the prognosis, it sure has happened -- a rift between the Mayor of the moment, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and the man who wouldn't mind being Mayor forever, Edward I. Koch.
"I have been very critical, in the same way I have been very supportive in the past," Mr.
Koch acknowledged this weekend.
"I think Rudy's become filled with his own sense of importance. I am trying to say to him: 'You're doing a terrific job substantively. But if you keep alienating people, you're going to end up with smoke.' "


Major's Big Gamble
Prime Minister John Major's ploy of calling a snap election on his leadership of the Conservative Party, which looked like a brilliant stroke only three days ago, is beginning to look like a very dangerous gamble indeed.
It may be that he underestimated the depth of passion among his party's right-wing "Euro-skeptics," who insist that he throw his full weight behind their efforts to hold the door against further integration of Britain into Europe.


Flag-Burning as Act of Contempt Still Equals Protected Speech
To the Editor:
Though David A. Ramsey (letter, June 19) claims to believe in free speech, no matter how offensive, he says burning the flag is so insulting to veterans who "spilled our blood while fighting for our flag" that it must be considered not political speech but an act of contempt.
Contempt is nothing but speech, and calling it an act makes it no less protected.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and two- and five-year notes being auctioned tomorrow and Wednesday.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.36 percent and the rate on the six-month issue, 5.35 percent.
In when-issued trading the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 5.60 percent, and the five-year note at 5.81 percent.


Aggressive Strategy By N.R.A. Has Left Its Finances Reeling
The leaders who took over the National Rifle Association four years ago point with pride to their success in increasing the group's membership and intensifying their lobbying against gun control laws.
But at the same time these leaders have allowed the once financially strong organization to deteriorate into a deficit-plagued operation with bookkeeping practices so sloppy that even some of its most stalwart members have grown alarmed.
"The disintegration of the assets of the N.R.A. under current spending policies have eroded our future viability," Max W. Goodwin, the chairman of the group's finance committee, wrote in a confidential letter last year to the organization's president.
The letter and other documents were provided to The New York Times by members concerned about the group's finances.


Finance Dept. Waste
To the Editor:
On June 21 I received a bill for quarterly payment of my estimated unincorporated business tax, due June 15.
I called New York City's Department of Finance to complain and learned that the bills had not been mailed out until the second week in June.


7 Sisters Still Reflect Rainbow's Colors
When they made their debut 20 years ago, they went by different names: the Lady in Red, for example; or the Ladies in Blue and Yellow.
Now they are identified by less elementary colors, suggestive of more subtle shades, like aqua, rose and mint.
And from time to time, they touch on subjects like AIDS, which are new to their vocabulary.
But the seven women of "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf," Ntozake Shange's epochal anthem to black women in search of their own voice, still have the power to shimmer.
And the fact that the palette from which their names are drawn has changed seems entirely appropriate.


McVeigh Says He'll Plead Not Guilty
In his first interview since he was charged with bombing The Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Timothy J. McVeigh said he intended to plead not guilty to the charges.
In the interview, which appears in the current edition of Newsweek magazine, Mr.
McVeigh says that he first heard of the bombing from the state trooper who arrested him about 90 minutes after it occurred on April 19.
The trooper stopped Mr.
McVeigh on a traffic violation about 60 miles north of Oklahoma City.


INSIDE
McVeigh Grants Interview  In his first interview since he was charged with the Oklahoma City bombing, Timothy McVeigh told Newsweek magazine that he intended to plead not guilty.
Page A8.
Arab-Israeli Violence Surges As Israel and the P.L.O. negotiators raced to meet a deadline for new agreements, the West Bank and Gaza Strip were hit with the most severe violence in months.
Page A6.
Computing an Accent  If I say "tomahto" and you say "tomayto," what's a poor computer voice recognition system to do?
The Linguistic Data Consortium is trying to sort it all out.
Page D1.


Video conferencing technology, hyped for so long, may finally be near.
HUMANS so rely on facial expressions to convey emotion that we usually try to replicate them, when we are separated by time and space, in other forms of communication.
Early in the development of electronic mail, users invented emoticons -- sideways faces formed like this one : ) with the aid of punctuation marks -- as an antidote to the inevitable misunderstandings that result when people type at each other instead of talking face-to-face.


They Won, But Party For Devils Is Up in Air
A day after the Devils tasted the champagne of victory, New Jersey's new Stanley Cup hockey champions are still trying to figure out how to properly share the moment with their fans.
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority were expected to make the arrangements today for the team's victory celebration, an awkward pairing somewhat like appointing the Capulets and the Montagues to organize Romeo and Juliet's nuptials.


Kiev to Queens: Plot Fit for Fiction; U.S. Customs Agent Tells What It's Like to Run a Sting
The undercover man's perilous brush with disaster did not come while jumping out of a Cessna or water-skiing on the Riviera with a slinky blonde.
It happened over Caesar salad with a few guys from Queens.
For months, Joseph King, an agent for the United States Customs Service, had been Joe Kennedy: Irish arms dealer, solicitor, broker for Iraq.
That April day, at the Hudson River Club in lower Manhattan, "Mr. Kennedy" was deep in negotiations over black-market zirconium, used in nuclear reactors and cluster bombs, when a friend of Joe King sauntered into the restaurant.


A Triple Bill for Summer Relaxation
GRP Records advertised its stable of musicians on Saturday afternoon at the JVC Jazz Festival at Bryant Park, offering a genial series of sets that worked well within their limited ambitions.
The young tenor saxophonist Teodross Avery opened the afternoon with "Red Top," a blues number that had him cruising through the form with complete authority.
Mr.
Avery is unabashedly in love with the 1950's and jazz orthodoxy.
On a warm afternoon, that works fine, and the audience, made up of old and young, clearly enjoyed his well-crafted be-bop lines.
Mr.
Avery has a big tone -- he's listened to all the big tenor players -- and on "Sphere," his tribute to Thelonious Monk, he made the little harmonic quirks of the tunes submit to his sound.


THEATER
They're Dressed to Kill, And Taking It Literally  'Gangster Apparel,' Igloo
There is plenty of talk but not much action or genuine humor in "Gangster Apparel," the skin-deep two-character comedy by Richard Vetere that grapples with the impact of clothes on character.
Or, to put it simply: Do clothes make the man?


Bridge
The two-week European Championships in Vilamoura, Portugal, which will qualify three countries in open and women's categories for world championship play in Beijing in October, are now half complete.
In the open series, the leaders are: first, Israel, 245 victory points; second, Italy, 237; third, Britain, 236; fourth, the Netherlands, 231; fifth, Sweden, 230.3, and sixth, Greece, 230.


Eli Wilentz, Whose Bookstore Lured the 'Beats,' Is Dead at 76
Eli Wilentz, whose Eighth Street Bookshop became a a literary nerve center of Greenwich Village in the 1950's and 60's, died yesterday at the Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 76, and lived at 17 West Eighth Street, above what is now a trendy shoe store and was once the touchstone of a generation.
The cause was cancer, said his son Sean.


Magazines Go Niche-Hunting With Custom-Made Sections
In their continuing search for new revenue sources, magazine publishers are increasingly customizing their editorial content for specialized groups of readers.
The publishers are using a technique known as selective edit, in which special editorial sections are inserted into magazines sent to targeted lists of subscribers.
Publishers can then charge these subscribers more and raise ad rates for advertisers who want to reach the readers.


DANCE
A Private Experience, With Electronics and Poetry  Martita Goshen's Earthworks St.
Mark's Church
In "Excavations (of the Soul)," Martita Goshen challenged herself by trying to create a difficult yet potentially exciting type of dance.
She sought to evoke a totally private experience and make it vivid and meaningful to onlookers who knew nothing about it.
At their best, such dances are dreamlike.
At their worst, they baffle.


Violence Surges in West Bank and Gaza
As Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization raced a deadline for new agreements, the West Bank and Gaza Strip were jolted today by their most severe violence in recent months.
In the northern West Bank city of Nablus, two young Palestinians were shot to death and about 35 other people were wounded in battles between Israeli soldiers and rock-throwing protesters demanding the mass release of Palestinians from Israeli prisons.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Walt Disney Co Pacific Telesis Gr TUESDAY  Aquarion Co Centerior Energy Corp Harsco Corp Montana Pwr Co Nipsco Inds Inc Rubbermaid Inc Schering-Plough Corp WEDNESDAY  Jostens Inc Morrison Restaurants Raytheon Co SPX Corp THURSDAY  Delmarva Pwr &amp; L Co


No Headline
"We should definitely have a parade, but I don't know where." -- JANET CZAPCZYNSKI, Devils fan.  [ B5:4. ]


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Triumphant Weekend for the United States
American rowers decisively defeated international teams that dropped in on the United States championships to test next year's Olympic rowing course in Gainesville, Ga.
The American elite men's eight cruised to an easy victory by two boat lengths and nearly six seconds over a crew from Ukraine yesterday.
The Ukrainians and the third-place Canadians barely outstroked the second United States boat, the pre-elite eight made up largely of college students, by less than a second in the last 500 meters.


DANCE
Of Swans, Magicians And Handsome Princes  Kirov Ballet Metropolitan Opera House
The Kirov Ballet went through the motions of "Swan Lake" on Friday night, but the emotions of this somber fairy tale were left by the wayside.


Personalizing Nazis' Homosexual Victims
Transformed by homosexuals from a mark of Nazi persecution into an emblem of gay liberation, the pink triangle gained great currency but lost its link to personal experience.
Today, after a half century, the symbol can be associated once again with one man's name, with his voice, with his story.


Teaching Hospitals
New York's teaching medical centers are in financial crisis, buffeted by the efforts of the state and Federal governments to cut hospital payments and health maintenance organizations seeking big discounts.
A study by the United Hospital Fund, a research and philanthropic group, shows how five of the city's academic medical centers - Montefiore, Mount Sinai, Columbia Presbyterian, New York Hospital and New Your University - operate in circumstances much different than other U.S. hospitals.
They have higher occupancy rates and longer average legnths of stay and they care for more Medicaid patients.
Chronic deficits have forces the centers to take on more and more long-term debt; debt per certified bed at the five hospitals was 22 percent higher than for other U.S. major teaching hospitals in 1993.


At Fifth Avenue Parade, Thousands Celebrate Gay Pride
Under balloon arches as long as a city block and all the colors of a rainbow, thousands of gay and lesbian New Yorkers, their families, friends and allies marched down Fifth Avenue yesterday in a celebration more carefree than confrontational.
There was plenty of toplessness in the annual Lesbian and Gay Pride March, but little of it involved women.
Participants rolled by in wheelchairs and strollers, on bicycles and double-decker buses.
A few wore leather or sequins or spandex.
But T-shirts were the order of a sticky summer Sunday, including the dark-blue versions favored by the Gay Officers' Action League, a police group.


New Talks Soon
The scene: Saturday night.
In one luxury box was the Devils' owner, John McMullen, watching his team win the Stanley Cup.
Next door was Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who wants to keep McMullen from bolting to Nashville.
At the final buzzer, Whitman rushed to McMullen's suite to offer her congratulations.
When McMullen later emerged, he was surrounded by reporters who wanted to know his plans.


CHRONICLE
Plenty of free speech accompanied the presentation of an award to G. GORDON LIDDY in Houston over the weekend.
"Shame, shame," shouted GLORIA ALLRED, a board member of the National Association of Radio Talk Show Hosts, as Mr.
Liddy approached the podium Saturday night to receive his free-speech award from fellow talk radio hosts.


Tops at Downing Hot Dogs
Michael DeVito ate only 15 hot dogs in the allotted 10 minutes on Saturday.
"No need to eat in excess," said Mr.
DeVito, of Manalapan, who captured his fourth straight New Jersey title at the Fifth Annual Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest before 200 gawking spectators at the Newport Center Mall.
Mr.
DeVito, a 33-year-old vice president at Salomon Brothers in Manhattan, was saving himself for Nathan's July 4 world championship on Coney Island, which he has won three times in the past five years.
Mr.
DeVito, who stands 6 feet tall and weighs 205 pounds, set the state record here last year by downing 17 dogs in 10 minutes, but he coasted to victory on Saturday.


Most Wanted; Another Big Week For Walt Disney
The Walt Disney Company is showing strong numbers in five categories.
For starters, the film "Pocahontas" heads the box-office list and the soundtrack is ranked No. 2 for music albums.
Three of Disney
s other films - "The Jungle Book," "The Crow" and "The Lion King" are bestselling videos, and "Jungle Book" is No. 9 in the video rentals category.
"Home Improvement," which the company produces, scored eighth in the television ratings category this week and is consitently among the top 10 watched shows.


Almost Time for Tomatoes
Starting about a week from now, the first of the state's tomatoes will be picked, put in bins and taken to a packing house here, Robert Matarazzo, a spokesman for the New Jersey Tomato Council, said over the weekend.
A computerized photo system will take a picture of each tomato and classify it by color and size.
The tomatoes will be put in containers, placed in padded bins, then packed in boxes for shipment to stores.
DAVID STOUT


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Digital Commerce column in Business Day on June 5, about an effort by some cable operators to offer connections to the Internet and on-line services, misstated the ownership of one company that is developing modems for such connections, the General Instrument Corporation.
It is independent, not a unit of Forstmann Little &amp; Company.
Forstmann Little, an investment firm, acquired General Instrument in a buyout in 1990.
In 1992, shares of General Instrument were sold to the public, and Forstmann Little has since reduced its holding to about 15 percent.


U.S. Turns Conservative For Draw and a Victory
It didn't evoke the flag-waving euphoria of the World Cup victory over the same opponent a year ago.
It didn't create the excitement of the blowout victory over Mexico a week ago.
But what today's scoreless draw with Colombia in the final match of the U.S.
Cup did do for the United States national team was good enough: it clinched the tournament title.
Playing in front of 36,126 at Rutgers Stadium, the United States pushed early, playing the offensive-minded soccer that lifted it to a 3-2 victory over Nigeria and a 4-0 shutout of Mexico earlier in this tournament.


On the Road to Paris, Expect Indurain at Every Turn
The organizers of the Tour de France are no longer content to think of it as merely the world's greatest bicycle race or even the third-biggest spectator sports event after the Olympic Games and the soccer World Cup.
They prefer to think of it also as theater, replete with pity, terror and catharsis.


President of PBS Waxes Eloquent In Its Cause
Ervin S. Duggan, president of the Public Broadcasting Service, is fond of giving speeches, and in the spring he delivered a particularly poignant one to a group of television and radio executives in New York.
His subject was the "forced commercialization" of public television, a topic whose pathos he sought to convey by citing a poem by Thomas Hardy called "The Ruined Maid." In it, two poor country girls talk about the finery one has acquired, apparently at the cost of her virtue.
By analogy, Mr.
Duggan suggested that if Congress forced public television to commercialize, it could become "the electronic equivalent" of the ruined maid.


Off-Duty Officer Shot in Elevator Mugging at His Apartment House
An off-duty police officer was shot twice when he resisted two muggers who tried to rob him in the elevator of his Co-op City building late Saturday night, the police said.
The officer, Angel Sostre, 37, of the Manhattan North Task Force, was shot in the neck and in the left shoulder after he identified himself to his attackers, the police said.
He underwent surgery yesterday at Jacobi Hospital and was listed in critical but stable condition, said Arek Tarih, a police spokesman.


To the Victor Devils Come the Spoilers?
A day after the Devils tasted victory, New Jersey's hockey champions are still trying to determine how to share their festive mood with their fans.
They are considering a place for a parade or party, even as the owner is considering where the team will play next year.
A move to Nashville would tamper with the mutual trust between ticket sellers and buyers, which says that if fans go through the gates, the team will be there.
But as the Devils consider a shift from the New Jersey Turnpike to Tennessee, that trust is imperiled.
Articles on page B5 and in SportsMonday, section C.


A Punch in the Nose, Then a New Life Begins
ROSE MADDER  By Stephen King  Illustrated. 420 pages. Viking. $25.95.
"Rose Madder," the title of Stephen King's 29th novel, refers of course to the reddish pigment used in painting, on which depend important details of the novel's scary plot.
But "Rose Madder" also sums up what the novel's heroine feels when she notices "a single drop of blood, no larger than a dime" on the sheet near her pillow while she is making the bed.


Gay and Proud on Fifth Ave.


Health Care at a Price
New York City's financially troubled hospital system has quietly begun charging poor, uninsured patients for services that it had long provided free.
The fees have been introduced at two public hospitals in Queens; ultimately, all city hospitals may follow suit.
Page B1.


Capturing the Essence of Art, in Sweat and Genius
Even with his 27th film excursion into American institutions, Frederick Wiseman, one of the most artistic documentary makers of this century, would have you believe that he and his cameraman simply wander into a hospital, race track, department store or monastery and record whatever happens to be unfolding at the time.
In a sense this is true, but the finished product is shaped with a cunning sense of design.
The latest fine example, on PBS at 9 this evening, is "Ballet," a three-hour profile of American Ballet Theater that was distilled from 110 hours of shooting over nine weeks.
As is usual in a Wiseman documentary, there is no narration, and no tricks or graphics to indicate persons or places.
Scenes begin and end with seeming randomness.
But not really.
What begins in the early morning will invariably end at night.
Casual shots of the moon in various phases hint at the passage of time.


In a Chicago Neighborhood Overrun With Crime, a Serial Killer Almost Walks Away
Violent crime is a frequent intruder on life in the Englewood neighborhood here, and all the misery it brings may have helped a suspected serial killer go undetected for months, even as the bodies of at least 10 women, strangled and then discarded like trash, were discovered one by one this year.
But some residents, including an alderwoman, wondered if police indifference to the victims and to the struggling community where they lived and died may have also masked the pattern of their deaths.
Most of the slain women, who ranged in age from 18 to 42, were addicted to drugs and sometimes sold their bodies on the streets of Englewood, a predominately black, poor and working class neighborhood on Chicago's South Side.


Market Place; How United Video's chairman can look like a loser and still win.
WHEN a company's chairman and chief executive agrees to surrender control and sell half of his stock for a below-market price, you have to wonder what is going on.
That is exactly what Lawrence Flinn Jr., the boss of United Video Satellite Group did in a deal announced late last week.
Tele-Communications Inc. will take control of United Video in one of the most unusual deals ever.


CLINTON ON SPOT ON VIETNAM ISSUE
Twenty-six years after he agonized over avoiding service in a war he "opposed and despised," President Clinton is moving toward the end of another agonizing deliberation over Vietnam: how and when to grant the former enemy full diplomatic recognition.
Most of Mr.
Clinton's senior diplomatic, military, economic and political advisers favor the move as the next step in a four-year-old process begun by the Bush Administration, aimed at providing the fullest possible accounting for Americans missing from the Vietnam War and at advancing United States business interests in Southeast Asia.


Fear, Not Science, Dictated Leprosy Treatment; Betty Martin's Miracle
To the Editor:
Re "Lives Stolen by Treatment, Not by Disease" (front page, June 19): More than 30 years ago, at the age of 13, I was assigned a summer reading list.
No book has remained so fixed in my mind as Betty Martin's "Miracle at Carville."


Hot New Audio Technology Chases Dolby's Soundprints
The recording "Mirror Ball," due out tomorrow, is not only a long-awaited collaboration of Neil Young and Pearl Jam.
It promises superior sound quality that is nonetheless compatible with compact disk players already in millions of homes.
What a young California inventor named Ray Dolby did for analog audio 30 years ago, a tiny Berkeley-based company, Pacific Microsonics Inc., hopes to do for digital recording.


Displaced Men Seek Work, Not Anxiety Cure
To the Editor:
Re "Angry Men, Resilient Women" (Op-Ed, June 19):


Hey, Want to Get Your Pentium Tweaked?
Computer madness came to New York City last week.
Two exhibits -- one a trade show of computer wares, the other a showing of works by video artists at the Museum of Modern Art -- shared a common goal: marketing electronics, or at least an electronic esthetic.
PC Expo in New York, a three-day trade show, attracted programmers, marketers, and hangers-on, who sallied forth to seek the perfect interface with potential customers.
At the Jacob Javits Convention Center, 835 exhibitors showed their wares in more or less eye-catching ways.
Mitsubishi's 'Monitor Man,' a mannequin, stopped some of the 130,000 visitors in their tracks.
Cyberbabble was everywhere: "I've got a cached Pentium tweaked and nudged to run at 120 megaherz," one latecomer said to another.
At the museum, works of art blending screens, computer monitors, open spaces and video images were part of the show "Video Spaces: Eight Installations," which opened last week.
Bill Viola's installation "Slowly Turning Narrative," at left, used a spinning 12-foot panel, mirrored on one side and blank on the other.
The main sponsor was Samsung Electronics Company of South Korea.


Cable Plans to Pounce in Networks' Off-Season
Summer is a season of solid profits for network broadcasters, but a reliance on the repeats that generate those profits has made the networks vulnerable to cable channels, which increasingly offer some of their most ambitious original programs during the summer months.
Cable executives have recognized for several years that summer is a time to pounce.
"A couple of years ago we figured out that this is the best time of year for us," said Judy McGrath, president of MTV.
"We're seeing opportunity in summer when other people don't."


Balanchine's Ode to Summer With Up-to-Date Flair
Darcey and Darci: The New York City Ballet offered a dream cast when Darcey Bussell made her debut as Titania in George Balanchine's "Midsummer Night's Dream" on Friday night and Darci Kistler danced the ballet's abstract pas de deux in Act II.
Ms.
Bussell, a guest artist from Britain's Royal Ballet, and Ms.
Kistler, one of Balanchine's last hand-picked ballerinas in the City Ballet, have been trained very differently, and they are, accordingly, very different dancers.
But they share an exciting boldness, which was manifest at the New York State Theater in the shape and energy of their dancing.
It made them look contemporary, never academic.


Every Skunk Has His Sweeter Moments. Just Ask Lemieux.
Near a corner of the raucous dressing room where Claude Lemieux is known as Pepe -- among other things -- to his New Jersey Devil teammates, a gleaming award fit snugly on a shelf.
The Conn Smythe Trophy, with its large maple leaf on top, rested in a place usually reserved for skates and pads.
But it is just a centerpiece among the reminders of who he is and where he has been.
Just beneath the trophy under a shelf, hangs a small picture of his sons, Christopher and Michael, providers of Lemieux's sense of purpose after a marriage that ended in a costly and bitter divorce.
Within arm's length, atop a nearby ledge, is a figurine of his namesake.
Pepe LePew holds a bouquet of flowers in his right hand, a box of Valentine candies in his left, and an unshaken look of confidence despite the stink that always seems to follow in his path.


Ray Charles Sings of Love and Other Comforts
How many times can Ray Charles wring catharsis from "Georgia on My Mind"?
Chalk up one more, Saturday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
He phrased it suspensefully, placing words at almost the last moment before chords changed; his voice broke into an achingly pure falsetto that rang with memories and loss.
Mr.
Charles, 64, remains one of the greatest American singers.
His phrasing is sly and precise, alluding to swing and gospel, Tin Pan Alley and the blues.
And every crack and rasp in his voice can suggest worlds of pain and humor, tenderness and wit.


BUSINESS DIGEST
2d Wave of Net Start-Ups Gets Venture Capital
Venture capital is pouring into Internet companies and is now seeking a second generation of start-ups.
The big winners are software start-ups seeking to make the Internet and the World Wide Web more hospitable.


All Is Comfortable, Even the Music
If Saturday's opening open-air concert at the Venetian Theater is the accurate paradigm, the next eight weeks of Caramoor's 50th season will be as easy to digest as the surroundings.
Luxury and comfort are the operative nouns here, with discouraging words seldom to be heard.
Familiar friends from the repertory are welcome, troublemakers told to stay away.
There are a lot of savage summer breasts to be soothed, and Caramoor will be busily at the task.
I suspect that the place, as much as the well-heeled clientele, has an affect on programming decisions.
Howls of anguish or earnest proclamation are somehow less convincing in a setting such as this.
The gardens of the old Rosen estate drip with greenery, and often with precipitation as well.
It rained, in fact, right up to the time of Saturday's concert, leaving the night air to vaporize into a benign dampness.
Going to Caramoor has never been camping out, but in the last few years an elaborate canopy and an anti-mud system of floorboards have been installed.
The elements are wrestled to the ground so that even at trying moments listeners can take their ease.


Escaped Patient Is Caught
A patient who escaped from the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center a week ago was captured last night at a subway station not far from the Queens hospital, the police said.
The patient, Burt Harry, 28, had been confined to the center since 1993 after he was charged with attempted murder for pushing a person off a subway platform.
Last Monday, while working unescorted on an assignment on the hospital's grounds, Mr.
Harry left for a break and did not return.


Inspirations and Departures From the Cajun Tradition
For a century, Louisiana has supplied American music with endorphins: strutting rhythms, jovial instrumentation and melodies that seem to have good times built in.
Three bands with Louisiana inspirations arrived at Tramps on Friday night in a tour sponsored by Rounder Records.
The two opening bands, Beau Jocque and the Zydeco Hi-Rollers and Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys, both hail from bayou country.
While both band leaders wield button accordions and thrive on two-steps, their music occupies two distinct spheres.
The Mamou Playboys subtly update Cajun music's Celtic heritage of fiddle tunes and storytelling songs, while the Hi-Rollers, steeped in blues and rhythm-and-blues, aim straight for dancers' hips and feet.


Reporter's Notebook; In Geneva, Diplomats Talk Of Mufflers, Not Warheads
First this was the city of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, where he spelled out the terms of the social contract from the cobblestone streets above Lake Geneva.
In the 1970's it was the meeting place of the oil sheiks, when they seemed to hold the world's economy in their hands.
During the cold war it was the site of endless arms control talks, when national power was measured in MIRV's and throw-weights.
Now Geneva, everyone's favorite neutral ground, is awash in a new vernacular.
From the hushed offices of the newly created World Trade Organization, to the Japanese and American missions here, where the biggest trade showdown in modern times is unfolding this week, the talk is of shock absorbers, showrooms and "shaken," a Japanese term for car inspection regulations that now rolls off the tongues of American negotiators.


When Women Suffer Testosterone Deficit
To the Editor:
"Does Testosterone Equal Aggression? Maybe Not" (front page, June 20) does a good job of making the point that testosterone is not only a "male" sex hormone and recognizes the beneficial effects on mood of adequate levels of this hormone.


Quebecers Put Patriotism on Stage
In this heartland of Quebec's nationalist movement, "The Fabulous Story of a Kingdom," a pageant of music, dance, a little history and a lot of emotion, is packing them in on Fifth Avenue near the waterfront.
"You see how a country was built," said Ghislain Bouchard, the author and artistic director of the production with its cast of 200 amateurs, most of them unpaid, filling 1,600 roles.
So far 350,000 people have seen the pageant, which has been staged in this town of 21,000 for the last seven summers.


Fear, Not Science, Dictated Leprosy Treatment; Infected Armadillos
To the Editor:
Your June 19 front-page article on leprosy features a photograph of a mural with an armadillo.
Unfortunately, the significance of this critter is not mentioned.


Taking In the Sites; A Path to Follow the Market If You Have Time and Patience
Finding World Wide Web sites that offer free stock quotations is easy, but finding the quote for your favorite stock is not always that simple.
The prices that are quoted are more than 15 minutes old, which is considered history on Wall Street, where the very latest quotes are the province of Bloomberg, Reuters and others that cater to brokers.
But by delaying prices 15 minutes, on-line services like Prodigy and America Online can offer quotes for little or no additional charge, and now several Web sites have been able to eliminate even token fees.


The United Nations at 50
In a unanimous vote 50 years ago, the San Francisco Conference adopted the Charter of the United Nations, realizing an old and laudable dream.
The new American President, Harry Truman, struck an exultant note.
"Between the victory in Europe and the final victory in Japan, in this most destructive of all wars," he informed the delegates, "you have won a victory against war itself." The Charter has worked, the U.N. survives, and in vital ways it has flourished.
But even a glance at the day's headlines suffices to show that Mr.
Truman's words were premature.
From its birth the world organization has been oversold, courting disappointment with unattainable hopes.
The General Assembly is not a global parliament, the Security Council normally relies on words or rusty muskets to punish aggression, U.N. peacekeepers are for the most part vulnerable monitors and the Secretary General from the outset has been tightly leashed by his sovereign masters.
Bureaucratic inertia, corruption and the careless handling of money have never been cured.


For Today's Computers, New Symbol Takes Over
In its own small way, one slim character that is now a fixture of every keyboard could be called a herald of the computer age.
It is , the backslash, the newer sibling and mirror image of /, the more familiar slash.
It is as common and essential to computer grammar as the period is to written language.
To those who talk to and through computers all day long, it is part of the linguistic furniture -- at least when one is using the Disk Operating System, or DOS, which provides the underlying architecture that controls most personal computer software.


A New Standard Is Proposed For Electronic Verification
A diverse group of companies, all seeking a missing component for doing business on the Internet, has rallied around a common system for verifying the trustworthiness of electronic messages and documents in cyberspace.
The proposed standard, called Digital ID, is being promoted by Verisign Inc., a Silicon Valley company that made its debut on Thursday.
The company is a spinoff from RSA Data Security Inc. of Redwood City, Calif., which has been offering similar services to companies for several years.


Russia's Premier: Too Popular for His Own Good?
Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russia's steady, stocky Prime Minister, had himself a good week, forcefully intervening to save the lives of hundreds of Russians taken hostage by Chechen militants in Budyonnovsk.
By contrast, President Boris N. Yeltsin, now 64, looked tired, vague and on the wrong side of these crucial events.


Patents; A Federal Magistrate Rejects Decades-Old Infringement Claims Against An Auto Maker
IN a pungently critical report, a Federal magistrate has contended that the inventor Jerome H. Lemelson should not be permitted to pursue patent infringement claims against the Ford Motor Company that his lawyers said could be worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
The magistrate, Phyllis Halsey Atkins, in United States District Court in Reno, Nev., concluded that Mr.
Lemelson's pursuit of new patents that piggyback onto applications he originally filed in the 1950's was "abusive." In a report on June 16, she said Mr.
Lemelson should be barred from enforcing subsequent related patents because he unreasonably delayed processing them for several decades.


James K. Batten, 59, Knight-Ridder Chairman
James K. Batten, a former reporter who rose to become chairman of one of the country's largest newspaper companies, Knight-Ridder, died on Saturday at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
He was 59.
He had been fighting a malignant brain tumor for which he underwent surgery last summer.
Because of his illness, Mr.
Batten stepped down as chief executive of Knight-Ridder in March but remained chairman of the company until his death.


Fear, Not Science, Dictated Leprosy Treatment
To the Editor:
"Lives Stolen by Treatment, Not by Disease" (front page, June 19), on people with leprosy imprisoned at a Carville, La., facility, fails to mention that the establishment and maintenance of Carville were based on politics, not sound public health.


Only Defendant to Fight Charge in NASA Case Wins Sympathy
The only person to demand a trial on charges from a 19-month Federal investigation into bribery and kickbacks involving NASA contracts has won the sympathy of many in this city where the Johnson Manned Space Flight Center has long been a bulwark of the local economy and ego.
Many people here say the Government went too far in trying to expose corruption among officials and contractors at the space center.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Memorial Recital For Judith Raskin  Karen Smith Emerson
Christ and St. Stephen's Church
Many New Yorkers still fondly remember the artistry of Judith Raskin, the soprano who died in 1984, and those who had no personal experience of her work can hear it on recordings, most notably a Mahler Fourth with the Cleveland Orchestra and George Szell.
Wednesday was the 67th anniversary of her birth, and to celebrate the occasion one of her students, Karen Smith Emerson, gave a recital to raise money for the Judith Raskin Memorial Scholarship, which is administered by Smith College.


Warren E. Burger Is Dead at 87; Was Chief Justice for 17 Years
Warren E. Burger, who retired in 1986 after 17 years as the 15th Chief Justice of the United States, died here today at age 87.
The cause was congestive heart failure, a spokeswoman for the Supreme Court said.
An energetic court administrator, Chief Justice Burger was in some respects a transitional figure despite his tenure, the longest for a Chief Justice in this century.
He presided over a Court that, while it grew steadily more conservative with subsequent appointments, nonetheless remained strongly influenced by the legacy of his liberal predecessor, Chief Justice Earl Warren.
The constitutional right to abortion and the validity of busing as a remedy for school segregation were both established during Chief Justice Burger's tenure, and with his support.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Sylvia Laibman Horwitz of Manhattan, an author and founder of two schools who died on June 18, misidentified the college she attended.
Mrs.
Horwitz graduated in 1932 from Flora Stone Mather College for Women, not from Case Western Reserve University.
The women's college later became part of a university that helped form Case Western Reserve University in 1967.


Jerusalem Journal; Can Israelis Be Polite? A Phone Call Could Tell
The Israeli telephone company, Bezeq, has decided that Israelis need to be more polite on the phone.
Now there's a news flash, you may be thinking: Israelis can be ill mannered.
File that one under Dog Bites Man.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
May  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  New-Home Sales . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  G.D.P. . . . 1st Qtr.
Revised  Factory Orders . . .
May


STUDENTS USE LAW ON DISCRIMINATION IN SEX-ABUSE SUITS
For months, LaShonda D., a fifth-grader at Hubbard Elementary School in Macon, Ga., complained to her teacher that the boy sitting next to her was bothering her, using vulgar language, rubbing up against her, trying to touch her breasts and vaginal area.
LaShonda finally had her seat changed, but the harassment continued.
When LaShonda's mother complained, the principal said he would "threaten the boy a littler bit harder" but also asked why LaShonda "was the only one complaining." Meanwhile, LaShonda's grades, and her mental health, declined.


Funds for Community Projects
The Federal Government has awarded Newark more than $21 million for community-development projects and to house individuals with AIDS and poor people, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, announced last week.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development will provide $12.8 million for community-development projects, such as day-care centers, demolition of abandoned buildings and grants to community-based groups that provide education, medical care and other services; $5.2 million for housing for people with AIDS, and $3.4 million for low-income housing.


Grey Will Handle Lexmark's Account
Lexmark International in Greenwich, Conn., which markets printers, keyboards and other computer-related equipment, has named Grey Advertising in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
The account was previously at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, until that agency resigned in February as part of efforts to focus on larger accounts.


1995 STANLEY CUP CHAMPIONS: Sports of The Times; Will Devils Betray The Sport's Trust?
IT is one of the oldest commandments in sports: If you build it, they will come.
It is thought of now as a memorable line from the baseball movie "Field of Dreams," where old-time ballplayers in old-time uniforms returned to a dusty diamond in an Iowa cornfield.
But the commandment has always applied to every sport.
It's why Yankee Stadium and Fenway Park were built, why Madison Square Garden and Chicago Stadium were built, why Giants Stadium and the Rose Bowl were built.


Voting on Budget, and Taxes
The Legislature is to vote today on a $16 billion budget for the fiscal year that begins on Saturday, but of more immediate interest to taxpayers is a cut in their income taxes.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's campaign promise to cut nearly a third of most residents' taxes will be fulfilled today if lawmakers, as expected, approve the third phase of her reduction plan.


Edward Wharton-Tigar, 82, British Agent
Edward Wharton-Tigar, a British agent during World War II, died on June 14, the Times of London reported on Thursday.
He was 82 and had a residence in London.
Mr.
Wharton-Tigar was also a mining executive and a prominent collector of what the British call cigarette cards, depicting Boer War heroes, Hawaiian hummingbirds and myriad other subjects.


Accounts
*
Michaels Stores Inc., Irving, Tex., to the Richards Group, Dallas, as the first agency to handle the broadcast creative and media portions of its account.
Michaels, an arts and crafts retailer, will continue to handle print advertising in-house; the company spends about $50 million annually on all forms of advertising.


Neutral-Zone Trap to Champagne Pop
The 1994-95 National Hockey League season was a long and ragged one, beginning with a 15-week labor lockout in early autumn.
It ended with an explosion of joy in early summer as the New Jersey Devils won the first -- and maybe only -- Stanley Cup championship in their history.
By beating the Detroit Red Wings by 5-2 Saturday night at Byrne Arena and completing a four-game sweep of the final tournament round, the Devils equaled the status of the Rangers a little more than 12 months before.


Mets Get Their Chances Versus a Spotty Maddux But Throw Them Away
The Mets roughed up the best pitcher on the planet, Greg Maddux, for two runs in the first inning and 10 hits over all, the highest number of hits the three-time Cy Young Award winner has allowed this season.
But it's not what the Mets did but rather what they didn't do against the Atlanta Braves today that has landed them in sole possession of last place in the National League East for the first time this season.
After scoring two runs on four hits off Maddux in the first inning, the Mets couldn't come up with a clutch hit the rest of the game.
The Mets left 11 runners on base, including 6 in scoring position.
Starter Pete Harnisch couldn't hold on to his early advantage and lost a lead for the third time in his last eight starts.
And second baseman Jeff Kent turned a one-run Braves lead in the seventh into a two-run lead when he blew a potential bases-loaded double play by throwing the ball into the dirt in front of the plate for an error.


In a New Era for Vietnam, a Church Is Reborn


Get a Hold of This Young Fisherman


Equity Offerings For This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Adtran Inc., Huntsville, Ala., 3 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.


Governor Pataki's Watershed
Gov.
George Pataki has promised time and again that he will save the 2,000-square-mile watershed that supplies eight million New York City dwellers and one million upstaters with drinking water.
As a down payment on that promise, he is mediating talks between city officials who want to keep the watershed clean and upstate developers who think the city has no right to meddle in their lives.
That is more than any of his predecessors in Albany have done, and he deserves credit for it.
Still, talk is one thing, results another.
The worst possible result of these closed-door discussions would be a rhetorically correct statement in which the antagonists agree to "put past differences aside" and "embark on a new era of cooperation." Such diplomatic double-speak cannot substitute for a detailed agreement that would do two things.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  A TEST OF DEMOCRACY IN HAITI
With delays, confusion and sporadic disruptions -- but little violence -- Haitians voted in an election that was an important test not only of Haiti's incipient democracy, but of U.S. foreign policy and the United Nations.
A1  CLINTON AGAIN PONDERS VIETNAM
Twenty-six years after he agonized over avoiding service in the Vietnam War, President Clinton is moving toward the end of an agonizing decision on granting Vietnam diplomatic recognition.
A1  JOHN MAJOR'S BIG GAMBLE
News Analysis: Prime Minister John Major's call for a snap election on his leadership of the Conservative Party may prove to be a very dangerous gamble.
A2  RUSSIA'S POPULAR PREMIER
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin had a good week, forcefully intervening to save the lives of hundreds of Russians held by Chechen rebels, while President Yeltsin seemed to be on the wrong side of events.
A3  ITALY HOLDS REPUTED MAFIA BOSS
Italian authorities have captured Leoluca Bagarella, the reputed leader of the Mafia since the arrest in 1993 of his brother-in-law, Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the presumed "boss of bosses." A3  QUEBEC TO CONSIDER NATIONHOOD
As the people of Quebec celebrate St.
Jean-Baptiste Day, their "national" holiday, they also face the second vote in 15 years on whether to split from Canada.
A6  Reporter's Notebook: Geneva is awash in a new vernacular.
A2  Arab-Israeli violence flared in the West Bank and Gaza.
A6  Jerusalem Journal: Improving Israeli telephone manners.
A4  National A8-13, B10  A NEW USE FOR TITLE IX
Until recently, Title IX was widely perceived as a law guaranteeing women's rights to participate in school athletics, but now it is being used in harassment cases.
A1  AN OVERHAUL BY DEFAULT
News Analysis: With none of the drama that accompanied the President's failed effort, Congress is embarking on major change in the health care system by trimming Medicare and Medicaid.
A1  FINANCIAL WOES FOR N.R.A.
The leaders who took over the National Rifle Association four years ago have allowed the organization to deteriorate into a deficit-plagued operation.
A1  HISTORY BEHIND PINK TRIANGLE
As the pink triangle was transformed from a mark of Nazi persecution into an emblem of gay liberation, it lost its link to personal experience.
Now the symbol can be associated with one man's name.
A1  MCVEIGH GIVES INTERVIEW
In his first interview since he was charged with the Oklahoma bombing, Timothy McVeigh told Newsweek magazine that he intended to plead not guilty to the charges.
A8  SEEING PATTERN IN 10 KILLINGS
Some people in the Englewood neighborhood of Chicago wonder if police indifference to the deaths of 10 women has masked the serial pattern of their deaths.
A8  NEW REPORT ON IRAQ DOWNING
Two Army helicopters might have escaped being shot down over Iraq if their pilots had received orders to switch to a different frequency, Time magazine said.
A10  SYMPATHY IN NASA STING
The only person to demand a trial on charges from a Federal investigation into bribery and kickbacks involving NASA contracts has won sympathy in Houston.
A11  VOTERS ARE DISENCHANTED
Residents of Tacoma, Wash., often a political barometer for the nation, are again restless.
In random interviews, they registered disappointment and disenchantment over the state of politics.
A12  Metro Digest B1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Talk with president of PBS.
C11  Theater: Ntozake Shange's "Colored Girls." C11  Music: Ray Charles at JVC Jazz Festival.
C11  Mel Torme and Peggy Lee at Carnegie Hall.
C13  Jazz for a lazy afternoon.
C13  Joe Henderson at JVC.
C13  Bands with Louisiana roots.
C13  Caramoor opens.
C16  Bach in America.
Warren Burger, who served as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for 17 years ending in 1986, died in Washington at age 87.
A1  James K. Batten, Knight-Ridder chairman.
B8  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Governor Pataki's watershed.
The United Nations at 50.
New York City's decrepit schools.
Letters  William Safire: Reading Bill's mind.
Anthony Lewis: The Italy we want?
Seymour Melman: Preparing for war (against ourselves).
T.
J.
English: Where crime rules.
Bridge C14  Chronicle B2  Crossword C16


New York City's Decrepit Schools
With their leaking roofs, collapsing walls and falling masonry, New York City's schools are a disaster waiting to happen.
It is only a matter of time before someone is badly hurt or killed, according to a new report from a special commission created by the Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines.
The task of fixing the schools may be obvious, but where the money can be found is not.
The report has several ideas, but they all require the city's leaders to set aside their fights over school governance and focus on the problem.
As usual, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani argued that the basic hindrance to repairing the schools is poor management, not lack of money.
The Commission on School Facilities and Maintenance Reform acknowledges many management problems but argues persuasively that the schools still need more money if they are to be safe and habitable.
It questions whether the Board of Education's current five-year capital spending plan of $7.5 billion is adequate.
The city is spending only about a third of that.


Voters in Tacoma, Wash.: Disenchanted No Matter Which Way They Turn
The well-tended, hilly neighborhoods off Puget Sound are about as far from the nation's capital as anyone can get.
Maybe that explains why voters here are so independent minded or, to be less charitable, so fickle.
This was Ronald Reagan territory in 1980 and 1984.
George Bush had a tougher time in 1988, but prevailed.
Four years later, Bill Clinton edged out Mr.
Bush, helped by one of Ross Perot's strongest showings.
Last year, the voters here in the Ninth Congressional District swung back to Republicans.
Randy Tate, one of six Republicans from the state who won a House seat that had been held by a Democratic, knocked off Representative Mike Kreidler and set out for the other Washington.


Big Labor Needs To Reorganize Itself
To the Editor:
"Who Will Lead Labor, Where?" (editorial, June 19) does not discuss the ironic fact that during years of economic uncertainty, when protections offered working people by labor unions should have drawn their greatest response, membership actually declined all through Lane Kirkland's years as head of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.


White Sox Complete A Sweep Of Indians
White Sox 3, Indians 2 Robin Ventura singled home the go-ahead run with two outs in the eighth inning, and the Chicago White Sox completed a three-game sweep of the Cleveland Indians with a 3-2 victory yesterday at Comiskey Park.


Testing Fragile Democracy, Haiti Votes
Despite widespread delays, much confusion and sporadic disruptions -- but little violence -- Haitians struggled to the polls today for an election with more positions at stake than any other in this country's long and turbulent history.
Across the country, hundreds of polling places opened hours late, others did not open at all, and a handful were reportedly forced to close after threats to election officials.
The result, international observers said tonight, was that at least 100,000 Haitians who wanted to cast ballots may have been unable to do so, making a debate about the validity of the results all but inevitable.


Peggy Lee and Mel Torme Offer Mystery and Precision
One should never underestimate the power of star quality and tenacity to pull a singer through a difficult performance.
In a rare appearance at Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening, an ailing Peggy Lee wove an eerie spell that transcended a vocal capacity so diminished that her voice was little more than a wobbly murmur.
Within the limited mobility left to her, Miss Lee still swings, although quietly.
Looking a lot like Mae West in her later years, the 75-year-old singer also conveyed more than a glimmer of the smoldering sexuality that made her the most glamorous nightclub singer of the 1960's.


Tracing Bach's Slow Start in America
The first documented performance of a work by Bach in America came in 1853: the Concerto for Three Claviers, at a concert in Boston.
It was not until 1888 that Bach's "St. John Passion" was performed in the United States, and the B-minor Mass was not sung here until 1900.
This was a period when Handel was already enormously popular, and the Boston-based Handel and Haydn Society, founded in 1815, was the premier choral institution in America.
There were many reasons for the neglect of Bach.
For one, his choral works were considered too arcane and too difficult.
And his instrumental music was largely unavailable.


On-Screen Guide to TV Schedules Can Program a VCR, Too
Surveys show that about 70 percent of VCR owners do not know how to program their machines, and now another challenge looms for people intimidated by living room electronics.
The average cable system currently offers more than 12,000 program choices a week on roughly 30 channels.
With hundreds of channels on the horizon, how will viewers keep track of what's on?
Printed guides, analysts say, will become too thick and difficult to keep up to date.
On-screen guides that are now available on most cable systems will scroll too slowly.
What will be needed, analysts say, is a guide that can organize vast amounts of information and present it quickly.


Devils' Elder Statesmen Enjoy These Better Days
From the bleak seasons of seemingly endless losing streaks, the being shunted from the playoffs by the first day of spring, the days and nights of humiliation and embarrassment -- to one exultant night of finally laying just claim to the Stanley Cup.
That is the story of the New Jersey Devils.
It is a New Jersey kind of story.
The Devils' elder statesmen, Ken Daneyko, John MacLean and Bruce Driver, came from somewhere else to make New Jersey their home.
And the Devils themselves were born in Kansas City, Mo., as the Scouts in 1974, moved to Denver two years later as the Colorado Rockies and were brought to the Garden State in 1982 by John McMullen, a Montclair, N.J., native.


Sax Lines, Profound and Decorative
The saxophonist Joe Henderson opened his set -- and the JVC Jazz Festival -- at Carnegie Hall on Friday night with "Modinha," a duet with the bassist Nico Assumpcion.
It took just a few seconds to hear what sort of cards he brought to the table; with the first handful of ideas, he showed an extraordinary rhythmic control, chopping with some phrases, letting some shudder.
Mr.
Henderson masked his rhythmic acuity with a woolly tone; his note choices, careful and full of yearning, opened the way for a real emotional response in the audience.
Mr.
Henderson's improvisations are full of moments of profound and gentle optimism.
His phrases, using repeated rhythmic ideas, climb as patiently as stairs, opening into broad vistas.
And he's erratic; those patiently placed, graceful notes are just as often followed by gnarled lines that whisk through a tune's harmony, never quite articulating anything but their own movement.
Mr.
Henderson can be oblique, and his improvisations ride on all the emotional relationships and contradictions that he brings to them.


Galarraga Powers Rockies With 3 Homers
Rockies 11, Padres 3
Andres Galarraga homered in three consecutive innings to drive in a career-high seven runs as visiting Colorado beat San Diego to split a four-game series.


Essay; Reading Bill's Mind
My '96 campaign has begun.
Running the country, which they won't let me do, now gives way to running for re-election, where I call the shots.
My Grand Strategy is to run above party, to secure the Perot anti-deficit vote, then to scare Democrats into coming along by painting the party in power as extremist.


When Digital Doesn't Always Mean Clear
Few mantras are more powerful in the information economy than the word "digital." Digital CD recordings are sharp and clean.
Digital television is expected to be cinematic, interactive and free of ghosts.
Digital culture, blossoming over the Internet, is arguably the social trend of the moment.
But digital cellular telephones, introduced in many markets with great fanfare over the last year, are not any of those.


CHRONICLE
One day soon it will house the German Parliament, but yesterday the Reichstag wore a billowy silver frock cinched by a long blue sash.
The artists CHRISTO and JEAN-CLAUDE presented their "Wrapped Reichstag" yesterday to an ambivalent Berlin and a curious world.


Awards Given In Public Relations
Fleishman-Hillard Inc. won the most awards at the 1995 Silver Anvils Awards presentation sponsored by the Public Relations Society of America in New York.


Amid Closings, Expansion Plan
The United States House of Representatives went on record this week in support of building a $70.8 million pier extension to serve two new ships at Naval Weapons Station Earle near Colts Neck.
The measure still must be approved by the Senate and President Clinton, and Congress still must appropriate the money next year.
But Representative Frank Pallone Jr., a Long Branch Democrat whose district includes the base, insisted that the endorsement makes the station more likely to survive possible future rounds of base closings.


Mayor's Mobile Cheering Section
Perhaps mindful of his mixed reception at the Puerto Rican Day Parade, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday unveiled his new strategy for dealing with booing spectators: a cadre of cheering supporters.
In yesterday's Gay and Lesbian Day Parade, Mr.
Giuliani was accompanied by about 40 members of a gay Republican club and officials of his administration.
Whenever he was greeted by boos from the crowd, the supporters quickly erupted in loud cheers and applause and in chants of "Rudy, Rudy."


WPP Revises Plan For Chief's Pay
The WPP Group P.L.C., the agency company in London whose holdings include the J. Walter Thompson Company and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, has modified a compensation plan for Martin Sorrell, the WPP chief executive, to toughen the criteria by which he would earn pay and stock bonuses.
The changes were made last week in an effort to pacify dissident institutional shareholders before a vote at a special meeting today.
Mr.
Sorrell's pay package had been valued at an estimated $39 million over five years.
The institutional shareholders that voiced unhappiness with the original plan, criticizing it as too generous and too complex, own about 10 percent of WPP's shares.
The changes include adding a provision that payments to Mr.
Sorrell would depend on dividend performance as well as increases in the price of WPP shares.
WPP executives said they expected the plan, as modified, would be approved.


Trainer, Krone Win Together
It has been said that if you want to find a friend in thoroughbred racing, buy a puppy.
But the friendship between the trainer Richard Dutrow and the jockey Julie Krone has endured for more than a decade, and yesterday at Belmont Park, the two made another trip to the winner's circle.
Lite the Fuse, the 4-year-old bay colt Dutrow bred, trains and owns, picked up his fifth victory in eight starts in the $107,400 Tom Fool, pulling off to a 4 3/4-length victory over Our Emblem under a confident ride from Krone.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about the artist Anne Tabachnick misidentified the San Francisco gallery that held her last exhibition, in April.
It was the Eleanor Austerer Gallery, not the Erica Meyerovich.


An Accidental Overhaul; Major Changes in the Health Care System Could Be a Byproduct of Budget-Cutting
With none of the drama and deliberation that accompanied President Clinton's failed effort, Congress is almost accidentally embarking on major change in the health care system.
Last year the primary goal was to insure the 37 million Americans who had no coverage.
This time the point is to save the Government $450 billion in projected spending over seven years.
"We don't have any money," Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, explained to a meeting of nursing home operators a few days ago.


Hospitals Start Charging Poor Patients
Under cover of summer, in the politically tranquil neighborhoods of Queens, New York City's struggling public hospital system has quietly started charging poor, uninsured patients for services that it had always provided free.
Since May 1, as part of a pilot project, the two public hospitals in the borough, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Queens Hospital Center, have been charging patients $10 for each prescription they fill, with a cap of $20 per day.


In Albany, a Frenetic Week For Negotiating Major Bills
The State Legislature returns to the Capitol this week for a final round of frenetic negotiations on bills that could start New York down the path to legalized casino gambling, force doctors to recommend H.I.V. testing to pregnant women and require convicted sex offenders to register with the state when they are released from prison.
None of the state's leaders were willing to predict late last week whether compromises will be reached on any of those bills, or on dozens of other significant pieces of legislation before the Senate and Assembly.
With the 1995 session dominated by a lengthy dispute over the state budget, few other issues received heavy attention until two weeks ago.
And many legislators seem to feel there is little that truly must be done before they leave town.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mostly Popular Arrangements, Enthusiastically Rendered  The New York City Gay Men's Chorus Carnegie Hall
In the normal chemistry of amateur singing groups, individuals plus music yield a kindred community.
In the case of the New York City Gay Men's Chorus, the process reverses.
Community is the starting point and music the end.
Affinity and purpose find a cultural arm in choral singing.
It is not surprising that this 15-year-old, 150-voice ensemble directed by Gary Miller leans toward popular arrangements, the kind that bring stage and audience most comprehensively together.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A LITTLE ADVICE, MAYOR TO MAYOR
It was probably inevitable, given their muscular temperaments.
Maybe it is temporary.
But whatever the prognosis, it sure has happened -- a rift between the Mayor of the moment, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and the man who wouldn't mind being Mayor forever, Edward I. Koch.
"I have been very critical, in the same way I have been very supportive in the past," Mr.
Koch said.
"I think Rudy's become filled with his own sense of importance. I am trying to say to him: 'You're doing a terrific job substantively. But if you keep alienating people, you're going to end up with smoke.' " Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ Page B3. ] OFFICER SHOT RESISTING MUGGERS
An off-duty police officer was shot twice when he resisted two muggers who tried to rob him in the elevator of his Co-op City building late Saturday night, the police said.
The officer, Angel Sostre, 37, of the Manhattan North Task Force, was shot in the neck and in the left shoulder after he identified himself to his attackers, the police said.  [ B3. ] THE TEAM BEHIND THE REMAKE OF REX
When paleontologists pronounced that Tyrannosaurus rex never stood upright, as he had for decades at the American Museum of Natural History, it was the museum's mounting team, not the scientists, that proposed the dramatic stalking pose that has turned rex into New York's newest media darling.
It was also the mounting team that decided to hoist the Apatosaurus's tail high in the air (to critical applause).  [ B3. ] ATTACK IN BROOKLYN LINKED TO FEUD
Six teen-agers attacked a 19-year-old Brooklyn man in an alley in Sunset Park, using baseball bats, hockey sticks and the car-theft prevention device the Club to beat him close to death, the police said.
The near-fatal assault on Asif Ali Hussain was part of a long-simmering feud between rival groups of Pakistani teen-agers, the police said, and the teen-agers who attacked Mr.
Hussain may have been seeking revenge for an earlier fight involving him.  [ B3. ] A STRATEGY FOR CROWD MANAGEMENT
Perhaps mindful of his mixed reception at the Puerto Rican Day Parade, Mayor Giuliani unveiled his new strategy for dealing with booing spectators: cheering supporters.
In the Gay and Lesbian Day Parade, Mr.
Giuliani was accompanied by about 40 members of a gay Republican club and officials of his administration.
Whenever he was greeted by boos from the crowd, the supporters quickly erupted in loud cheers and applause.  [ B4. ] REGION  TO CELEBRATE OR NOT TO . . .
A day after the Devils tasted the champagne of victory, New Jersey's new Stanley Cup hockey champions were still trying to work themselves into a properly festive mood.
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority were expected to make the arrangements for the team's victory celebration, an awkward pairing somewhat like appointing the Capulets and the Montagues to organize Romeo and Juliet's nuptials.  [ B5. ] The 1994-95 National Hockey League season ended as the New Jersey Devils won the first -- and maybe only -- Stanley Cup championship in their history.  [ Sports, C1. ] MOVING BEYOND THE BUDGET IN ALBANY
The State Legislature returns to the Capitol this week for a final round of frenetic negotiations on bills that could start New York down the path to legalized casino gambling, force doctors to recommend H.I.V. testing to pregnant women and require convicted sex offenders to register with the state when they are released from prison.
None of the state's leaders were willing to predict whether compromises will be reached on any of those bills, or on dozens of other significant pieces of legislation before the Senate and Assembly.  [ B5. ] DOWN, PERHAPS, BUT NOT OUT IN YONKERS
Terence M. Zaleski's tenure as Mayor of Yonkers, New York's fourth-largest city, has hardly been easy.
Elected in 1991 with 36 percent of the vote, Mr.
Zaleski, a Democrat, has presided over a deadlocked government in which he and the Republican-controlled City Council have accomplished little together.
But as the mayoral race gears up, five months before the November election, few in this working-class city of 188,000 have counted Mr.
Zaleski out.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B2


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A look at the state of the agency-client marriage uncovers a case of irreconcilable perspectives.
AN effort to put agencies and clients on the couch and analyze the tempestuous state of their union has discovered disorders that even the most dedicated disciple of Freud might shrink from in dismay.
The results of an annual survey by Nancy L. Salz Consulting in New York, on the relationships between advertisers and agencies, indicate that the gap between the two sides is becoming a "widening chasm" and, as a result, advertisers and agencies are "farther apart than ever." That has ominous implications for their ability to cooperate in the production of effective advertising.


Reichstag Tells Story of Failed Democracy
To the Editor:
The prominently displayed dedication in your June 20 photo "Reichstag Under Wraps" gives a flash of insight into one of the birth defects of democracy in Germany.


The Serious Money Hits the Superhighway
Venture capital is pouring into Internet companies, and is already aiming at the second generation of start-ups.
As the building of the data highway appears to be well under way, the big winners today are software start-ups that are working to make the still nerdy Net and particularly the World Wide Web more hospitable to consumers and businesses.


Weight Watchers Review Advances
Weight Watchers International, the unit of the H. J. Heinz Company in Jericho, L.I., that operates weight-loss centers, has narrowed the review on its account to 7 agencies from 12 to 15.
The billings were estimated at $30 million to $35 million.
A decision is expected after Labor Day, she said on Friday.


Nasdaq Posts Rise of 0.5% In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market increased one-half of 1 percent in the month that ended June 15, the exchange announced yesterday.
Uncovered short sales amounted to 837.5 million shares, compared with 833.5 million shares for the month that ended on May 15.
Open positions of short sales reflect the total number of shares sold short by Nasdaq members and their customers.


MUSIC
Of Lovers in Another Life, With Libretto by Mishima  Harmonia Opera Company Merkin Concert Hall
The Harmonia Opera Company was founded in 1981 to present Japanese works, and on Sunday afternoon it staged the American premiere of "Ayame" ("Iris") a one-act opera by Yutaka Makino with a libretto by Yukio Mishima.
Its premise is that Ayame, a concubine, and Yorimasa, a samurai who has killed an evil bird that was haunting the Emperor's dreams, realize that they were lovers in a previous life, when he was a cypress and she was an iris that grew at his feet.


A Correction: Market Timing
Today The Japanese Government will announce further details of its economic stimulus package.
It is expected to tackle issues like the weak Tokyo stock market and unemployment.
Stock traders say that if the package turns out to be a disappointment, it could lead to heavy selling on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Sister Martha's 62-Year Assignment
AMONG the highlights of Sister Martha Winum's tour is the iron lung parked in a hallway near Rehabilitation.
It takes some explaining.
What helped save lives during wave after wave of the polio epidemic looks like a space capsule with a window at the head, rubber portholes on the sides, a crank at the feet.
Sister Martha will explain it all.
"These portholes were used for massaging the patient's arms," she said, sticking her arms in and kneading the air.
Physical therapists and nurses striding down the hall had stopped in their tracks to watch.
Sister was 40 years away.
"This here is for the bedpans," she said, working her way down the capsule.
It started to seem like a magician's trunk.
"Here," she said at the crank, "this is how you pump in the air. Up, down, up, down. After a few minutes, you're exhausted."


Al Hansen, 67, Artist Who Created Happenings
Al Hansen, one of the first Happenings artists and a founder of the Fluxus art movement, was found dead last Tuesday in his apartment in Cologne, Germany.
He was 67 and had lived in Cologne since 1987.
The cause of death has not been determined, said his dealer in Cologne, Hari Hoffman.


Transit System Braces for Strike
New Jersey Transit will offer expanded bus service and limited train service if its engineers walk off the job this weekend, officials said yesterday.
Notices of train schedules will be distributed on trains and at major stations, beginning today.
Bus schedules will be available in terminals in Hoboken, Newark and New York.


High Court to Rule on Local Phone Companies' Right to Compete With Cable TV
The Supreme Court agreed today to rule on the constitutionality of a part of Federal telecommunications policy that Congress is in the process of repealing -- a law that has kept local telephone companies from competing with the cable television industry to provide video programming in their service areas.
A Federal appeals court in Richmond ruled last November that the prohibition was an unconstitutional burden on the telephone companies' right of free speech, preventing them from communicating over their own networks with their desired audience.
Phone companies have been bringing and winning First Amendment challenges to the policy in Federal courts around the country.
This case was brought by the Bell Atlantic Corporation, which owns phone companies from New Jersey through Virginia.


With Future Uncertain, Devils Will Celebrate (in Parking Lot)
The New Jersey Devils announced plans yesterday for their Stanley Cup victory parade, and just as promptly rained on it by proclaiming their intention to end their franchise agreement with the state's Sports and Exposition Authority after the 1996-97 hockey season.
At the very moment the team was planning for a celebration with its ecstatic fans through an evening motorcade tomorrow outside Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Devils sent the most serious signal yet that they are unhappy with their lease and might move to Nashville, which has been courting the team for months.


A Pungent Whiff of Savannah and Its Favorite Son
From "Skylark" to "Moon River," a whiff of magnolia seeps through many of the lyrics of Johnny Mercer, who was born in Savannah, Ga., in 1909 and died in Los Angeles in 1976.
References to the songwriter and his music also wind through "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," John Berendt's best-selling portrait of Savannah.
Several of the most dramatic scenes in a book that is part travelogue, part real-life melodrama, take place in Mercer House, a mansion that once belonged to the Mercer family.
On Sunday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, readings from Mr.
Berendt's book were interwoven with performances of many Mercer songs during a concert that also brought two of the book's more colorful characters to the stage.
Lady Chablis, a black drag queen whom the author befriended, made the evening's grandest entrance and read one of her monologues, and Emma Kelly, a Savannah-based singer and pianist whom Mercer nicknamed "The Lady of 6,000 Songs" performed rough, hearty versions of several Mercer standards.
Joining them were Margaret Whiting, Bobby Short, Gerry Mulligan and half a dozen other New York jazz and cabaret stars in a dual celebration of Mercer's songs and Mr.
Berendt's book.


Pollution Bill Clears Legislature
A bill that would revamp the state program on air pollution permits sailed through the State Legislature yesterday, the A.P. reported.
The plan is based on an agreement reached two weeks ago between the State Department of Environmental Protection and industry representatives.
Under the bill, companies that pollute less than others would amass pollution "credits" that they could sell to bigger polluters.


Germany to Send Forces to Balkans to Support U.N.
Eyeing its influence and image in Europe and elsewhere, the German Government resolved today for the first time to send armed forces to the Balkans to support United Nations peacekeepers, but made clear that the deployment precluded troops on the ground in Bosnia.
The decision must be approved by Parliament, which meets on Friday, and is the culmination of a tortured debate in Germany over its diplomatic role in the present after the destruction wrought by its militaristic past.


Lockheed To Eliminate 12,000 Jobs
The Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a sweeping consolidation plan yesterday that would close plants and field offices, eliminate 12,000 jobs and ultimately save the company $1.8 billion a year.
The planned cuts are a painful byproduct of the merger, completed in March, between the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation, a combination that created the nation's biggest military contractor.


Professor Will Step Down As Head of Black Studies
In a quiet end to his troubled chairmanship of City College's Black Studies Department, Prof.
Leonard Jeffries will step down at the end of this month, college officials said last night.
Earlier in the evening, the City University of New York's board of trustees approved the department's choice of a new chairman, described by colleagues as a political scientist with moderate views.
Dr.
Jeffries, the fiery speaker whose anti-Semitic remarks polarized the campus and spurred a three-year legal effort by the college to strip him of his chairmanship, did not seek to renew his three-year appointment, which expired this year, Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses, the president of City College, said.
The eight-member faculty of the Black Studies Department voted unanimously to elect a new chairman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the mood of voters in Tacoma, Wash., incompletely identified a Democrat who said that he preferred his party's indecisiveness to the Republicans' preoccupation with religion.
The voter was Dennis McInteer, 54, who teaches seminars on the use of humor in the workplace.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  COLOMBIA CARTEL CRACKDOWN  Although it would take years to stem the flow of cocaine to the United States, Colombia has responded to pressure from Washington with what appears to be a serious crackdown on the Cali cartel.
A1


Slayings of 3 Youths Stun Little Rock
When three armed men invaded the home of Mary Hussian here this month and killed three of her children, execution-style, this city, which had thought it was waging a successful fight against violence, found itself discouraged anew about how to combat the problem.
The police said the killers were gang members exacting revenge on the victims for something the gang, mistakenly, thought another family member had done.
Adding to the horror was the fact that one of the suspects arrested in the killings is related to the victims' family.


The N.B.A. Slides Into a Labor Limbo
Officials of the National Basketball Association have not decided how to proceed beyond their agreement that isn't, but the National Labor Relations Board is proceeding with plans for a hearing on decertification of the players union next Wednesday.
Commissioner David Stern said yesterday no plans have been made to resume talks that negotiators for both sides thought they had concluded last Wednesday night.
Stern said he has since had one conversation with Simon Gourdine, the union's executive director, but Stern said he did not talk to him yesterday but probably would today.


Sony Displays Flat-Screen TV Employing a New Technology
Seeking to become competitive in the market for flat screens, the Sony Corporation today displayed a new technology for producing flat television sets that can hang on a wall.
Sony said it hoped to begin selling 25-inch television sets using the technology in the autumn of next year.
It did not say how much they would cost.


2 Officers Suspended After Scuffle In the Bronx
Two off-duty police officers raised a drunken row in the Bronx late Sunday, cursing and scuffling with other police officers who had responded to a report of a man waving a gun, the police said yesterday.
The incident, in which a sergeant was arrested, was the third case involving apparently drunk off-duty officers that has embarrassed the department over the last six weeks.


A Top Official in Investment Banking Quits at UBS Securities
Victor A. Cohn, co-head of the investment banking operations of UBS Securities Inc., resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
His departure raised eyebrows on Wall Street, where the firm is considered something of a barometer for the fortunes of foreign firms trying to build a presence in American investment banking.


Are Directors Overpaid? The Answer Varies Widely
Annual retainers, meeting fees, stock options, pension benefits, deferred compensation -- put them all together and you get the many components of a director's pay package and one big controversy.
This year, in particular, stockholders have been complaining that too many directors do too little for their generous checks.
Since "everyone's talking about it," said Graef S. Crystal, the corporate-compensation expert, he decided to see if all the fuss was warranted.
And in some cases it appears to be, judging by Mr.
Crystal's comparison of the performance of 414 of the nation's largest companies with the pay package they gave their directors in 1994.


Avoid All That Smoke At the N.B.A. Draft
On the day of the 1993 National Basketball Association draft, Don Nelson, the former Golden State Warriors coach, was asked whether he was planning to pull the trigger on a blockbuster deal that would secure the rights to Chris Webber.
"If I tell you," Nelson deadpanned, "I have to kill you."


Court's Ruling on Drug Tests Welcomed
High school sports officials, coaches, parents and athletes endorsed yesterday's Supreme Court ruling that upheld, by 6-3, the right of public school systems to require random drug testing for their student-athletes, but they cautioned about possible privacy questions.
"I think it's a great ruling and it was a long time coming," said Roy Schleicher, the associate director of the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association.
"The kids take these substances knowing that they are enhancing their playing ability. What I don't think many of them realize is that at the same time these drugs are abusive to them physically and mentally."


World News Briefs; Leader of Chechen Raid Expresses Condolences
The Chechen rebel commander whose fighters took more than 1,000 hostages and killed at least 120 people in a hospital in southern Russia two weeks ago now says he feels bad about the raid, and that he and his men "turned into beasts." But he also warned that similar acts of violence could follow.
In his first television interview, from an undisclosed location, the fugitive commander, Shamil Basayev, calmly expressed his condolences to his victims.
"Some may think its cynical, but I and the guys are saying this from our hearts."


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.(SNTV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


O'Neal-Olajuwon: Eat Heartily
Who was behind a newspaper ad yesterday in which Shaquille O'Neal challenged Hakeem Olajuwon to a game of one-on-one?
Earlier this month, Olajuwon's Houston Rockets swept O'Neal's Orlando Magic to win the National Basketball Association championship.
But in an advertisement in yesterday's editions of The New York Times and USA Today, this dare appeared in simple typescript: "Hakeem -- The series may be a done deal, but it ain't over between you and me. Sure, you're pretty good with your team behind you, but I want you one on one. Shaq."


DANCE
Linking the Worlds Of Mortals and Fairies  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
George Balanchine is revealed as amusing, sweet-tempered and resolutely un-Aristotelian in "A Midsummer Night's Dream," danced to Mendelssohn.
But two role debuts on Saturday afternoon made sense of what is essentially two ballets in two acts in a magical performance by the New York City Ballet.


LEGISLATORS PASS A TAX CUT OF 30% FOR NEW JERSEY
The New Jersey Legislature passed the second half of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's 30 percent income tax reduction tonight, a year ahead of schedule, with many Democrats joining Republican majorities in the Assembly and Senate.
The Senate enacted the Governor's $16 billion budget with a party line vote of 22 to 17, and at 8:10 P.M. the Assembly passed the budget, 54 to 23, as well as the tax cut.


Riley's Next Suit Might Be Filed Against the Knicks
Pat Riley's terse but contentious resignation statement on June 15 may have been the first shot of a legal battle to invalidate the fifth and final year of his contract with the Knicks.
Before the former Knicks coach left for Greece -- the same day he faxed his resignation to the team and released a statement to the news media claiming "serious differences and questions about authority and final decision making" -- Riley obtained the services of a lawyer to handle a potential breach of contract suit against the Knicks.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A provocative approach helps an environmental group push its cause.
IT IS a provocative formula, if not tried and true, for the occasional advertiser to try to stretch scant advertising dollars by submitting an advertisement so outrageous that the newspaper or magazine has no choice but to reject it.
The thwarted advertiser expresses public bafflement at this throttling of First Amendment rights, then surfs the attendant publicity.
When it does happen, the foiled advertiser is often a mischievous jeans maker or sports-equipment manufacturer or even a large multinational clothing company, like Benetton of Italy.


Appearing Nightly: Robert Dornan, Master of the Put-Down
As the Republican presidential candidates trek America's political stage, Representative Robert K. Dornan, far back in the pack, stands out as the lounge act of the show.
He is the warm-up man and put-down artist tart as Don Rickles, skewering President Clinton as a "draft-dodging adulterer" leading the nation's "cultural meltdown" that a Dornan presidency must reverse.
"I am the one inside the Beltway listening to the screams of the Christians when the lions roar," the Californian Congressman booms in a deep, rough-edged voice that invariably draws cheers from conservative faithful like the Virginia Republicans who gave him a standing ovation last weekend.
Even so, their straw poll was delivered solidly to the conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan, much as they loved Mr.
Dornan's spleenful warm-up act with its warnings against abortion and "pro-active" homosexuality.


Kerkorian Planning to Buy 4% More of Chrysler Stock
Less than a month after withdrawing his takeover bid for the Chrysler Corporation, Kirk Kerkorian announced yesterday that he intended to spend $700 million to purchase 4 percent of the auto maker.
Under the proposal, Mr.
Kerkorian's Tracinda Corporation would buy 14 million shares of Chrysler for $50 each, a stake which would increase the Las Vegas investor's holdings to 14 percent of Chrysler.


In California, Tax Increase Draws Foes
In what many are describing as a watershed vote in one of the most conservative areas of the country, the residents of Orange County are expected to go to the polls on Tuesday and reject an emergency tax increase to help lift the county government out of bankruptcy.
Polls have shown that, as the vote draws nearer, more and more residents are saying they will not support the proposed half-cent increase in the local sales tax, to 8.25 percent.
The expected "no" vote is being interpreted as both a statement on the attitude toward taxes and on the credibility of the county's Republican-dominated power structure, which has said the tax is a critical step in extricating the wealthy county from bankruptcy and avoiding deeper financial problems.


BUSINESS DIGEST
United Healthcare Merger To Create a Health Giant  United Healthcare agreed to buy Metrahealth for $1.65 billion.
The deal would transform United, a leading H.M.O. operator, into the nation's largest health insurance and service company.
He plans to spend $700 million for 4 percent of the shares, which would raise his stake to 14 percent.
One notable loser: Disney, off $2.50, to $57.
Even though "Pocahontas" grossed more than $30 million over the weekend, investors apparently expected more.  [ D8. ] No Ticketmaster, No Pearl Jam  Pearl Jam canceled its tour after a long feud with Ticketmaster over its service charges.
The rock band tried to perform in non-Ticketmaster locations.
It didn't work.  [ C15. ] Stock Funds Top $1 Trillion  Stock funds are hot, as new numbers make clear.
Funds investing mainly in stocks topped $1 trillion in assets, only 27 months after hitting $500 billion.  [ D4. ] A Close Look at Directors' Pay  Do directors do too little and get paid too much, as many stockholders say?
Graef Crystal looked into it.
His answer: compensation is all over the map.  [ D4. ] If You Can Read This Ad . . .
"Standing behind this bus could be more dangerous than standing in front of it. Diesel fumes can kill," read an environmental group's ads.
The M.T.A. wanted none of it, but tentatively gave in after a lawsuit was filed.
The environmentalists get publicity, as well as the ads.
Advertising.  [ D7. ] At Browning-Ferris, Recycling Pays  Browning-Ferris is a big beneficiary as demand surges for recycled paper -- fueled by environmental concerns -- sending the price for waste paper from $7 a ton in 1994 to $68 early this year.
The company embraced recycling early, setting up a wide network of processing centers.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]


Whitman Delivers Cuts Year Ahead of Schedule
But can she afford it?
From the beginning of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's wonderful adventure in tax cutting 18 months ago, the skepticism that she met with was rarely about money and mostly about politics.
Cutting the income tax rate by 30 percent over three years was dismissed by over-confident Democrats and even some Republicans as a political impossibility, an interruption in the ever-increasing flow of money from Trenton to the suburbs and the cities that had continued unabated, through Democratic and Republican administrations alike.


Ryan vs. Jenkins in Tribute
One is in the Hall of Fame, the other probably a shoo-in when he becomes eligible.
And both will be celebrated next month at the All-Star Game.
Pitching greats NOLAN RYAN and FERGUSON JENKINS will serve as honorary captains at the game, the baseball commissioner's office said yesterday.


Enzyme Gap Makes Mice Violent
IN the quest to better understand human aggression, a multinational research team has developed a strain of aggressive mice that lacks the gene for an enzyme that regulates chemical activity in the brain.
The enzyme deficiency appears to alter development of neurons in the brain.
The enzyme, monoamine oxidase A or MAOA, breaks down two important neurotransmitters, serotonin and norepinephrine.
The former influences moods and perception while the latter helps deliver the nerve impulses that control body movements.


CHRONICLE
He accused her of an "ugly, mean-spirited campaign" to isolate him from the children.
She accused him of physical and emotional abuse and infidelity.
And in the middle were the children themselves.
Yesterday in Manhattan, Hollywood and real life merged in a drama involving custody of the child star MACAULAY CULKIN and five siblings.
Justice David B. Saxe of State Supreme Court restored joint custody to both parents three days after giving temporary custody to the mother, PATRICIA BRENTRUP, after she alleged that their father, CHRISTOPHER CULKIN, had left the family and was threatening the children's acting careers.


Gritty Book Sets Prudence Aside
"Don't approach history as something to be shaken for its cautionary fruits," the author Tobias Wolff wrote to Mary Karr in January 1991, as she embarked on "The Liars' Club," her memoir of her East Texas childhood, published this month by Viking.
"Don't be afraid of appearing angry, small-minded, obtuse, mean, immoral, amoral, calculating, or anything else," Mr.
Wolff wrote.
"Take no care for your dignity." And indeed, Ms.
Karr did not.
She has written one of the rawest memoirs by a serious American writer in years: the story of her childhood in "the Texas Ringworm Belt," oil-refinery country where the cancer rate rivals Bhopal's and Chernobyl's, in a town Business Week called one of the 10 ugliest on the planet.
Ms.
Karr's mother suffered from something known locally as "Nervous." She married seven times -- twice to Ms.
Karr's father -- and spent stretches of Ms.
Karr's childhood insensible from drugs and alcohol.
She set fire to Ms.
Karr's toys, and tried to kill her.
And as if all this wasn't enough to make a person miserable, at the age of 7 Ms.
Karr was raped by a neighborhood boy and a short while later molested by her babysitter, all of which she discusses explicitly.
Indeed, she takes no care for her dignity in the memoir, which Michiko Kakutani, reviewing it in The New York Times, called "an astonishing book."


Not the Same CUNY
People who remember the City University of New York of 25 years ago look sometimes with concern at the growth of the university's remedial education program, which now enrolls one-third of entering students and represents 8 to 9 percent of courses offered at four-year colleges.
But the university today is not the university of 25 years ago, just as New York is not the same city it was.
When a growing proportion of the 213,000 students are immigrants or working parents or both, attending college is a juggling act that can require the acclimation of remedial courses.


Blame FM Radio for Blandness on the Air
To the Editor:
Your lament for the lost creativity of FM radio (Media, June 19) draws more on myth than fact.
You write wistfully of the "long songs" and "freedom for program hosts" on progressive stations in the 1960's as if they were unprecedented or revolutionary innovations -- your word is "visionary."


Sports of The Times; Deep Crater The Future at Wimbledon
THE two giant cranes loom silently over the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, reminding everybody of changes to come.
The British like tradition.
But change equals money.
The people who run Wimbledon like money.
Therefore, change hovers over Wimbledon.


Immigration and Bad Social Policies Don't Mix; A White Ethnic Core
To the Editor:
Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, in a personal attack on me (letter, June 16) seconded by A. M. Rosenthal (column, June 20), purports to prove his charge of racism through selected quotations from my book "Alien Nation: Common Sense about America's Immigration Disaster."


'95 Hurricane Season Seen as One of Fiercest In the Last 20 Years
INHABITANTS of the Atlantic Coast, the Gulf Coast and the Caribbean, beware: this hurricane season is shaping up as one of the most active in the last two decades, experts say.
The reason is a conjunction of atmospheric and oceanic forces that are expected to make this year's crop of tropical storms and hurricanes 40 percent more frequent and intense than they have averaged over the last 45 years, according to a combined index of frequency and intensity calculated by researchers at Colorado State University in Fort Collins.


CUNY Adopts Stricter Policy On Admissions
Tightly restricting admission to its four-year colleges, the City University of New York will no longer accept students judged unable to complete all remedial work within the freshman year.
The policy change, approved by the Board of Trustees last night, will affect about 1,000 to 2,500 incoming freshmen out of the 143,000 students who attend the system's 11 senior colleges.
Set to take effect in the fall of 1996, it is expected to save about $2 million of the $17 million spent on remedial education each year.


Becoming a Huge H.M.O. Was a Matter of Purchase
The United Healthcare Corporation grew into one of the nation's biggest health maintentance organizations by buying big H.M.O.'s in Midwestern and Southeastern cities.
Yesterday, the company said it would spend $1.65 billion to jump into new markets that extend well beyond its H.M.O. roots.
By buying the Metrahealth Companies from Metropolitan Life and Travelers, United Healthcare will take its chances in the rapidly changing world of traditional health insurance.
It will acquire health care contracts with 40 of the nation's biggest and toughest big business customers and also enter markets in the Northeast, Southwest, West Coast and rural America.


Dresdner Will Pay $1.6 Billion for Kleinwort Benson
Dresdner Bank A.G. of Germany, completing its negotiations to acquire the Kleinwort Benson Group, said today that it had agreed to buy the British investment bank for $:1 billion, or nearly $1.6 billion.
The deal would create another giant European financial institution.
Dresdner is Germany's second-largest bank but has lacked a strong presence in international investment banking.
Kleinwort has had a strong record but has lacked the size to compete on its own against the American and European firms that are increasingly dominating the investment banking business.


Out in the Motor City, Wings Fans Still Thirsty
Their airplane was gliding in for a soft landing, but their Stanley Cup hopes had encountered anything but that 700 miles to the East.
These travelers, some in Red Wings jerseys, had spent $1,250 each to visit New Jersey for three days and two hockey games.
They saw the Devils complete a four-game sweep of their Red Wings to win the post-season tournament.


Corrections
A listing of events in Weekend on Friday with an article about the JVC Jazz Festival gave the wrong telephone number for Carnegie Hall's box office.
It is (212) 247-7800.


With Fiber Evidence, Simpson Prosecution Enters Final Phase
Hairs from humans and dogs, as well as fibers from clothing and automobile carpeting, finally took center stage in the O. J. Simpson murder trial late today, as prosecutors embarked upon the last major phase of their case, nearly five months after they began.
Prosecutors called Denise Lewis, a laboratory technician for the Los Angeles Police Department.
Ms.
Lewis, who spoke of the care with which hair and trace evidence was handled, will be followed by two expert witnesses.
They are expected to testify for the rest of the week and perhaps a few days beyond.


Excerpts From the Opinions on Random Drug Testing for Student Athletes
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Vernonia School District v.
Acton, upholding random drug tests for student athletes.
The vote was 6 to 3.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice Scalia
The Student Athlete Drug Policy adopted by School District 47J in the town of Vernonia, Ore., authorizes random urinalysis drug testing of students who participate in the district's school athletics programs.
We granted certiorari to decide whether this violates the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.


Justice Burger's Contradictions
In the decade since Warren Burger retired as Chief Justice, many historians have found his tenure moderate, sometimes even liberal, despite the conservative aims of the President who appointed him, Richard Nixon.
Like these shifting verdicts of history, the legacy of the Burger Court and its Chief Justice is confusing and contradictory.
Mr.
Burger, who died Sunday at the age of 87, set out to reduce the role of the courts in American life, according to his version of judicial restraint.
Yet he joined his Court in finding a right to choose abortion, delivered the first constitutional blow to sex discrimination and even upheld court-ordered busing to desegregate schools.


Stock Funds At $1 Trillion In May Assets
Mutual funds that invest primarily in stocks have topped $1 trillion in assets, only 27 months after first exceeding $500 billion and just a decade after exceeding $100 billion.
The figures reflect two factors that have profoundly changed the American capital markets in recent years.
Investors have warmed greatly to stocks, and more and more of them have turned to mutual funds as their primary way to invest.


Bill to Track Sex Offenders Nears Passage
Despite deep constitutional concerns, leaders of the New York State Assembly said today that their Democratic-controlled house would give final passage this week to a bill requiring sex offenders to register with the state when they are released from prison.
The bill passed the Assembly Codes Committee today and is now certain to become law.
It would allow citizens to learn whether a sex offender has moved to their community by calling a special 900 telephone number or by checking a directory kept at police precinct station houses.


Pettitte Shines as Winning Streak Hits Five
Where has this efficient team been hiding?
Could these Yankees of the past five games be the same Yankees who have already trudged along in last place for 10 days this season while irritating George Steinbrenner and making Manager Buck Showalter's office chair a little warmer?
Someone find the telephone booth where the Yankees made their quick change last week.


Richmond Hesitates on Tennis Star's Statue
Bowing to a public furor over a decision to erect a statue of the tennis star Arthur Ashe on an avenue that memorializes Confederate heroes, the City Council today decided to postpone a July 10 groundbreaking and consider other possibilities at a public hearing on July 17.
Mr.
Ashe, who died in 1993, avoided his hometown for much of his life because of the indignities of segregation he had suffered there as a youth.
On June 19, the Richmond Planning Commission voted to honor him with a statue on Monument Avenue, where bronze Confederate generals guard the intersections.


Q&amp;A
Thin Air
Q.
I was told to expect not just breathlessness but dehydration at a high-altitude resort.
Why?


Hudson Street Goes to Hollywood
Hoboken, a mile-square city of brownstones and bakeries, rarely gets national attention, although it did serve as the location for the 1954 film "On the Waterfront." But now it will be the setting for "Hudson Street," an ABC television series to be broadcast this fall, starring Tony Danza as a detective.
"Hudson Street," named for the location of Hoboken's real-life police headquarters, was chosen because it is just across the Hudson River from New York but has managed to retain its hometown feel, said Paula Askanas, a spokeswoman for Columbia Tristar Television, the show's producer.
Lori Laughlin (of ABC's "Full House" ) will play an idealistic police reporter for a newspaper based loosely on The Hudson Reporter, a Hoboken weekly.
TERRY PRISTIN


Linguists Debating Deepest Roots of Language
IN their archeological digs through the strata of human language, linguists have long been fascinated by the seeming similarities between the English words "fist," "finger" and "five." The motif is repeated by the Dutch, who say "vuist," "vinger" and "vijf," and the Germans, who say "faust," "finger" and "funf." Traces of the pattern can even be found as far away as the Slavic languages like Russian.
Conceivably, sometime in the distant past, before these languages split from the mother tongue, there was a close connection among the words for a hand and its fingers and the number five.
But did the mathematical abstraction come from the word for fist, or, as some linguists have proposed, was it the other way around?
The answer could provide a window into the development of the ancient mind.


Self-Defeating Plan
To the Editor:
Re your June 21 news story on the demise of educational programs available to inmates in New York State: The elimination of Tuition Assistance Program funds at correctional institutions could ultimately cost New York's taxpayers substantial sums of money.


Taking a Page From a Predecessor


Sister Martha's 62-Year Assignment
AMONG the highlights of Sister Martha Winum's tour is the iron lung parked in a hallway near Rehabilitation.
It takes some explaining.
What helped save lives during wave after wave of the polio epidemic looks like a space capsule with a window at the head, rubber portholes on the sides, a crank at the feet.
Sister Martha will explain it all.
"These portholes were used for massaging the patient's arms," she said, sticking her arms in and kneading the air.
Physical therapists and nurses striding down the hall had stopped in their tracks to watch.
Sister was 40 years away.
"This here is for the bedpans," she said, working her way down the capsule.
It started to seem like a magician's trunk.
"Here," she said at the crank, "this is how you pump in the air. Up, down, up, down. After a few minutes, you're exhausted."


Nasdaq Posts Rise of 0.5% In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market increased one-half of 1 percent in the month that ended June 15, the exchange announced yesterday.
Uncovered short sales amounted to 837.5 million shares, compared with 833.5 million shares for the month that ended on May 15.
Open positions of short sales reflect the total number of shares sold short by Nasdaq members and their customers.


Poetry, Monsters and Metal in the Dark World of Vince Bell
Vince Bell, who sang on a bill on Friday night at the Bottom Line with three other performers, is preceded by a particular story wherever he goes: the tale of his obituary, which has already been published.
Broadsided by a car in Austin, Tex., on the way home from recording what was to be his debut album in 1982, Mr.
Bell was thought dead.
But after weeks in a coma and years of rehabilitation, he returned to songwriting with a very different perspective.
His first album, appropriately titled "Phoenix," was finally released last year on Watermelon Records with guests including John Cale, Lyle Lovett and Victoria Williams; in the meantime, singers like Mr.
Lovett and Nanci Griffith have recorded his songs.
Accompanied by two Bob Dylan alumni, David Mansfield on violin and mandolin and Stephen Bruton on guitar, Mr.
Bell turned his wounds into poetry.
His songs were filled with images of misshapen monsters and twisted metal, paralysis and victory, loneliness and introspection.
"To bring the beast back to life, you pull the stake from his heart," he rasped in a cold deadpan in "The Beast." "He wakes up vicious and mean, waits for the killing to start."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ANUCHO INC., Overland Park, Kan., a holding company, said it planned to buy back as much as 10 percent of its outstanding common shares, or as many as 7.5 million shares, because it believed its stocks were undervalued.
PHARMACY MANAGEMENT SERVICES INC., Tampa, Fla., a managed health care service provider, said its shareholders had approved its merger with Beverly Enterprises Fort Smith, Ariz., in a transaction valued at $150 million.


Before Prisoners Get Isolation Treatment
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court has yet again weakened the rights of inmates to sue to obtain due process before being placed in isolation units in prisons (news article, June 20).


Brown Appeals Ruling
Brown University was joined yesterday by national education groups in filing appeal briefs against a Federal court decision it said creates athletic quotas for females.
The university filed a 50-page brief denouncing the March ruling that found the Ivy League school in violation of Title IX, a 1972 law prohibiting gender discrimination at schools.
United States District Court Judge RAYMOND PETTINE ruled in favor of female athletes who said Brown discriminates against them because they are fewer in number than male athletes.


A Powerful Machine, a Better Bus
Apple's much anticipated overhaul of its Macintosh family is expected to occur in August, bringing a new generation of Power PC microprocessors to its desktop and portable computers.
But Apple gave an early preview of the new systems last week when it introduced the high-end Power Macintosh 9500, code-named Tsunami.
The Power Mac 9500 was designed to appeal to professional graphic artists, publishers, multimedia software developers and other demanding Macintosh users who can say "768 megabytes of RAM and several gigabytes of hard disk, please" without giggling.
It essentially replaces the Power Mac 8100/110, which has been in chronically short supply anyway.


A Promise in Haiti
To the Editor:
Re "Election Campaign in Haiti Splits Allies" (news article, June 23):


CHRONICLE
Also in the appreciation department: PAUL BOWLES, the writer and composer who moved to Morocco in 1947, will return to New York City for the first time in nearly three decades for a two-day festival of his music in September.
The riddling writer also composed music for plays by Tennessee Williams and Lillian Hellman, worked with Orson Welles and scored a ballet for Salvador Dali.
JONATHAN SHEFFER, the artistic director of Eos Music Inc., which is organizing the festival, to be heldSept. 19 to 21 at Alice Tully Hall, called the composer's music "a fusion of jazz and Tin Pan Alley, with Stravinsky touches and Spanish influences" inspired by the years Mr.
Bowles spent in Mexico.
To shore up plans for the festival, he recently visited Mr.
Bowles, 83, bearing 12 boxes of Jell-O, a favorite of the composer that is difficult to get in Tangier, where he lives.


Faiths That Proselytize: A Warning to Students
One person's religion is another's cult, and it's too much to ask of MTV-style reporting to sort out one from the other.
Instead, tonight's 30-minute program, "New Religions: The Cult Question," directed especially at college students, is a quick and cautionary guide to a few of the proselytizing groups that may nowadays be encountered on campus.
Kurt Loder, who talks fast enough to hire out as an evangelist, goes to Montana to look in on the Church Universal and Triumphant, starring Elizabeth Clare Prophet, also known as Guru Ma; the International Church of Christ, which specializes in campus recruiting, and the Church of Scientology, whose teachings, it is suggested here, resemble science fiction and which receives an on-camera plug from John Travolta.


Woman Dies at Kevorkian Clinic
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, using a rented building as a clinic for assisted suicide, helped a Missouri woman become the first to die at what his lawyer called a "mercy clinic."
"A historic event occurred today," the lawyer, Geoffrey Fieger, said.


Carlingford Journal; Cattle Barons They're Not, but the Irish Do Nicely
In Irish mythology, Queen Maeve led a huge army over the mountains near this quiet village in what is known as the Cattle Raid at Cooley, to capture the greatest brown bull in Ireland.
She lost the battle but managed to take the bull, which had been her husband's property.
In the plains around this hamlet of 600 people, in view of the Cooley Mountains, broken on high by Maeve's Gap, the legend of the bulls is very much alive, and so is the cattle business, one of Ireland's most important moneymakers in an economy still heavily dependent on agriculture.


L.P.G.A. Rethinks Hall
Now that BETSY KING has finally earned her way into the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame, the association expects to make the criteria for getting there more realistic.
How and when the standards will be changed is up to the golfers, but it will probably happen within two years, Commissioner CHARLES S. MECHEM JR. said yesterday.
The players want the Hall of Fame elite but attainable, Mechem said.


Chess
Years ago, there was probably more last-round phobia than now.
Mikhail Botvinnik once went so far as to suggest that the last round be abolished, so widespread were the nervous blunders.
Of course, that's impossible.
Still, many players approach it as closely as they can by taking short, inoffensive draws.
By not extending themselves, they ward off disaster.
Unfortunately, in so doing they also may let the first prize slip away.


The Cellar Is Getting Dingier For Mets
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, plans to wait until after this three-game series with the Florida Marlins before rendering a verdict on what changes might be needed on his team.
He needn't wait that long.
While they have been stamped "Fragile: Handle With Care" for most of this season, the Mets should now be "Returned to Sender." A shake-up, any kind of shake-up, would be welcome as soon as possible before the Mets put themselves and everyone else into a deep sleep.


As Haitian Tally Proceeds, Signs of Irregularities Mount
The election intended to bring democracy to all levels of government in Haiti unraveled further today, as vote counting proceeded under questionable circumstances and Sunday's chaotic balloting was criticized both by Haitian political leaders and by election observers.
At least 200,000 of Haiti's 3.5 million registered voters were still waiting today to cast their ballots for parliamentary, mayoral and municipal council seats, but election officials were unable to say when that would happen.
Officials acknowledged that some polling stations were still without ballots and other voting materials that should have been delivered last week.


Jeffries Will Give Up Post
Quietly ending an embattled term, Leonard Jeffries will step down as chairman of City College's Black Studies Department.
Page B2.


Chrysler to Buy Control of Japanese Dealer Chain
Taking a big step to increase its car sales in Japan, the Chrysler Corporation said today that it planned to buy majority ownership of its Japanese importer and dealership chain, giving it direct control of its sales network.
The transactions, which will cost Chrysler about $100 million, have been in the works for months.
But the timing of the announcement could give some impetus to trade negotiations between the United States and Japan that are approaching their deadline.


Jesse B. Sokoloff, Developer and Philanthropist, 77
Jesse B. Sokoloff, a real estate developer and leader of Jewish philanthropic agencies on Long Island, died on Saturday in his home in Hewlett Neck, L.I.
He was 77.
The cause was cancer, his family said.
He was a former president of the Jewish Community Services of Long Island.
He also served on the boards of the Federation Employment and Guidance Service and UJA-Federation of New York.


Dreamworks Link Sought by Michael
George Michael is negotiating a recording contract that would give the domestic distribution rights for the singer's music to Dreamworks S.K.G. and the foreign rights to Virgin Records.
The arrangement would extricate the recording star from his contract with Sony Music, with which he has had a legal battle since 1989.
Executives at Sony and Dreamworks declined comment, but those with knowledge of the talks said a signing could be weeks, even months, away.


MERGER TO CREATE LARGEST COMPANY FOR HEALTH PLANS
One of the nation's largest operators of health maintenance organizations, the United Healthcare Corporation, agreed yesterday to buy Metrahealth, a more traditional health insurance company with 10 million customers, including 1.5 million in the New York City area.
The new company would be the nation's largest provider of health care plans.


Morrison Knudsen Corp.(MRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Immigration and Bad Social Policies Don't Mix
To the Editor:
Re "Arianna, Go Home!" (column, June 20): A. M. Rosenthal distorts my views on immigration as expressed over a two-hour "Firing Line" debate.
The most important debate on "Firing Line" was not between the two sides but within the two sides.
I vigorously disagreed with Peter Brimelow over his preoccupation with the ethnic origins of those immigrating to our shores.
And Mr.
Rosenthal knows that.


DANCE
The Soloist as Backdrop For Endangered Creatures  Frances Becker Merce Cunningham Studio
Frances Becker, a South African-born choreographer, presented three mixed-media solos on Saturday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
The least interesting medium mixed into each of them turned out to be dance.


Market Place; Browning-Ferris profits 2 ways: collecting trash and recycling it.
DEMAND for recycled paper is surging, and that is good news for Browning-Ferris Industries.
Paper recycling got off to a tough start.
States enacted a flurry of laws in the late 1980's that required or encouraged the collection of paper for re-use, but there was not enough capacity to process it all.
The result was predictable: Paper piled up in warehouses, prices fell and recycling companies lost money.


A 'Megan's Law' for New York?
The idea that people have the right to know if a convicted sex offender plans to move into their community is a comforting one, and it is about to win legislative approval in Albany.
But before the Legislature adopts a version of "Megan's Law" in New York, the lawmakers ought to consider the damage being done to civil liberties, the right to privacy and due process.
The bill's main provisions are almost certain to be struck down as unconstitutional under the state or Federal Constitutions.
The measure rushing toward passage this week is sponsored by Senator Dean Skelos, a Nassau County Republican, and Assemblyman Daniel Feldman, a Brooklyn Democrat.
It would make New York the latest in a growing number of states that require some form of community notification for sex offenders released from prison after serving their terms.
The bill would set up a Board of Examiners for Sex Offenders to determine what type of information should be disseminated, and how widely it should be given out, depending on the seriousness of the sex crime.


U.S. Says Cuba Refuses to Free Nixon Nephew
The State Department said today that Cuba was holding the passport of Donald Nixon Jr., nephew of the late President Richard M. Nixon, and was preventing him from returning to the United States.
Last Friday, Mr.
Nixon's wife, Helene Nixon, asked the State Department and several members of Congress to help her husband, asserting that he was being detained by Cuban officials.


Nautica Enterprises Inc.(NAUT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Beyond the Criticism Is Another McMullen
Craig Biggio telephoned John McMullen at his Montclair, N.J., home Sunday and congratulated him on his team's National Hockey League championship.
Now the owner of the New Jersey Devils, McMullen not long ago was Biggio's employer with the Houston Astros.
The call pleased McMullen, but it did not surprise him.
Despite the portrait of an evil, crusty old man that was drawn in the 13 years McMullen owned the Astros, many of his former players remain close friends.
In fact, they look forward each fall to his invitation to join him, at his expense, at a private golf tournament at courses in this country and abroad.


Outmaneuvered on Taxes, Opposition Searches for a Strategy
Since the modern State Constitution was passed here in 1949, New Jersey Democrats have largely dominated state government.
Then 18 months ago, with the election of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republicans took control of the executive and legislative branches for only the second time in 45 years, leaving the Democrats in search of a strategy that will give them a leg up for the State Assembly races this fall.
But if Democrats had a unified plan of action, it did not surface today during the Legislature's passage of bills to cut income tax rates by 15 percent.
Indeed, 12 of the 28 Democrats in the Assembly joined the Republicans today in voting for Governor Whitman's tax cut.


Lawyers for Jury Duty
To the Editor:
Elliott A. Cohen ("Exempting Lawyers From Jury Duty Makes Good Legal Sense," letter, June 21) is entitled to his view that requiring lawyers and judges to serve on juries could unfairly contaminate a jury.
However, the New York State Bar Association vigorously supports the legislation, awaiting action by the Governor, that would eliminate all occupational exemptions, including those for judges and lawyers.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.94
4.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.36
4.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.35
4.60
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.11
6.05
7.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.49
7.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.51
7.48
8.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.12
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Passing the Olympic Torch


McCall Bout Pushed Back
OLIVER MCCALL's World Boxing Council heavyweight title defense against FRANK BRUNO of Britain has been rescheduled for Sept. 2, the promoters FRANK WARREN and DON KING announced yesterday.
McCall had been due to meet Bruno at London's Wembley Stadium on July 22 but the fight was called off when the American cut his hand.


South African Feels Free to Ignore Politics
The mood of peace and reconciliation that has swept South Africa over the last year may at times seem too good to be true, but Mbongeni Ngema is taking it at face value.
For his latest theatrical creation, "Mama! The Musical of Freedom," he has turned his back on politics and chosen to celebrate the change with music, dance and good humor.
The 40-year-old Mr.
Ngema -- playwright, composer, choreographer and director -- makes no apologies.
He reckons he did his bit for the political struggle in a series of plays and musicals, including "Woza Albert!," "Sarafina!" and "Township Fever," that carried black South Africa's message of resistance abroad.
But, he insists, the 1980's and early 1990's were different times.


Yankees Roll On, but It Looks Like a Lost Season for Key
Forget Darryl Strawberry for a few days and forget Dwight Gooden for at least a few months.
But remember yesterday because that is when the Yankees learned that Jimmy Key, the ace pitcher they desperately need to help catapult them into the American League East race, might not throw another pitch this season.
Key, who is undergoing rehabilitation because of an injury to his left shoulder, was supposed to toss 20 pitches in three staggered sessions at New York's minor league complex in Tampa, Fla., yesterday.
But the left-hander threw just 10 pitches then walked off the mound in pain.
Even though the Yankees were still deciding last night what their next move would be with Key, the possibility of surgery and a lost season loomed.


Playing Pygmalion to a Hermeneutic Computer
GALATEA 2.2  By Richard Powers  329 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.
The Galatea in Richard Powers's dazzling new novel is a modern-day incarnation of the statue that came to life in the old Pygmalion legend.
She's a souped-up, computer-driven neural net, a kind of 1990's version of Hal in "2001," a latter-day Frankensteinian monster who goes by the name of Helen.


METRO DIGEST
CUNY ADOPTS STRICTER ADMISSION POLICY
Tightly restricting admission to its four-year colleges, the City University of New York will no longer accept students judged unable to complete all remedial work within the freshman year.
The policy change, approved by the Board of Trustees, will affect about 1,000 to 2,500 of incoming freshmen who attend the system's 11 senior colleges.  [ Page A1. ] LEGISLATURE PASSES WHITMAN'S TAX CUT
The New Jersey Legislature completed Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's historic tax cut tonight, as many Democrats joined Republican majorities in the Assembly and Senate to approve the second half of Mrs.
Whitman's 30 percent income tax reduction a year ahead of schedule.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  A NEW ROW INVOLVING OFFICERS
Two off-duty police officers raised a drunken row in the Bronx late Sunday, cursing and scuffling with other police officers who had responded to a report of a man waving a gun, the police said.
The incident was the third case involving drunken off-duty officers over the last six weeks.  [ B3. ] A VOICE FROM THE PAST CRIES FOUL
William Seales was happily married and running his own photo shop when the voice of a friend reached out of the past and accused him of murder.  [ B3. ] GRANDSON HELD IN DEATH OF 82-YEAR-OLD
They called her the Grandmother of Westbury Court, a mother figure to dozens of teen-agers and young adults on the block in her Flatbush neighborhood.
But Arrelia Mascha, 82, had trouble mothering one child: the grandson she had recently taken in, Waheed Foster, 14.
Last week, the police said, he killed her.  [ B3. ] RENT BOARD SCALES BACK PROPOSAL
After an outcry from tenant groups and lobbying from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Rent Guidelines Board scaled back its proposal for a two-tier system.  [ B3. ] JEFFRIES TO STEP DOWN AT CUNY
In a quiet end to his controversial chairmanship of City College's Black Studies Department, Professor Leonard Jeffries will step down at the end of this month, college officials said.  [ B2. ] FRAUD CHARGED IN HOUSING VIOLATIONS
The City Comptroller has charged that the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development is permitting widespread fraud and abuse by not pursuing landlords who falsely claim to have corrected housing violations on their property.  [ B2. ] REGION  A 62-YEAR ASSIGNMENT
Among the highlights of Sister Martha Winum's tour is the iron lung parked in a hallway near Rehabilitation.
It takes some explaining.
What helped save lives during wave after wave of the polio epidemic looks like a space capsule with a window at the head, rubber portholes on the sides, a crank at the feet.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B4. ] DEVELOPER PLANS RESORT IN ATLANTIC CITY
The casino developer Steve Wynn is planning a $600 million complex on what are now 155 marshy acres in Atlantic City's Marina District, near the Harrah's and Trump Castle casinos and west of the Boardwalk area where 10 casinos sit.  [ Business Day, D1. ] Chronicle B7


Crackdown Has Cali Drug Cartel on the Run
Until last month, Helmer Herrera Buitrago could relax in his penthouse bathtub while monitoring on closed circuit television who was coming and going from his private 14-story office and residential tower here.
To cruise around town, he could choose from a fleet of 70 cars, including a bullet-proofed Mazda equipped with louvers to allow his bodyguards to fire machine pistols at pursuers.


Citing Abuse, Microsoft Sues U.S. About Its New Network
Frustrated by the Justice Department's dogged pursuit, the Microsoft Corporation has turned the tables and taken the Government to court.
Microsoft, portrayed by rivals as an all-powerful force in the software industry, filed a petition in Federal court last Friday that stated it was a beleaguered victim of a "campaign of harassment" and "abusive behavior" by the Department of Justice.


EGYPTIAN LEADER SURVIVES ATTACK
President Hosni Mubarak survived an assassination attempt without injury this morning when several gunmen carrying automatic weapons opened fire on the motorcade carrying him to the opening of an African summit meeting in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa.
President Mubarak did not attend the meeting.
He was rushed back to Cairo, where he vowed that the attackers would "pay dearly for their actions." Two gunmen were killed in the assault, as were two Ethiopian police officers.
One police officer was wounded.


Dead Man's Videotaped Testimony Is Shown at Trial
William Seales was married and running his own photo shop when the voice of a friend reached out of the past and accused him of murder.
The voice was that of Kenneth Arch, a companion since childhood.
But Mr.
Arch and Mr.
Seales had gone different ways since their involvement in the drug scene of the late 1970's.
Mr.
Seales successfully completed a drug rehabilitation program and pulled his life together, his lawyers say.
Mr.
Arch died of AIDS, which he contracted from intravenous drug use, while serving a three-year prison sentence on a drug charge.


Coming Back to Atlantic City; Welcome Set for Wynn's Las Vegas-Scale Project
With a volcano out front, dolphins out back, a tropical jungle and tigers inside and a huge front-desk aquarium where sharks lurk, the Mirage casino resort that Steve Wynn opened in Las Vegas six years ago quickly became to resort hotels of the 1990's what Disneyland was to amusement parks in the 1950's.
Competitors raced to imitate its mix of gambling and fantasy for adults, beginning a construction boom on the Las Vegas Strip.
They built casinos around the themes of ancient Egypt (Circus Circus) and the Emerald City of the Wizard of Oz (MGM Grand).
Others plan nostalgic visions of New York City (MGM Grand and Primadonna Resorts) and Paris (Bally Entertainment).


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


General Loses Command
A three-star Air Force general has been stripped of his command because of "inappropriate personal conduct," the U.S.
Air Combat Command said today.
Lieut.
Gen.
Thomas Griffith was relieved of command of the 12th Air Force and United States Southern Command on Sunday after he was accused of having an extramarital affair, said two senior Air Force officials, who asked not to be identified.


Observer; Another Peril Averted
Last time, you recall, I promised to discuss Presidential politics today but -- lucky, lucky you! -- it now seems we can skip it.
I know, I know: You planned to skip it anyhow.
I was hoping to skip it myself.
Discussing Presidential politics on a sweet day in June, as Lyndon Johnson once said of the jokes at the Gridiron Dinner, is "about as much fun as throwing cow flops at the village idiot."
You never heard of the Gridiron Dinner?
It's your basic old-fashioned showbiz roast in fancy dress.
Once a year Washington media swells throw a white-tie party for America's biggest shots and entertain with good-fellow-type insults.


Clinton as Crimefighter
ORGANIZATION Clinton-Gore '96 PRODUCER Squier, Knapp, Ochs, Washington; Hank Sheinkopf, New York City; Dick Morris, West Redding, Conn.; Marius Penczer, Memphis.


Wyman-Gordon Co.  (WYMN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Clinton Calls U.N.'s Critics 'Isolationists'
Fifty years after the adoption of the United Nations Charter here, President Clinton fiercely defended the organization today against Congressional critics he branded "the new isolationists." But he also called for a streamlined United Nations that "wastes less and produces more."
Speaking on the same stage where delegates signed the United Nations Charter in 1945, Mr.
Clinton recalled President Franklin D. Roosevelt's observation that America's well-being is dependent on the well-being of other nations, and said, "Today more than ever those words ring true."


Commercial Metals Co.  (CMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


On My Mind; Anniversary Waltz
Things were different in the early days of the United Nations.
You wouldn't believe what went on.
Self-respecting countries paid their dues on time.
U.N. censorship of its own history was unknown.
Meetings of the Security Council were open to the press.
Rebels against foreign conquest were permitted to walk the corridors.
The U.S. described tyranny as tyranny; the cash register did not entirely rule Western diplomacy.


Body Shop Seeks Its First U.S. Agency
The Body Shop Inc., the chain of health and beauty aids stores, said yesterday that it was searching for its first agency to handle its account in the United States.
Though the billings have not been determined, Adweek this week estimated advertising spending at $10 million.


Airplane Passengers Injured in Turbulence
An American Airlines flight from Los Angeles to New York made an unscheduled landing in Chicago yesterday after several passengers were injured in turbulence over Wisconsin.
There were conflicting reports about how many of the 116 passengers on the flight were injured, although officials said nine people were taken to hospitals.


All Are to Blame for Baseball Network's Demise
A business divorce is rarely as abusive as the case of ABC and NBC vs.
Major League Baseball.
The plaintiffs filed for dissolution last Thursday on the grounds of an unconsummated vow and mental cruelty.
If the romance had lasted longer, ABC and NBC might have charged infidelity for baseball's flirting with CBS and Fox.
All parties share blame for the end of The Baseball Network, a joint broadcast and advertising venture that gave NBC and ABC the once valuable TV rights to baseball without risk.


The Devils Have Look Of a Cup Perennial
The Devils have built such a strong foundation of players, coaches and scouts in their organization that they could very well join the handful of teams that have dominated the National Hockey League championships over the last two decades.
The Montreal Canadiens (6 titles), Edmonton Oilers (5), Islanders (4) and Pittsburgh Penguins (2) have captured 17 of the last 20 Stanley Cups.
Like those teams, the Devils, under the hand of Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager, have been structured around draft choices and a few brilliant trades.


A Democratic Note Pad Lost Becomes a Republican Find
It started when scribbled notes of a closed-door meeting of top Democrats who had gathered to plot strategy for rebuilding their party were inadvertently left on a counter at Neil's Outrageous, a liquor store on Capitol Hill.
Today, it was grist for gleeful Republicans who sought to turn the notes into an embarrassment royal for the Democrats.


Teaching an Old Dog . . .


Food at Shelters Was Spoiled, Green Says
A Brooklyn company that provides meals for the city's homeless shelters has often served spoiled, rancid food, and it lost out on a New Jersey contract because of its poor products, New York City's Public Advocate charged yesterday.
Public Advocate Mark J. Green called on the Giuliani administration to disqualify the company, the Maramont Corporation, from doing further business with the city.
He said that Maramont was bypassed on a contract earlier this year by the New Jersey Department of Education to provide preschool meals because of "the poor quality of its products."


World News Briefs; British Cabinet Member Quits to Challenge Major
Prime Minister John Major's political travails deepened today when a right-wing member of his own Cabinet resigned and announced that he was running against Mr.
Major for leadership of the Conservative Party on July 4.
The move by the 44-year-old Secretary of State for Wales, John Redwood, means that Mr.
Major will face a real contest in the election he called in resigning the party leadership last week.
If Mr.
Major loses he will have to step down as Prime Minister, and if he fails to win by a thumping margin his authority will be so weakened that he may find it hard to carry on.


Marking 50 Years of the United Nations


Youth Is Arrested in His Grandmother's Death
They called her the Grandmother of Westbury Court, a stalwart mother figure to dozens of teen-agers and young adults on the block in her Flatbush neighborhood.
But Arrelia Mascha, 82, had trouble mothering one child: the grandson she had recently taken in, Waheed Foster, 14, a silent youth who had a tendency to raise small furies when she tried to discipline him.


Astronomers Get Close-Up of Black Hole's Power
TWO new discoveries have encouraged astronomers to think they have found promising ways to explore the powerful dynamics of those cosmic phenomena known as black holes.
As a place where matter is so densely packed and gravity is therefore so strong that nothing can escape it, not even light, a black hole cannot be seen.
But scientists have gathered increasingly persuasive indirect evidence that such objects exist.
Some appear to have the mass of several million Suns and are the most probable sources of intense radiations from the centers of many galaxies and enigmatic stellarlike objects called quasars.
Much smaller ones may have little more than three or four solar masses.


Lockheed Martin Is Leaving
Already battered by recent announcements that three other companies -- Mobil Oil, Carter-Wallace and Hill Refrigeration -- are closing operations in East Windsor Township, Mercer County got some more bad news yesterday.
The Lockheed Martin Corporation said it will move its Astro Space operations to Sunnyvale, Calif.
Astro Space, which manufactures spacecraft, employs about 3,200 workers in East Windsor Township.
The company said some workers would be offered jobs at other plants.


Arvid Jouppi, 77, A Longtime Analyst Of the Auto Industry
Arvid Jouppi, a longtime and much-quoted automobile industry analyst, died on Thursday at the Angela Hospice in Livonia, Mich., outside Detroit.
He was 77 and lived in Canton Township, Mich.
The cause of death was heart failure, officials at the hospice said.


Senate Democrats Lose Effort To Weaken Bill on Lawsuits
The Senate today turned aside three Democratic amendments to weaken a bill that would make it more difficult for investors to bring class-action lawsuits accusing companies of fraud.
The failure by opponents to force changes in the legislation set the stage for a vote on the bill on Tuesday.
With 49 co-sponsors -- 37 Republicans and 12 Democrats -- it is a virtual certainty that the Senate will follow the House in approving changes to the 61-year-old Securities Exchange Act.


By Design; It's a Jungle Out There
Big cats will be on the prowl come fall, as leopard, cheetah and tiger prints show up on everything from scarfs to coats.
But for summer, it's the reptiles that reign.
Snakeskin patterns abound on dresses, pants, shoes, belts, bags and more.
The natural python look in gray and white seems light enough for warm weather, and the darker red-and-brown versions can keep going into autumn.


A Time Capsule of the 70's
On Sunday afternoon during a JVC Jazz Festival concert in Bryant Park, the down-and-dirty 1970's funk band Ohio Players came on like a time capsule.
Opening their 70-minute concert with a pledge of allegiance to bell-bottoms, platform shoes and "Afros of all different sizes," the seven-member group -- with four musicians remaining from the band's glory days -- lit into its 1974 groove "Skin Tight." With a panoply of low, lascivious synthesizer sounds and deep bass lines that sounded like come-ons whispered from a dark alley, the band helped make funk sound like a dirty word again.
Born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1959 (as the Ohio Untouchables), the band spent more than a dozen years cultivating a reputation for funk novelties and prurient album covers, each featuring a different scantily clad woman.
On Sunday, the band played (in the jesting sense of the word) at the expense of playing (in the musical sense).
Some jams just lasted a minute or two before deteriorating into halfhearted attempts to work the audience with cries of "Do you all remember this song?" At one point, the group stopped the show to deliver what it called its new message: a long-winded offer of thanks to Jesus Christ and to the Groove Academy, a Manhattan-based party and concert promoter, which helped put together Sunday's show.
Also slowing down the concert was a sound system that malfunctioned during the band's second song and the absence of the horn section that added punch to the band's groaning funk recordings.


Hospitals to Get State Subsidies
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed legislation yesterday to give $475 million in subsidies to all hospitals in the state to help offset their costs for treating poor patients who are not covered by Medicaid or Medicare.
But a new source of money must be found by next year or aid to hospitals will end, Health Commissioner Len Fishman told The Associated Press.
The "charity care" reimbursement program has cost $1.5 billion over three years.
The money has been raised by diverting tax dollars allocated to the unemployment trust fund, a source that may no longer be available.


Nasdaq Posts Rise of 0.5% In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market increased one-half of 1 percent in the month that ended June 15, the exchange announced yesterday.
Uncovered short sales amounted to 837.5 million shares, compared with 833.5 million shares for the month that ended on May 15.
Open positions of short sales reflect the total number of shares sold short by Nasdaq members and their customers.


CHRONICLE
Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the leader of the Brooklyn-based Lubavitch movement who died a year ago at age 92, will be awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in Washington tomorrow.
A ceremony honoring the spiritual leader, whom his followers called the Rebbe, is expected to include Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of Revlon; Elie Wiesel, the writer, and Itzhak Perlman, the violinist, as well as House Speaker Newt Gingrich; Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader; Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and other Washington luminaries.
The medal, approved by Congress last year, will be accepted by Rabbi ABRAHAM SHEMTOV, the chairman of Agudas Chassidei Chabad, an umbrella committee for Lubavitch organizations around the world.


Sister Martha's 62-Year Assignment
AMONG the highlights of Sister Martha Winum's tour is the iron lung parked in a hallway near Rehabilitation.
It takes some explaining.
What helped save lives during wave after wave of the polio epidemic looks like a space capsule with a window at the head, rubber portholes on the sides, a crank at the feet.
Sister Martha will explain it all.
"These portholes were used for massaging the patient's arms," she said, sticking her arms in and kneading the air.
Physical therapists and nurses striding down the hall had stopped in their tracks to watch.
Sister was 40 years away.
"This here is for the bedpans," she said, working her way down the capsule.
It started to seem like a magician's trunk.
"Here," she said at the crank, "this is how you pump in the air. Up, down, up, down. After a few minutes, you're exhausted."


Groundbreaking for Audubon


Lilly Industries(LICIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Richard Conners, 85, Legislator Called 'Dean of the Assembly'
Richard J. Conners, who spent 50 years in political office in Albany, most recently in the New York State Assembly, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Cohoes, N.Y.
He was 85 and a lifelong resident of Albany.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Accounts
*
Business Computing Partners, Los Angeles, to Lois, Colby/Los Angeles, Santa Monica, Calif., a unit of Lois/ USA, as the first agency to handle advertising for the network of business computer consultants.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.


Oh, the Knicks'll Hire a Coach Someday
Chris Ford met yesterday with Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager, as the search for Pat Riley's successor continued.
The Knicks would not say whether Ford is a more viable candidate than Don Nelson, but they have decided to take their time in hiring a new coach after Chuck Daly spurned them.


Walgreen Co.(WAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


WPP Shareholders Approve Pay Plan
The WPP Group P.L.C., the agency company in London whose holdings include Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide and the J. Walter Thompson Company, said yesterday that its shareholders had approved a modified compensation plan for its chief executive, Martin Sorrell.
The approval came after several changes were made last week to toughen the criteria by which Mr.
Sorrell would earn pay and stock bonuses; institutional shareholders had threatened to vote against the plan.
Mr.
Sorrell's pay package has been valued at an estimated $39 million to $56 million over five years.


With Much to Unravel, Investors in Failed Charity Gather
The bankruptcy of the Foundation for New Era Philanthropy was anything but an ordinary bankruptcy.
For one thing, it was registered as a charity -- one that had lured hundreds of rich people and nonprofit groups to give it money on the promise of doubling that within six months through the generosity of wealthy anonymous donors.
The process of dividing up the assets that remain may prove unusual as well.
There are already suggestions from some charities that the groups that made money from New Era should return their profits voluntarily.
Some groups have even said they will.


The World of Doom, Tailored to Fit Yours
NOBODY knows how many millions of people have played the gory adventure game Doom since it was introduced more than a year ago.
The first episode was free, in the sense that one could download it from an on-line service, although subsequent episodes cost money.
Its sequel, Doom II, is strictly cash and carry.
A few hours with Doom II can be almost as exhausting as actually severing the heads and limbs of well-armed enemies with pistol and rocket, chainsaw and plasma rifle before they do the same to you.
The player moves through the mysterious corridors of a world populated by growling, groaning -- whats? -- accompanied by the sound of threatening music.
Whatever they are, when you kill them, they bleed.
Luckily VGA and Super VGA monitors are not of photographic quality.


INSIDE
Haiti Election at Risk
The election to expand democracy in Haiti unraveled further, with criticism both of the vote itself and of vote-counting procedures.
Page A8.
A Win, and Perhaps a Loss
The New Jersey Devils prepared for a Stanley Cup victory parade and for a possible end to their franchise agreement with the state.
Page B1.
Balkan Role for Germany
Germany decided after much debate to send armed forces to support the Balkan peacekeeping effort, but it will not send ground troops.
Page A3.
New Rules on Sex Offenders
Leaders said the New York State Assembly would approve a bill requiring sex offenders to register with the state upon release.
Page B1.
Clinton Begins Ad Campaign
The President effectively begins his re-election campaign today by broadcasting $2.4 million worth of television advertisements.
Page A14.


Rent Board Compromises On Increases
After an outcry from tenant groups, the Rent Guidelines Board last night scaled back its proposal for a two-tier system that would have imposed larger rent increases on poorer tenants in the city's rent-stabilized apartments.
After a rancorous debate, the nine-member board approved rent increases of 2 percent for one-year leases and 4 percent for two-year leases for all of the city's 900,000 rent-stabilized apartments -- the same increases as last year.


Prices Down On Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the second consecutive day as investors grew nervous about the strength of the economy following a bigger-than-expected gain in sales of existing homes in May.
The pickup in the data raised questions about how fast the economy is slowing and whether or not the Fed will put off an interest rate cut in July.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 24/32 of a percentage point, to 1142/32 ; its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, rose to 6.54 percent, from 6.49 percent on Friday.


High Court Upholds Drug Tests For Some Public School Athletes
Upholding a random drug-testing program for the first time, the Supreme Court ruled today that public school officials could require student athletes to submit to random urinalysis as a condition of being allowed to play interscholastic sports.
The 6-to-3 decision, which stressed student athletes' status as role models as well as their special needs for mental and physical well-being, left open the broader question of whether school districts could subject all of their students to random drug testing.  [ Excerpts, page B6. ]


Astros Coast Behind Swindell's Shutout
Astros 11, Cardinals 0
Greg Swindell pitched a six-hit shutout and the rookie Orlando Miller drove in a career-high five runs with three hits as Houston coasted to an 11-0 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals last night in the Astrodome.


Progesterone May Play Major Role In the Prevention of Nerve Diseases
FRENCH researchers say that the sex hormone progesterone may play a previously unrecognized role in combating certain nerve diseases by helping to repair and replace the protective covering around some nerves.
Evidence from animal studies, they said, shows that progesterone, known mainly as a female sex hormone, is produced locally in the peripheral nervous system, where it promotes the formation of the myelin sheath that surrounds nerve fiber.


President Gets Early Start On Ad Campaign Trail
With ominous music, an unfurling flag, the click-clack of assault weapons and testimonials from police officers that he is "helping us make this a safer nation," President Clinton effectively begins his re-election campaign on Tuesday, broadcasting $2.4 million worth of television advertisements in nearly two dozen markets nationwide.
The White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, previewed the three 30-second advertisements -- all of which focus on crime -- for reporters at the White House today.
He described them not as campaign ads but as Mr.
Clinton's first effort "to begin articulating in more concrete terms" his record in office.


Patterns
Sprucing Up Bergdorf's Men
Bergdorf Goodman Men, directly across the street from the main Bergdorf's, will gobble up more space on Fifth Avenue as part of a program to upgrade a store that once offered a minature-golf course to lure customers but seemed in danger of sinking under the weight of its own sobriety.


Corrections
The listings in Money &amp; Business on Sunday for Market Timing, a calendar of economic reports and events, were published in error.
The listings were for the week of May 1 through May 6.
A corrected version, for the current week, appears today on page D2.


Breaking the Mob's Hold on Javits Center
The unsupportable arrangement by which New York State ceded control of hiring at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to mob-dominated unions will soon be history.
The center's new executive director, Robert Boyle, is moving ahead on a plan to have the state hire its own permanent work force at the exhibition hall, using a broad screening process to eliminate those with extensive criminal records or ties to organized crime.
The reform plan also includes new work rules designed to drastically reduce featherbedding at shows and cut exhibitors' costs over all by up to 40 percent.
Such moves are obviously needed to strip corrupt unions of their rights to assign jobs, and to end the exorbitant prices and extortionate work practices that have driven away badly needed convention business.
In past years, officials shrugged off responsibility for cleaning up the mess by noting that the unions had signed collective-bargaining contracts with private exhibition companies and contractors, not with the Javits Center itself.
To his credit, Gov.
George Pataki has pledged to make reclaiming the Javits Center a top priority.


An Israeli Journalist In Reunified Germany
Timing could hardly be more propitious for the HBO Showcase drama "The Infiltrator," a based-on-fact look at Germany's violent right-wing organizations.
Neo-Nazi obsessions with ethnic purity can also be found, of course, in countries as different as Bosnia and the United States.
A footnote to the film says there are currently 300 active white supremacist groups in this country, including 160 skinhead gangs, operating in 40 states.
"The Infiltrator," a production of Carnival Films, a major British independent, is adapted by Guy Andrews from the nonfiction book "In Hitler's Shadow," by Yaron Svoray and Nick Taylor.
In 1992, Mr.
Svoray (played here by Oliver Platt), an Israeli journalist and son of Holocaust survivors, is freelancing in Los Angeles for Israeli publications.
His new assignment is to go to Berlin, where his father and grandfather were born, to report on a resurgence of Nazi violence in the reunified Germany.


Port Authority Hasn't Solved Its Toxic Harbor Sludge Problem
To the Editor:
Your June 22 news article on the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's decision to ship contaminated material dredged from berths at the Howland Hook marine terminal on Staten Island to a Utah landfill told only part of the story.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  HOUSTON ASTROS -- Activated Andy Stankiewicz, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Assigned Mike Brumley, outfielder, outright to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Atlantic Coast League


House Appropriations Panel Takes Up the Volatile Task of Filling In Budget Details
Now that Republican leaders have provided the bark -- a deal to balance the Federal budget by 2002 and to provide $245 billion in various tax cuts -- the Congressional appropriations committees this week begin to deliver the bite, chomping away at virtually every area of Government.
When the House opens the spending debate on Tuesday on the floor and in several committee meetings, members will be considering cuts to programs ranging from the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities, a perennial target of conservative politicians and organizations, to the subsidy for tobacco growers, one of the most fiercely guarded programs.


No Headline
"There is a God, and no one is going to live longer than he was given to live." -- PRESIDENT HOSNI MUBARAK OF EGYPT, who survived an assassination attempt.  [ A1:1. ]


Sister Martha's 62-Year Assignment
AMONG the highlights of Sister Martha Winum's tour is the iron lung parked in a hallway near Rehabilitation.
It takes some explaining.
What helped save lives during wave after wave of the polio epidemic looks like a space capsule with a window at the head, rubber portholes on the sides, a crank at the feet.
Sister Martha will explain it all.
"These portholes were used for massaging the patient's arms," she said, sticking her arms in and kneading the air.
Physical therapists and nurses striding down the hall had stopped in their tracks to watch.
Sister was 40 years away.
"This here is for the bedpans," she said, working her way down the capsule.
It started to seem like a magician's trunk.
"Here," she said at the crank, "this is how you pump in the air. Up, down, up, down. After a few minutes, you're exhausted."


Nasdaq Posts Rise of 0.5% In Uncovered Short Sales
Open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market increased one-half of 1 percent in the month that ended June 15, the exchange announced yesterday.
Uncovered short sales amounted to 837.5 million shares, compared with 833.5 million shares for the month that ended on May 15.
Open positions of short sales reflect the total number of shares sold short by Nasdaq members and their customers.


At Trade Talks, Sparring And Cryptic Hints of a Deal
Japan's top trade official arrived here tonight unarmed and dropped a few cryptic hints that he might be ready to strike a deal in the 48 hours remaining before the United States places record sanctions on Japanese luxury car imports.
His opponent across the negotiating table, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, arrived talking tough and heavily armed -- wielding a $400 shinai, a bamboo sword used in kendo, a Japanese version of fencing.


Review/Fashion; Citified Suits Are the Focus Of Resort Collections
Resort.
Cruise.
Prespring.
By any name, the collections that European designers are showing now in New York just serve to fill the stores' racks in November and December.
Ostensibly intended for wearing in warm weather, these clothes run the gamut from swimwear to business suits, with an emphasis on the suits.
They're made of linen, cotton, silk, wool and cashmere so a woman can find something to freshen her winter wardrobe or to pack for a trip to wherever destiny takes her, whether it's a Caribbean island or a cosmopolitan city.


Youthful Swan Queens And Noble Squires
The Kirov Ballet first showed off its latest production of "Swan Lake," by Oleg Vinogradov, in 1992.
But now it has returned to the Metropolitan Opera House with an especially young crop of swan queens.
On Saturday afternoon, 19-year-old Anastasiya Volochkova made her local debut as Odette-Odile; in the evening, Uliyana Lopatkina, a 21-year-old who is to dance again this Saturday afternoon, was seen for the first time in the same dual role.


A New Provost for Princeton
Princeton University is getting a new provost.
He is Jeremiah P. Ostriker, chairman of the University's Department of Astrophysics and director of the Princeton University Observatory.


Pearl Jam Cancels Its Troubled Tour
Pearl Jam has canceled the rest of its troubled United States tour, citing the difficulty of trying to perform in locations not affiliated with Ticketmaster, the giant ticket distribution company with which it has had a long-running feud.
In a statement released on Sunday, the band said it had wanted to focus on music, but instead had "been faced with continued controversies associated with attempting to schedule and perform at alternative venues."


Farmers' Market for Commuters
PATH commuters will have a chance to bring home fresh produce once a week, thanks to a new farmers' market that is to open on Wednesday at the Journal Square Transportation Center.
The market, to open one day a week from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., will offer produce from 40 growers who are members of the North Jersey Farmers Market Council.
The organization will open another market in Somerville on Saturday.


Bond Executive May Gain Most In the Turmoil Atop Salomon
John L. Haseltine, the head of Salomon Brothers' bond-trading businesses, is arguably the biggest winner from recent and continuing executive changes at the troubled investment company.
A 19-year Salomon veteran, Mr.
Haseltine, 48, could be tapped as a future president or vice chairman of Salomon, according to current and former executives of the firm.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the Crossword yesterday omitted two clues in some editions.
The missing entries were: 48 Down, "Army no-show," and 49 Down, "Virtuoso performance?" Readers wishing copies of the corrected puzzle may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Bosnian Muslim Troops Evade U.N. Force to Raid Serb Village
In a raid before dawn that again illustrated the weakness of United Nations forces here, Bosnian Government soldiers apparently slipped past United Nations posts today and attacked this isolated Bosnian Serb village, burning several houses, stealing livestock and leaving a dozen families homeless, a Bosnian Serb spokesman said.
Although the assault had no great military significance, it reflected both the growing frustration of Government troops and the inadequacy of United Nations peacekeepers who have pledged to prevent them from leaving supposedly demilitarized enclaves in eastern Bosnia.


Esther Rome, Author, Dies at 49; Sought Better Health for Women
Esther Rome, co-author of the best seller "Our Bodies, Ourselves" and women's health advocate for more than 25 years, died at her home in Somerville, Mass., on Saturday.
She was 49.
The cause was breast cancer, said a friend, Judith Norsigian.


Qatar Leader Is Sent Packing by His Son
A long-simmering family dispute within the ruling family of Qatar culminated today in the forced departure of Emir Khalifa Bin Hamad al-Thani, who was asked to leave the country for an extended stay abroad by his son and Crown Prince, Hamad Bin Khalifa al-Thani.
The father and son have been feuding for more than two years.
Much of the power in the tiny emirate of 300,000, which sits on a huge natural gas reserve, was already in the hands of the Crown Prince.


Downward Spiral of Troubled Life; Behind a Bloody Trail: Reform School, Prison and Drugs
In recent months, people around Darnell Collins would gauge his mood by looking at his eyes.
If he was not on cocaine or heroin, they were a gentle brown, but when he was high, they grew large, darkened a shade and by all accounts filled with a venom, seeming to suck all the air from the room.
In the weeks before Mr.
Collins began what the authorities are calling a cocaine-laced murder spree that left his girlfriend, April Gates, dead along with six others in New Jersey and Manhattan, that look made Miss Gates shake.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 3


Inquiry Finds Housing Violations Are Unchecked
The City Comptroller charged yesterday that the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development is permitting widespread fraud and abuse by not pursuing landlords who falsely claim to have corrected housing violations on their property.
In addition, city inspectors spent far less time checking landlord violations in neighborhoods that are mostly black and Hispanic than in other neighborhoods, Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said.
Mr.
Hevesi, who conducted an investigation along with State Senator Franz S. Leichter, a Manhattan Democrat, said that housing inspectors checked landlords' claims of fixing violations about 25 percent of the time in mid- and lower Manhattan, while almost never in Harlem, Inwood or Washington Heights.


Slower Ball Doesn't Slow Sampras Down as Wimbledon Opens
The sky was cloudless, the grass lawns were flawless, and since postcard conditions prevailed today at Wimbledon, it seemed only fitting that Pete Sampras should start his campaign for a third consecutive title in similarly picturesque form.
The only trouble was the lack of cooperation he initially received from his goggle-wearing, cigarette-puffing, strange-serving German opponent, Karsten Braasch, a player more picaresque than picturesque.
Braasch, who has never minded that his game smacks more of the ridiculous than the sublime, managed to downgrade the two-time defending champion's form on his favorite surface from magical to mundane.


World News Briefs; Russians Report Sightings Of U.S. Relief Worker
The brother of Frederick C. Cuny, the American relief worker who has been missing in Chechnya since April 7, said today that he had received two reports this month from Russian officials that Mr.
Cuny was seen alive in June and was being held by Chechen rebels.
The Clinton Administration announced, meanwhile, that two agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation would arrive in Russia on Tuesday to investigate the Cuny case.


EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK: Private Armies From the Past; How Britain Banned Mosley's Black Shirts
Back in 1936, the tolerant British were startled by a surge of political violence spawned by paramilitary armies whose leaders preached hatred.
Well aware of how similar brawls helped doom the Weimar Republic, the Conservative Government and police officials took the lead in securing passage of a Public Order Act.
It banned the wearing of political uniforms and proscribed "quasi-military organizations."
The measure worked.
Violence ebbed.
A Fascist threat evaporated, and standards of civility were upheld.
Allowing for obvious differences in place and time, this mostly forgotten episode is surely relevant to the current American debate about private militias and their fiery commanders.


Turbulent Air Violently Shakes Jetliner Over Wisconsin
Passengers on an American Airlines flight from Los Angeles to New York on Monday night were thrown to the ceiling and objects were flung around the cabin of the DC-10 when the plane was violently jostled over Wisconsin.
The captain diverted the flight to Chicago, where 17 people were taken to hospitals.
Two remained hospitalized late yesterday, both in good condition.


Early Gains In Treasury Issues Lose Momentum
The plunge in consumer confidence helped Treasury securities make early gains yesterday, but it could not overcome a lackluster note auction or signs that the economy may not be slowing enough to allow the Fed to cut interest rates.
The 30-year bond slipped 1/32 , to a price of 1141/32 for a yield of 6.54 percent, unchanged from the previous day.
Intermediate notes and shorter-maturity bill rates were either down slightly or unchanged.


Let's Mourn All Victims Of Shooting Spree
To the Editor:
As a resident of the Chelsea block on which one of Darnell Collins's seven victims was fatally shot on June 20, I know I am not alone in being appalled by the failure of a system that allows a convicted criminal the freedom to move from city to city on a deadly rampage despite clear indications of his dangerously unstable condition.


Darden Restaurants Inc.(DRI,N) reports earnings for 13wks to May 28


INSIDE
Aristide Defends Election
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide described Haiti's disorderly election as "a major step toward democracy for my country" and said that its results would stand.
Page A9.
Egypt Vows to Crack Down
In an angry response to an attempt on the life of President Hosni Mubarak, Egyptian officials have signaled a tougher stand against Islamic militants.
Page A7.
Consumer Confidence Falls
An index measuring consumer confidence took its steepest fall in nearly three years, in a sign that Americans will continue to spend cautiously in the coming months.
Page D1.
Dutch Debate Over Twins
A Dutch woman who gave birth to twins, one white and one black, has set off a new debate about tinkering with human procreation.
Page A3.


Confidence Of Consumers Falls Sharply
Consumer confidence took its steepest fall in nearly three years in June, dropping to the lowest level since late last year, the Conference Board reported today.
The surprisingly big decline reported by the Conference Board, a New-York based business research group, was taken as a sign that consumers, their incomes growing slowly and saddled with high debt, will continue to spend cautiously in coming months.


Down to Earth for America's Cup Skipper
The rocket of fame that took New Zealand's yachting team straight to the moon after winning the America's Cup last month is headed back down to earth.
How else to explain seeing Russell Coutts this week, his tousled black hair, deep brown eyes and square shoulders hunched over a plate of greasy fried eggs and hash browns in a dark, damp and decidedly seedy restaurant in Point Judith, R.I.?


Scalping Revision Is Being Postponed
The curtain has all but come down for now on a disputed effort to scrap the state's scalping law and allow ticket brokers to set their own prices for resale of tickets to Broadway shows and special events.
With New York's limits on ticket markups set to expire on Friday, the Senate and Assembly have been considering bills that would allow licensed brokers to charge whatever they want for tickets.
Out-of-state brokers have been lobbying strenuously in behalf of those bills, but it seems likely they will be shelved for a while.
Unable to agree on the measures, the State Legislature is expected to extend the current, spottily enforced law through next March.


Ex-Fugitive Sentenced in Fraud
Describing himself as an experienced financial adviser, Jay J. Deutchman of Mahopac, N.Y., told prospective investors he would get them a high rate of return in municipal bond fund pools.
About 40 investors from New Jersey, New York and Connecticut believed him, and gave him $5 million.
But Mr.
Deutchman did not invest the money.
Instead he lived a lavish life.
He fled to Venezuela in August 1993, but was deported to the United States last September.


Pipeline Investigators to Remain
A Federal Office of Pipeline Safety was set up in Trenton last year to investigate the March 1994 pipeline explosion in Edison, which destroyed eight buildings in an apartment complex and forced the evacuation of more than 1,500 residents.
Now, the office will be made permanent.
"Our region has the highest concentration of pipelines in the United States," said United States Senator Frank Lautenberg, who requested the permanent status.
The office's three inspectors will monitor pipeline inspections in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania.
All inspectors responsible for the East Coast had been based in Washington.


Big 3 and Japan
Of all the exaggerated claims made by both sides in the trade dispute, among the least credible is that the Big Three auto makers have earnestly attempted to penetrate the Japanese market, only to be blocked at every turn.
Despite statements by the United States Government and the companies' own trade organization to the contrary, even Big Three executives concede they have barely tried.
"The biggest strategic mistake that we made over the last 30 years was not aggressively attacking the Japanese market -- from the standpoint of understanding the people that have become your key or toughest competitors," said G. Richard Wagoner Jr., president of North American operations at the General Motors Corporation.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.99
4.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.35
4.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.34
4.54
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.13
6.11
7.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.54
7.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.52
7.51
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.15
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Underclassmen Take Over the N.B.A. Draft
He was leaning on the hotel reception desk, wearing long denim shorts and a baseball cap turned backward.
He was laughing and giggling with a friend from his Chicago neighborhood.
As the only American high school senior who will play Sega tonight and be able to purchase the nation of Senegal on Wednesday, Kevin Garnett is understandably excited.
"I can't even explain the feeling, going pro, you know," the graduate of Farragut Academy in Chicago said.
"It's . . . just . . . unbelievable."


Prosecutor Wants to Keep Bomb Trial in Oklahoma
Two months after the bombing of the Federal building here, the wind downtown still tastes of concrete dust.
Fresh flowers, flags, poems and children's stuffed animals appear daily on the steel fence around the site, and Joyce Swallow, who was injured in the attack, slowly makes the long, hot walk from her new office to the bus every afternoon.
As fresh as the memories are, Patrick M. Ryan, the new United States Attorney in Oklahoma City, said that all the suspects to be charged in the bombing could get a fair trial here and that the trial should be held here.


S.E.C. Charges Distributor Defrauded Film's Investors
The investors who put money on the expectation that "Happily Ever After" would be the next classic animation film have since lived anything but.
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged yesterday that they were defrauded by the company that distributed the film in 1993.
"Happily Ever After" was billed as a sequel to "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," although the Walt Disney Company had nothing to do with the movie.
The S.E.C. said the company that distributed the movie projected in a series of direct-mail advertisements sent to 400,000 potential investors that the film "would gross between $50 million and $80 million at the box office and earn an additional $35 million to $42 million from videotape sales."


Loss of Economic Council Held Imprudent
An effort by House Republicans to abolish the Council of Economic Advisers has drawn criticism from past council chairmen from both parties, who say it provides the President with an important independent source of economic advice.
A proposal to cut funds for the council's operations will be considered on Wednesday by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on the Treasury, Postal Service and General Government.
Representative Jim Ross Lightfoot, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the subcommittee, said last week that even without the council the President would have enough economists in the Office of Management and Budget and the National Economic Council.


A Principal Is Removed By Cortines
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines removed the principal of Washington Irving High School in Manhattan yesterday after an investigation found that he allowed 19 students to graduate even though they had failed required courses.
Mr.
Cortines ordered the investigation yesterday after several teachers said the principal, Robert Durkin, had pressured them into giving students passing grades or had changed the grades himself without consulting them.


An Ill Wife, A Tough Boss And a Lawsuit
A valued employee begins to miss morning meetings.
He takes time off when it is inconvenient to fellow workers.
When there are complaints, he pleads burdens at home.
It is a pattern familiar in most every workplace -- including the East 63d Street town house that is the headquarters of Ronald O. Perelman, the billionaire New York financier.
There, the troubled employee was Fred L. Tepperman, a top Perelman lieutenant whose wife was ill with Alzheimer's disease.


Burrell Out for Season
The outdoor track season is over for LEROY BURRELL.
The sprinter said he won't compete for the rest of the summer because of a swollen tendon in his left foot.
Burrell said the inflamed plantar tendon, injured last summer, has not completely healed.
"It's probably best I not run," Burrell said Monday in Houston.
"This whole season has been disappointing, but I'm looking to the Olympics."


Mondo Alfresco: The Cornucopias
The French Picnic
Baguettes, $1.25 each, Columbus Bakery, 474 Columbus Avenue (83d Street).
D'Artagnan duck rillettes, $5 for 9.5 ounces, Gourmet Garage, 453 Broome Street (Mercer Street).
French ham, $10 a pound, Les Halles, 411 Park Avenue South (28th Street).
Coach Farms low-fat goat log, $8.99 for 6 ounces, Bon Appetit, 301 North Harrison Street, Princeton, N.J.
St.-Loup soft-ripened goat cheese, $5.99 for 5 ounces, Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (Ninth Street).
Lentil salad, $6.95 a pound, Flavors, 8 West 18th Street.
Ratatouille, $8.99 a pound, Suzel's at Broadway Butcher, 2446 Broadway (90th Street).
Mesclun, cornichons and Dijon mustard, supermarkets.
Apple tart, $16, Mitchel London, 22A East 65th Street, or Butterfield Market, 1114 Lexington Avenue (78th Street).
Georges Duboeuf Beaujolais Villages 1994, $7.
The Italian Picnic
Bocconcini, $6.98 pound, Todaro Brothers, 555 Second Avenue (31st Street).
Focaccias with olive and tomato toppings, $2.50 to $8 at both Ecce Panis branches on the Upper East Side.
Sopressata salami, $7.98 and $9.98 a pound, G. Esposito, 500 Ninth Avenue (38th Street).
Italian giant-white-bean salad, $12 a pound, Grace's Marketplace, 1237 Third Avenue (71st Street).
Grilled vegetables, $7.95 a pound, Hay Day Markets in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Westport, Greenwich, Ridgefield and New Canaan, Conn.
Fresh grapes, $1 and up a pound, and fresh figs, 50 cents each, supermarkets and fancy-food shops.
Nonni biscotti, $5.99 for eight ounces, Broadway Farm, 2335 Broadway (85th Street).
San Pellegrino water, various prices and sizes, in supermarkets.
Montepulciano d'Abruzzo, about $8 in wine shops.
The Middle Eastern Picnic
Olives, $4 to $6 a pound, Murray's, 198 Eighth Avenue (20th Street) and 42 Cornelia Street (Bleecker Street).
Pita and zaatar breads, 25 to 75 cents each (sold in packages), Ninth Avenue Cheese Shop, 615 Ninth Avenue (44th Street).
Smoked-eggplant spread, $5.95 a pound, Casa del Pescatore, 957 Second Avenue (51st Street).
Tatziki, $4.78 a pound, Fairway Market, 2127 Broadway (74th Street).
Spinach pie, $3.99 a wedge, Likitsakos Market, 1174 Lexington Avenue (82d Street).
Stuffed vine leaves, $4.50 a dozen ($2.50 for six), Sahadi, 187 Atlantic Avenue (Court Street), Brooklyn Heights.
Couscous salad, $8.50 a pound, New Prospect at Home, 52 Seventh Avenue (Lincoln Street), Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Israeli baklava, $10 a pound, Michelle's Kitchen, 792 Lexington Avenue (60th Street).
Fresh orange juice, $2.50 a quart, and fresh figs, 50 cents each, at supermarkets and fancy-food shops.
The Asian Picnic
Vegetable sushi, about $3 a package at Daikichi Sushi branches.
Cold sesame noodles, $3.75 a portion, at the three Ollie's Noodle Shops locations.
Oriental chicken salad, $14 a pound, Word of Mouth, 1012 Lexington Avenue (72d Street).
Sesame broccoli salad, $10, Dean &amp; DeLuca, 566 Broadway (Prince Street).
Roast-pork buns and scallion buns, $1 each, Sammy's Bakery, 461 Avenue of the Americas (11th Street).
Almond cookies, $1.50 each, and fortune cookies, $2 a bag, Kam Man, 200 Canal Street (Mott Street).
Fresh litchis, $6 to $7 a pound in Chinatown or $8 to $10 a pound in fancy-produce shops.
Fresh apricots, $2.50 a pound, supermarkets.
Japanese peach and lime drinks, 75 cents, Yaohan, 595 River Road, Edgewater, N.J.
ON THE COVER  The American Picnic
Cold cucumber soup, $5.99 a quart, Zabar's, 80th Street and Broadway.
Meatloaf sandwiches: mini-meatloaves, $6.95, Vinegar Factory, 431 East 91st Street; onion buns, Orwasher's, 40 cents each, 308 East 78th Street.
American Spoon Foods Smoked Tomato Ketchup, $3 for eight ounces, fancy-food shops.
New-potato salad, $6 a pound, Red Horse Market, Montauk Highway, East Hampton, L.I.
Coleslaw, $2 a pound, Pastrami King, 124-24 Queens Boulevard (82d Avenue), Kew Gardens, Queens.
Chocolate pudding, $4 for 4 ounces, Sarabeth's Kitchen, 423 Amsterdam Avenue (81st Street) and 1295 Madison Avenue (92d Street).
Brownies, $2.60 each, William Greenberg Jr.
Desserts, 1100 Madison Avenue (82d Street), 2187 Broadway (78th Street), 518 Third Avenue (35th Street).
Zucchini-nut loaf, $5, Neuman &amp; Bogdanoff, 1385 Third Avenue (79th Street).
Cherries, $2 to $2.50 a pound in supermarkets.
Nantucket Naturals lemonade, 75 cents to $1 each for a 12-ounce bottle, convenience and fancy-food shops.
Brooklyn Lager, $1.29 for a 12-ounce bottle, supermarkets.


Europe Delays Plan for Common Currency
With Europe's economies struggling with high unemployment and swollen budget deficits, European Union leaders meeting here have put off plans for a common currency from 1997 to Jan. 1, 1999, at the earliest.
Even then, they said on Tuesday, probably only Germany, France, and smaller countries in their economic orbit would be ready to join.


Mexicans Are Bailing Out The Nation's Weak Banks
Three years after the Mexican Government got out of the banking business by selling all the major banks back to private owners, Mexico's grave economic crisis has forced the Government to pour billions of dollars back into the institutions to keep them from collapsing.
The Government has spent about $4 billion through a number of programs intended to help the banks cover bad loans that have ballooned since December, when the peso was devalued and interest rates skyrocketed.
In all, it is estimated that Mexico may end up spending more than half the $10 billion it made through the sale of the 18 largest banks from 1990 through 1992.


Pulsipher Shows Promise In First Victory
Two unimpressive starts made people start to wonder what all the fuss was about.
But tonight Bill Pulsipher gave the Mets a glimpse of their future.
If his career is filled with many more performances like the one he delivered against the Marlins, then that future might be as bright as advertised.
The 21-year-old rookie with the hip-hop look and quirky superstitions, showed off his golden left arm, allowing just three hits in seven and a third innings to lead the Mets to a 2-0 triumph that ended a three-game losing streak.


Securities Litigation Measure Nears Passage in the Senate
The Senate tonight moved swiftly toward a final vote on legislation that would make it far more difficult for investors to sue corporations and stockbrokers for securities fraud.
Opponents of the measure tried repeatedly today either to slow the bill or to modify its effects but were beaten back at every turn.
The legislation is expected to pass as early as Wednesday morning with support from both Democrats and Republicans.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The New York Road Runners Club holds its training classes around 8:30 at night in Central Park.
Picture the trainers in their running suits encouraging about 200 sneakered runners to maintain their pace around the duck pond as two homeless men sit on a bench amid their belongings.
The runners in my class thundered by them, and as I brought up the rear I heard one of the men on the bench remark to the other: "The park just isn't safe after dark anymore." MYRNA BLOCK
. . .


Congressional Proposal Adds Element of Risk to Sugar-Growing Business
When Paul R. Orsenigo, a vegetable farmer, decided to diversify last year and grow sugar cane, it seemed a sure bet.
Cane is not only a hardier crop than leaf lettuce or parsley, he reasoned, it is also money in the bank because the Federal Government guarantees its price.
"Vegetable farming is a colossal gamble," Mr.
Orsenig said recently as he drove through his 320-acre farm outside this town on the shores of Lake Okeechobee, 69 miles northwest of Miami.
"Sugar cane helps you weather some of the bad years you have in vegetables."


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times yesterday about the introduction of the Power Macintosh 9500 by Apple Computer Inc. gave an incorrect definition of the abbreviation P.C.I., referring to internal data pathways to and from the computer's microprocessor.
It stands for Peripheral Component Interconnect, not Personal Computer Interconnect.


Philip Morris Seeks to Curb Sales to Young
Philip Morris USA, the nation's largest cigarette maker, yesterday announced the most comprehensive and expensive program in the company's history to prevent minors from smoking, including a national advertising campaign, plans to put warnings on cigarette cartons and packs, and the discontinuation of its traditional promotional giveaways of millions of packs of cigarettes.
"The best way to keep kids away from cigarettes is to keep cigarettes away from kids," said James J. Morgan, the company's president and chief executive, at a press conference in Manhattan.
Philip Morris makes Marlboro, the world's largest-selling cigarette brand.


A Road Novel's Trip Through Darkness
THE LATE CHILD
By Larry McMurtry
461 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Larry McMurtry's new novel, his eighth since his Pulitzer Prize-winning "Lonesome Dove" of 1985, has many elements that will be familiar to his corps of loyal readers, especially a quaintly lunatic cast of characters living on the improvident margins of American life.
Certainly familiar is the seedy and gritty West, an anti-mythical, melancholy landscape where frail and truculent characters struggle with smallness, boredom and the loutishness of others.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Black and White/Thin and Fat.
That's the Joke, Get It?  'Identical Twins From Baltimore' Eclectic Theater Company
"Identical Twins From Baltimore," a scatterbrained new musical satirizing Hollywood, tabloid television and the obsession with fame, sinks under the weight of an ill-conceived central gimmick.
Jill and Jane Undergrowth, identical twins the show follows from Baltimore to New York to Hollywood in their quest for stardom, are portrayed by physical opposites.


CASTRO CONFERS WITH EXILED FOE
Fidel Castro said, "You've let your hair grow long."
Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo said, "It's not my style, but my wife likes it long, so long it is."


Ailing Mets In Need Of a Cure
What started as a season of hope has slipped into a season of misery for the Mets, turning them into a team for which confusion and frustration have proven more suffocating than even the stifling Florida heat.
Manager Dallas Green openly admits he is out of ideas on how to save his team and veteran players like Bobby Bonilla, John Franco and Bret Saberhagen are openly voicing their frustrations.


From a Microwave Fan
To The Living Section:
I was surprised at your article "Microwave: Revolution That Never Happened" (May 31).
I love my microwave, even though only 500 watts of power.


Ruling Likely to Affect Coach-Player Relations
In the aftermath of the Supreme Court's decision Monday to allow public schools to conduct random drug tests on student-athletes, one prominent Long Island high school football coach said the ruling is likely to strain the already delicate relationship between coach and player.
Tom Cassesse, who has coached Comsewogue High School for the last 23 years, said he was upset by the court's ruling and further incensed yesterday when he was told that his school section would leave it up to individual schools to form a policy rather than impose a universal policy among all the schools in Suffolk County.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  TRADE SHIFT BY JAPAN SEEN  Japan's Trade Minister showed new willingness to expand foreign access to the Japanese automotive market, American officials said.
But it is not clear whether Tokyo would offer enough to stave off American sanctions.
A1  STRANGULATION OF SARAJEVO  With the collapse this month of Western attempts to protect Sarajevo and the resumption of regular shelling, an overwhelming sense of crisis has taken hold.
A1


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Reunited and Examining The Wounds That Never Heal  'The Soul of an Intruder' Miranda Theater
Guilt and ghosts command the stage at the Miranda Theater (259 West 30th Street, Chelsea), where "The Soul of an Intruder," by Steve Braunstein, opens the door into the psychological hell where old wounds bleed forever.


COMPANY NEWS
CORNUCOPIA RESOURCES LTD., Vancouver, British Columbia, a mining company, announced the acquisition of Addwest Minerals Inc., Arvada, Colo., a metal-mining company, from Addington Resources Inc., Ashland, Ky., for about $22.3 million plus other considerations.
ONCOGENE SCIENCE INC., Uniondale, L.I., a biopharmaceutical concern, said it would sell the assets of its research products business to Calbiochem-Novabiochem International Inc., San Diego, for $6 million and some additional considerations.


To Preserve Afrikaners' Language, Mixed-Race South Africans Join Fray
Peter Marais worries as much about the future of Afrikaans in the new South Africa as the next guy.
But the next guy is likely an Afrikaner, a member of the white tribe that ruled South Africa until last year and forced its language on a dark-skinned majority.
Mr.
Marais is part of that abused majority, a man of mixed race.
"I'm a great advocate for the protection and guarding of Afrikaans as an official language," said Mr.
Marais, the minister of local government for the Western Cape province in southwestern South Africa.
"The colored people don't consider Afrikaans to belong to the white man. We believe it's our language, which the white man stole from us."


Sears P.L.C. Reports Sales Are Sluggish
Sears P.L.C., a British retailing company, said yesterday that sales at stores open a year or more had risen 2.6 percent so far this year, though first-half pretax profit would be less than the $:53.8 million ($85 million) reported a year earlier.
Same-store sales have been "disappointing," running about 1.5 percent lower than Sears had forecast.


Thatcher's John Hancock


A New 'Real World,' This Time in London
Before "Friends" and its slew of imitators on tap this fall, there was "The Real World." Network sitcoms use actors; the MTV series, calling itself a reality-based soap opera, recruits through extensive interviews young adults willing to live in a house with several strangers for five or six months and have their lives taped.
In either case, it's the group dynamic at play, and occasionally at risk.
"The Real World" first appeared in 1992, ensconced in a Manhattan loft apartment.
The second series moved on to a new group in Venice, Calif., and the last one was set in San Francisco.
Now, beginning tonight in a one-hour special, "The Real World" goes international.
The scene is London, and the "cast" of seven ranges in age from 19 to 24.


Israel's Russians Seek To Build a Nation
To the Editor:
As a close friend of the former Soviet dissident Natan Sharansky, I was glad to read "Israel's Russians Organize to Win Respect" (front page, June 20).
Mr.
Sharansky's intention in forming a political movement is not merely to pose as a threat to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as one who is able to "bring down his Government."


After a Yearlong Dispute, Enola Gay Exhibit Opens


G.M.'s Opel Unit Had a Profit Last Year
The Adam Opel A.G. subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation returned to profitability in 1994 but management fears that possible earnings gains this year are threatened by the strong German mark and high wages, its chairman, David Herman, said yesterday.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


An Appointment With the Ethics Committee


TV Guide Taps Editor to Lead On-Line Unit
News America Publishing yesterday named Barry Golson, executive editor of TV Guide, as editor in chief of a new unit for magazine development and new media.
Among his duties, Mr.
Golson will oversee TV Guide Online, an electronic version of the magazine's television listings scheduled to go on the Internet in September.


Conan O'Brien: Going Strong(er)
Defying predictions of critics and his own initial limitations, Conan O'Brien is still around and thriving -- almost.
He is still the star of NBC's "Late Night," and it looks more and more as if he will remain so for some time, although exactly how long is an open question because NBC has never fully endorsed him with a long-term contract.
So the speculation continues that the network is keeping its options open in case a real star comes along.


Market Place; H.M.O.'s take a pounding in Wall Street trading.
AS bad news battered three H.M.O. companies, Humana Inc., the Coventry Corporation and the Physician Corporation of America, in recent days, some analysts argued they were just discrete incidents.
Yesterday, however, nearly every stock of health maintenance organizations came under attack.
The selloff included even the United Healthcare Corporation, despite the long-range hopes inspired by United's grand $1.65 billion plan to buy the health care business of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Travelers Life Insurance Company.


Graduation Day Times 2


Results Plus
BOXING  Camacho Scores a Victory
Hector Camacho, hoping for a shot at a fourth title, bloodied his opponent's face last night and stopped Juan Arroyo after the sixth round of their junior-middleweight bout in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Panel Votes to Keep Tobacco Subsidies
Led by a bipartisan bloc of Southern representatives, the House Appropriations Committee today defeated an attempt to end the 50-year-old Federal Government subsidy to tobacco growers.
But in another move that cut as deeply across party lines, the committee by a surprisingly wide margin approved an amendment to extend a moratorium on new offshore oil drilling.


Wine Talk
FOR summer drinking," the wine shop ads trumpet. But is there, then, something different about summer drinking?
Actually, yes.
To begin with, there's more of it.
And we're not talking iced tea here.
Like pink gins on the veranda at Raffles or cold beer in the bleachers at Fenway Park, those summer drinks go down easily, too easily.


Vive la California? France Will Think About It
Patrick Lhoste, a French wine trader, was skeptical as he tasted a sip of a 1992 cabernet sauvignon from Sebastiani Vineyards of Sonoma County, Calif.
Apparently pleasantly surprised, he still skimped on compliments.
"It's very oaky," he judged, tasting the effects of aging the wine in oak barrels.
The oaky taste tends to be more pronounced in California wines than in French ones.


Japan Gets Economic Tonic; Critics Call It Bland
The Government announced a package of measures today meant to ward off recession in Japan, but economists dismissed the steps as unlikely to make much difference and investors responded by selling off shares.
The reaction underscored fears that if the Government was unable to stimulate the economy, conditions might worsen before they improve.
As Japan moves into its fifth year of economic troubles -- and its eighth rescue package -- the fragile economy is teetering on the brink of recession.
Last week, the Government reported that the economy had expanded a mere one-tenth of 1 percent in the first quarter of 1995 from the prior three months.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Campaign by car dealer pokes fun at sales pitches, angers other dealers -- and increases his business.
CAR-DEALER advertising can be a wasteland of shrieking prices and exclamation points.
But one dealer, Swanson Chrysler Plymouth in St.
Petersburg, Fla., has hit on a disarming formula: poke fun at and unmask some of the most misleading practices of auto dealers.
True, venal auto dealers are an easy target.
But it is a perilous strategy, nonetheless, not only because it brings the advertiser's own occupation into disrepute but also angers fellow auto dealers.
The local auto dealer organization, of which Swanson Chrysler is not a member, is especially angry.


Egypt Signals Tougher Stand On Opponents
In an angry response to an attempt on the life of President Hosni Mubarak, Egyptian officials signaled today that the country would take a tougher stand against Islamic militants, and the army, which has kept out of the fray, warned that it was ready to step in if called upon.
In remarks to some 5,000 people in the palace gardens this morning, the 67-year-old Mr.
Mubarak dwelled on his belief that Sudanese fundamentalists were linked to the attack on his motorcade in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital, on Monday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Japan's Trade Minister Is Sounding Flexible
Things looked bad in Geneva until Japan's trade minister perked up at some "creative alternatives" offered by Mickey Kantor and surprised the Americans with a new willingness to expand foreign access to the Japanese auto market.
As tonight's deadline approached, though, it was not clear whether Japan would offer enough to persuade President Clinton to call off threatened tariffs on luxury cars.  [ Page A1. ]


Huggins Will Stay Put
The University of Cincinnati board of trustees yesterday gave conditional approval to a 10-year contract extension for its basketball coach, BOB HUGGINS, a school spokesman said.
GREG HAND, the spokesman, said he did not have a copy of what the trustees approved or how much it would pay Huggins, who now receives $234,000 a year in salary, plus other basketball-related income and benefits.
According to published reports, the extension would pay Huggins $750,000 a year.


Red Sox's Fourth Home Run Finishes 11-Inning Victory Over Toronto
Red Sox 6, Blue Jays 5
Bill Haselman hit a broken-bat home run with one out in the 11th inning to give the Boston Red Sox a 6-5 victory over Toronto in Fenway Park.
It was the Blue Jays' eighth consecutive loss.


Former Clinton Spokeswoman Arrested
Dee Dee Myers, President Clinton's former press secretary, was arrested early today on charges of driving while under the influence of alcohol and driving on the wrong side of the road.
Ms.
Myers, who is now a co-host on the CNBC cable program "Equal Time" and the Washington editor of Vanity Fair magazine, said in a statement issued today: "Last night, I had a couple of drinks during dinner with a friend. I thought I was O.K. to drive, but I now realize I was wrong. I should have been more careful. I am dealing with the incident through appropriate legal channels. I feel terrible about it and will not let it happen again."


BBDO Worldwide And SmithKline Part
The SmithKline Beecham Consumer Healthcare division of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. and BBDO Worldwide in New York said yesterday that after nine months they had mutually agreed to part ways on their account, with billings estimated at $50 million from products like Panadol.
As a result, the BBDO account has been reassigned to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York and in New York, SmithKline's two lead global agencies.
BBDO, which is part of the Omnicom Group, joined the SmithKline roster in October when SmithKline acquired Sterling Winthrop whose analgesics business was handled globally by BBDO; SmithKline subsequently sold the domestic portion of the Sterling business to Bayer, so BBDO was in effect working for both companies.


Distinguished Alumnus Indicted
A managing partner at the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand was indicted yesterday on charges of defrauding both his firm and his alma mater, Seton Hall University, which had given him a distinguished alumnus award in 1987.
Using checks from his personal account and his firm, Robert T. Caruso of Saddle River donated more than $150,000 to the university, the indictment said, but convinced Seton Hall to refund a substantial part of the money by promising that he would make a later contribution.


In Muslim Cleric's Trial, a Radical Defender; Left-Leaning Lawyer and Revolutionary Sympathizer Comes Back in the Limelight
Lynne F. Stewart, counselor at law and radical at heart, strode through the Federal courthouse in Manhattan, a purple cloth tote bag crammed with legal papers dangling from her hand, a New York Mets cap on her head.
No formidable briefcase like those being borne about her.
No sign of the dress-for-success standard of lawyering also abundant in the vicinity.


New York 'Megan's Law' Will Pass Legal Tests
To the Editor:
"A 'Megan's Law' for New York?" (editorial, June 27) makes the sweeping assumption that main provisions of the sex offender registry and community notification bill, expected soon to pass the Assembly after having passed the Senate 52 to 1 three weeks ago, "are almost certain to be struck down as unconstitutional under the state or Federal Constitutions." This is hardly the case.


Warner Records Chairman Said to Be Staying
Executives at Time Warner's music division said yesterday that Danny Goldberg would remain as chairman of Warner Brothers Records despite the recent ouster of his boss, Doug Morris.
Mr.
Goldberg's future has been in doubt since Michael J. Fuchs, chairman of the Warner Music Group, abruptly dismissed Mr.
Morris as chief executive of Warner's United States operations last Wednesday.
Mr.
Fuchs said Mr.
Morris had been leading a campaign to destabilize Warner Music in an effort to seize control of the company.


On Grass Surface, Pierce Proves Nothing to Sneeze at in Round 1
Her demotion to Court 14 served as a second slap on the wrist for her habit of snubbing Wimbledon.
But other than that, Wimbledon did everything except pin a welcoming corsage on Mary Pierce's tennis dress as she made her much-awaited, much-belated debut on grass.
The fifth-seeded Pierce, who had already been knocked down a rung from her actual No. 4 world ranking by Wimbledon's seedings as punishment for her lack of a track record here, powered herself past 115th-ranked Sandra Dopfer, 6-1, 6-2.


A Slipper Untried, via the Kirov
Prokofiev's ballet score for "Cinderella" has served many choreographers in the West, making it easy to forget that it is primarily as Russian a ballet as "Swan Lake." Oleg Vinogradov's newest and individualistic version, which had its New York premiere Monday night with the Kirov Ballet at the Metropolitan Opera House, is a useful reminder.
Commissioned by the Kirov to write a three-act version of the fairy tale, Prokofiev saw the war postpone the premiere of his ballet until 1945, when it was finally given not by the Kirov in Leningrad but by the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow.


Killer's Transfer Is Opposed
Derrick C. Butler has served 22 years for the 1973 murder of a Camden police officer, and the Camden police say he should never be released.
Five officers urged the New Jersey Parole Board yesterday to reverse an earlier decision to transfer Mr.
Butler from state prison into a residential program, The Associated Press reported.


Cherry Corp.(CHERB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


G. W. Wattles, 75, Legal Expert at U.N. And Former Official
Gurdon Wallace Wattles Jr., a former expert in international law at the United Nations Secretariat, died on Sunday at his country house in Amenia, N.Y.
He was 75 and kept a home on Manhattan's Upper East Side as well as his home in Dutchess County.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Principal Is Removed
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines removed the principal of Washington Irving High School in Manhattan after an investigation found that he allowed 19 students to graduate even though they had failed required courses.
Mr.
Cortines ordered the investigation yesterday after several teachers said the principal, Robert Durkin, had pressured them into giving students passing grades or had changed the grades himself without consulting them.
Article, page B3.


Lawsuit Charges Army Corps Ruined Fire Island Beaches
Ever since Robert Spencer built his seaside bungalow on Fire Island 57 years ago, he has been fighting to keep the sand from being washed from beneath its footings.
Over the last two years, he has contributed his share to an $8 million fund used by Fire Islanders to replenish the sand along their Atlantic Ocean beach front.
But most of the sand, like the money, is gone, and there are few signs that the Federal Government is prepared to follow through on past promises of aid.


For Meat Safety Without Big Government
To the Editor:
I want to respond to "The Republican Assault on Meat Safety" (editorial, June 22), in which you criticize me for what I regard as a reasonable effort to implement fair meat and poultry inspection standards.


Yesterday in Washington
ENVIRONMENTAL REFORM -- Senators battling Federal regulations are aiming at what would seem to be one of the least burdensome but most effective of environmental rules: requiring manufacturers to publicly disclose how much they pollute.
At the urging of chemical companies, a provision to scale back the program has been tucked into a regulatory relief bill that may come to the Senate floor this week.
ECONOMIC ADVISERS -- An effort by Republicans on the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Treasury, Postal Service and General Government to kill off the Council of Economic Advisers has drawn criticism from past council chairmen from both parties, who say it provides the President with an important independent source of economic advice.
Representative Jim Ross Lightfoot of Iowa, chairman of the subcommittee, says the President had enough economists in the Office of Management and Budget and the National Economic Council.
But Herbert G. Stein, a council chairman under President Richard M. Nixon, said, "I think it's a stupid idea."


Fuller (H.B.) Co.(FULL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hotel Union Rejects Offer As Deadline Approaches
Members of New York City's hotel workers union yesterday rejected management's latest contract proposal, bringing the city closer to a hotel strike on the eve of the July 4 weekend.
Negotiations over the contract between the union, the 22,000 member Hotel and Motel Trades Council, and the Hotel Association of New York City, which represents about 75 hotels, had been proceeding in earnest until Monday afternoon when they suddenly broke off over issues including a wage package and the rules governing independent contractors who operate hotel restaurants and other services.


Skin Grown in Lab Offers New Hope For Burns and Unhealable Wounds
TWO of the most intractable problems in medicine have been the handling of extensive burns and the treatment of wounds that never heal.
In both cases the natural ability of skin to regenerate is lost, and the patient is not only in constant pain but vulnerable to one infection after another.
In many cases it is even necessary to amputate limbs when the skin fails to heal.
The treatments have been limited and drastic: cutting skin from another part of the body to graft over the wound, or using the skin of cadavers to cover a wound temporarily while it tries to heal.


Pataki Weighs Bill on Sales of Houses With Pasts
About 50 potential buyers made appointments to see Eve Clyde's brick ranch in Orange County, but in the end, only 15 people showed up.
To sell the house, after putting it on the market twice over three years, she lowered the price $16,000 -- much more than she wanted to.
The problem, she said, was that she believed she had no choice but to reveal to every buyer a fact she did not like telling anyone: in 1990, her husband, Thomas, 49, a manic depressive, shot himself to death out on the deck.


What Reporters Dig Up, Hype, Skim and Ignore
As a preview of what its producers hope will be a new PBS series about the way news is covered or left uncovered, "Media Matters" has an intelligent air that holds promise for the future, even if this first effort is not as probing as the subject invites.
Alex Jones, a former New York Times media reporter, makes an amiable and knowing host, and the program's correspondents go about their job in workmanlike fashion.
The lead story has to do with Susan Smith, the South Carolina mother who has confessed to killing her two young children.
As confirmed here, the case was of course a journalistic orgy, marked by the usual overheated reporting.
There is Tom Brokaw announcing on the day the story broke that "A mother's nightmare came true."


End Game on Dr. Foster
To the Editor:
Who cares how many abortions Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr., President Clinton's Surgeon General nominee, performed?
If abortion is a crime, Dr.
Foster became a murderer when he did the first one.
But if abortion is legal -- and it is -- it doesn't matter if he performed a million.


Marvin Camras, 79, Inventor in Tape Recording
Marvin Camras, an electrical engineer and inventor widely seen as the father of magnetic tape recording, died on Friday in Evanston, Ill., He was 79.
The cause was kidney failure, said Sara Fishman, a spokeswoman for the Illinois Institute of Technology, where Mr.
Camras worked and taught for more than 50 years.


Public Service Spot Takes Top Honors
At the 42d annual International Advertising Festival in Cannes, France, the jury withheld its highest honor, the Grand Prix award, in favor of presenting a "special jury award" to honor a public service announcement as the best of show.
Public service advertisements are not eligible for the top prize, according to rules of the festival, which is sponsored by Screenvision Cinema Network.
The honored spot, titled "Eggs," was created by Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO in London, a unit of the Omnicom Group, for Queen Elizabeth's Foundation for the Disabled People in London.


In Brief
*
Hanson P.L.C. said yesterday that its United States affiliate had agreed to acquire the mobile hydraulic crane business of Fried.
Krupp A.G.
Hoesch-Krupp for about $:29 million, or about $46 million.
Krupp, the steel and engineering concern, is based in Essen, Germany. (Dow Jones) *
Lafarge S.A., a French building materials manufacturer, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a 50 percent stake in the Entegre unit of the ATA Construction Company of Turkey.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
Entegre produces 225,000 tons of gypsum and cement-based building materials annually at its plant in Istanbul, Turkey. (Bloomberg Business News)


Opening Era, Space Shuttle Is Launched
The space shuttle Atlantis blasted into orbit today with a crew of five Americans and two Russians on a historic mission to dock with the Russian Mir space station, a linkup meant to inaugurate a new era of East-West cooperation.
The docking is set for early Thursday and will kick off five days of joint research by 10 astronauts in a sprawling orbital complex made up of the 112-foot-long Mir and the 122-foot-long shuttle.
A winged American spaceship has never before docked with a Russian craft.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Scene-Stealing Cat Loses All 9 of Them  'Kitty Killer' Performance Space 122
Theater, too, has its silly season, and its annual summertime arrival has been signaled by Keith Levy's "Kitty Killer," a goofy, pop trash-compactor of a show.
This bumpy, amiably sordid chronicle of a show-business murder follows the crime and punishment of Sherry Vine (Mr. Levy), a nightclub entertainer of major ambition and minor talent who killed her long-time companion and performing partner, a cat named Kitty, with a candlestick.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the arrest of an off-duty police officer in the Bronx included an erroneous charge, supplied by the police, in some editions.
The officer, Sgt.
Raymond Brickley of the 46th Precinct, was charged with resisting arrest and menacing, not with obstructing governmental administration.


Baseball Seeks a Loophole for TV Talks
Major League Baseball's television committee is investigating how to legally initiate talks with Fox and CBS before October, said Bill Giles, the chairman of the five-man panel and owner of the Phillies.
The maneuvering comes less than a week after NBC and ABC angrily told baseball they will terminate their involvement in The Baseball Network after the 1995 season.
TBN is a joint venture to televise games and sell advertising.


Confederation Life Is Expected to Be Sued
The rehabilitator of the American branch of the failed Confederation Life Insurance Company of Toronto plans to file a lawsuit today that will assert that officers and directors of the company improperly removed $600 million from the branch, insurance executives said yesterday.
Confederation Life was Canada's fifth-largest life insurer and had assets in its American branch of $5.4 billion.
After Canadian regulators seized the company last year, regulators in the United States put the American branch into rehabilitation under the direction of Victor H. Palmieri, a corporate turnaround specialist.
Deborah Levy, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Palmieri, said yesterday that the lawsuit was to be filed but she declined to discuss its contents.


A Gay Wedding Guide
To The Living Section:
The article "Who's Offering Advice? Just About Everyone" (May 10) named 15 wedding guides covering a multitude of matrimonial variations.


Devils Rain on Own Parade by Terminating Lease
One day before the parade to celebrate their stunning four-game sweep to the Stanley Cup championship, the New Jersey Devils said yesterday that they will terminate their lease at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on July 6.
Within hours of being informed, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority asked the Chancery Division of Superior Court in Hackensack, N.J., for a restraining order to prevent the lease termination and a move by the franchise to Nashville.


U.N. Blue-Pencils Criticism of Members in Anniversary Book
A book commissioned by the United Nations to mark its 50th anniversary has created a commotion even before publication, not because of what it contains but because of what it omits.
Jonathan Power, the editor of the commemorative book, "A Vision of Hope," said no fewer than 70 cuts were made in the manuscript submitted to Gillian Martin Sorensen, the official in charge of coordinating the celebration of the United Nations anniversary.
All 15 writers who contributed to the book have asked that their names be removed from the chapters they wrote.


Reitmans (Canada) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Uproar Over Twins, and a Dutch Couple's Anguish
The Dutch couple, in their 30's, had tried to have a baby for more than five years.
Finally they turned to one of the most prestigious fertility clinics in the Netherlands.
They gave their sperm and eggs to white-coated technicians and the in vitro fertilization took place in March 1993.
The following December brought Teun and Koen, two healthy twin baby boys.


Hornets Reacquire Gill In Trade With Sonics
The Charlotte Hornets, looking to add scoring to their erratic backcourt, reacquired KENDALL GILL last night in a trade with the Seattle SuperSonics.
The Hornets sent the shooting guard HERSEY HAWKINS and the journeyman swingman DAVID WINGATE to the Sonics for Gill, whom Charlotte selected No. 5 over all in the 1990 draft.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about an agreement by the Rite Aid Corporation to buy 30 Pathmark drugstores misstated the surname of Rite Aid's chief executive.
He is Martin L. Grass, not Glass.


Hair and Fiber Used to Tie Simpson to Scene of Killings
Prosecutors took their first steps today to try to show how a collection of hair found on a ski cap near the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, along with hair and fiber found on a number of other items, implicate O. J. Simpson in the killings.
Susan Brockbank, a technician in the Los Angeles Police Department's special investigations division, testified that she saw 34 hairs -- some blond, some dark and some from an animal, presumably Mrs.
Simpson's dog -- on the blue knit cap picked up near the bloodied bodies.
The exact hair count is unclear; a hair and fiber specialist from the Federal Bureau of Investigation spotted 38, Ms.
Brockbank said.
That expert, who is expected to testify on Wednesday, is poised to say which hair belonged to whom or what, and which fiber came from where.


ShopKo Stores Inc.(SKO,N) reports earnings for 16wks to Jun 17


Helene Curtis Industries(HC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Unwarranted Student Drug Testing
By upholding routine, random drug testing for public school athletes, the Supreme Court has permitted a needless and dangerous relaxation of the Fourth Amendment's safeguard against unreasonable searches.
Although the 6-to-3 decision on Monday concerns only pupils who volunteer for interscholastic sports, its principle is not easily contained and invites school authorities across the country to consider schoolwide testing.
The Court held that a school district, once satisfied that there is a student drug problem, may test all athletes as a condition of participation in interscholastic sports.
Every applicant may be subjected to a special urinalysis at the start of the season and to random selection for repeated testing throughout the season.


Ernest T. S. Walton, 91, Irish Physicist, Dies
Ernest T. S. Walton, an Irish physicist who performed a crucial atom-smashing experiment in 1932 that ushered in a new era of nuclear research, died on Sunday at Belfast City Hospital in Northern Ireland.
He was 91.
Dr.
Walton and a colleague, John Douglas Cockcroft, shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951 for creating the first man-made machine for smashing atoms and using it in experiments from 1927 to 1932 at the Cavendish Laboratory of Cambridge University in England.


Judge Warns N.J. Transit Engineers Not to Strike
A Federal judge ordered New Jersey Transit's railroad engineers today not to carry out their threatened strike on Friday night.
She pledged that anyone defying the edict would face "swift and harsh penalties," though the union local refused afterward to retreat from its threat.
"There will be no strike," the judge, Maryanne Trump Barry, said as she granted New Jersey Transit a temporary restraining order.
"The trains will run. Anyone who violates this order had better have his toothbrush handy."


Pearl Jam Reinstates 3 of Its Concerts
First it was on, then it was off.
Now it's on again, or at least part of it is.
Pearl Jam, which announced on Sunday that it was canceling the remainder of its 15-date summer tour because of the difficulties of performing at locations that do not sell tickets through Ticketmaster, said yesterday that it would play three of the canceled dates.
They are July 8 and 9 at the Marcus Amphitheater in Milwaukee as part of the city's Summerfest and July 11 at Soldier Field in Chicago.
Concerts in five other cities west of Chicago remain canceled, a spokeswoman for the band said.
Band members were not available for comment, and neither Pearl Jam's publicity agency, Pyramid, nor its record label, Epic, had an explanation for the sudden change of plans.


Corrections
A sports picture caption in some editions on Sunday, about a Yankee at bat against Toronto, misidentified the player.
He was Wade Boggs, who hit a three-run double in the fourth inning, not Paul O'Neill.


Honoring an Auctioneer With a Benefit for AIDS
THE Sotheby's auctioneer, known for provocatively calling things as he saw them, sat in a wing chair, kibitzing at the auction that was being held in his honor to benefit organizations seeking to combat AIDS and help its victims.
"Can you believe this chair?" said Robert C. Woolley, Sotheby's director of decorative arts.
"I hate Americana." The complaint is the kind of thing that friends and acquaintances have come to expect from the 52-year-old esthete, who years ago threw another fund-raising party at which guests could come as "old friends" for $500, "new friends" for $250 or "acquaintances" for $100.


Henry Alonzo Keller, 87, Artist Of the Yankees' Top Hat Logo
Henry Alonzo Keller, an artist who created the top hat-on-the-bat emblem of the New York Yankees and designed thousands of program covers for football and baseball games, died on Monday in De Land, Fla.
He was 87.
Mr.
Keller, who was known as Lon, created the Yankee emblem just after World War II, when the Yankees and other teams began to rely more on advertising to lure a prosperous public suddenly free of the hardships of war.
The emblem first appeared on the 1947 spring training roster and was on the cover of the World Series program that year, when the Yankees met the Brooklyn Dodgers.


Skinhead Violence Is Worldwide and Growing, a Report Finds
What began in England two decades ago as random groups of violent youths with shaved heads who called themselves "skinheads" has grown into a worldwide movement of 70,000 people in more than 30 countries, a new report by the Anti-Defamation League has concluded.
The report, "The Skinhead International, a Worldwide Survey of Neo-Nazi Skinheads," found that by espousing a crude form of Nazism and white supremacy, these groups have become one of the world's most violent right-wing forces; in the United States they have been responsible for 31 killings in the last five years.


Tapes Depict Burger in Judicial Unrestraint
To the Editor:
Former Chief Justice Warren E. Burger (obituary, June 26) will be remembered, among other things, for ruling that President Nixon had to relinquish the Watergate tapes.
Those tapes shed a damning light on Mr.
Burger's own ethical standards.


CUNY Change on Admissions Results in Dismay and Approval
One day after the City University of New York tightened admissions standards at its four-year colleges, education experts around the city greeted the change with a mixture of praise and concern.
The university will no longer accept students at its senior colleges who are judged to be unable to complete all remedial work as freshmen.
And while some applauded the move as a more efficient way to use resources and to serve students, others feared the university might be abandoning its legacy of serving the poor.


Two Fixable Bills on H.M.O.'s
The New York State Legislature plans to vote this week on two bills that Gov.
George Pataki has proposed to change the state's rules governing health maintenance organizations, the rapidly growing health plans that provide medical benefits through networks of physicians.
The two bills are flawed but fundamentally worthy.
With a few fixes, each deserves to be passed.
The first bill would require health maintenance organizations to offer a comprehensive package of benefits to customers -- many of whom are chronically ill -- who sign up as individuals rather than as members of group insurance plans.
The idea is to give these vulnerable customers the choice of leaving Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which is currently the only plan that offers individuals drug and other expensive benefits.


Agassi Leads Classy Field; Stich Prone To Errors
On a bright, breezy and busy day when seven former champions reappeared on the lawns of Wimbledon, top-seeded Andre Agassi, who rendered the place a pushover with his Grand Slam breakthrough in 1992, remained the darling of this tournament.
But ninth-seeded Michael Stich, who captured his first and only Grand Slam singles title here in 1991, reprised last year's role as its opening-round dunce.
Outhustled in every department by 30th-ranked Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, Stich lost after he stuttered through the second set's tie breaker bereft of his mandatory weapon, the first serve.
The German was thoroughly disgusted by his desultory 6-4, 7-6 (7-3), 6-1 exit on Center Court.


CHRONICLE
About 300 New York City schoolchildren will converge on Riverbank State Park in Harlem this morning for the city's first Police Department Youth Olympics.
Third, fourth and fifth graders will compete in relay races, basketball and other athletic events.


Raiders Still Face Obstacles On Their Road to Oakland
Now that Al Davis has decided to move the Raiders from Los Angeles to Oakland, Calif., the fun of jumping political and logistical hurdles will begin in earnest.
One of the largest obstacles will come in Chicago on July 10, when 23 of the National Football League's 30 owners must approve the proposed move.
The Raiders approached the first hurdle last night when the Oakland City Council took up the issue of whether to approve an $85 million bond issue to help finance renovations to the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum -- the team's home before it left for Los Angeles 13 years ago.
The renovations include expanding the stadium's capacity to 65,000 by adding 9,000 club seats and 175 luxury suites.
Another $500,000 will be used to build the Raiders a training facility in Oakland.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Performing Tribute To a Versatile Legend  Alpha Omega Theatrical Dance Company Marymount Manhattan Theater
The Alpha Omega Theatrical Dance Company paid tribute to a "living legend" at Marymount Manhattan Theater on Saturday night.
The honoree was the modern-dance choreographer George Faison, who has also won a Tony Award for his work on Broadway.
But the program also celebrated the kind of vibrant dramatic dance that Mr.
Faison and Eleo Pomare, another legendary sort on the program, helped to shape and refine in the 1960's and 70's.


The Americans Invade Henley
The Henley Royal Regatta, the oldest and most famous rowing event, begins Wednesday on the Thames where it started in 1839.
In recent years, it has taken on a distinctly American accent.
This year's 43 entries from the United States is a record.


With Picnic Blankets Unfurled; Mondo Alfresco: International Cornucopias
IS it the air?
The informality?
Anthropologists who have analyzed the allure of picnics suggest that they awaken in us an instinctive yearning for primeval innocence.
"Fresh air and natural beauty, adventure, no cooking and no tables and chairs -- a good picnic is a thrilling reversal of normal rules," wrote Margaret Visser, a Canadian author, in her book "The Rituals of Dinner." This rule-reversal may be the fun: as Mrs.
Visser said, picnics come with "the freedom we grant ourselves to lounge about on a blanket eating cold food with our hands."


To Preserve Afrikaners' Language, Mixed-Race South Africans Join Fray
Peter Marais worries as much about the future of Afrikaans in the new South Africa as the next guy.
But the next guy is likely an Afrikaner, a member of the white tribe that ruled South Africa until last year and forced its language on a dark-skinned majority.
Mr.
Marais is part of that abused majority, a man of mixed race.
"I'm a great advocate for the protection and guarding of Afrikaans as an official language," said Mr.
Marais, the minister of local government for the Western Cape province in southwestern South Africa.
"The colored people don't consider Afrikaans to belong to the white man. We believe it's our language, which the white man stole from us."


Despite Ruling, Wide Drug Testing of Students Is Not Foreseen
Although the Supreme Court has ruled that public schools can require student athletes to submit to random drug tests as a condition of playing, educators say that as a practical matter such tests are not likely to become widespread any time soon.
"I'm pretty sure there won't be mass testing across the country," said Gwendolyn Gregory, a lawyer for the National School Boards Association.
"School administrators are concerned that they will feel more pressure to do testing, but they know it's very costly, and creates a lot of administrative problems. Urine testing is something you've got to do right or you're in worse shape than you were before. You don't want to confront the wrong kid because the samples got mixed up."


Better Odds For Healing
DATA from grafts done in cosmetic surgery show that in simple wounds, the cultured skin from Organogenesis, like the patient's own skin, "takes" -- remaining in place and continuing to grow -- nearly 100 percent of the time, said Dr.
Michael Sabolinski, medical director of the company.
In wounds that are very difficult to heal, both natural skin and cultured skin take about 20 percent of the time after one application, and the success rate increases with multiple attempts.


Personal Health; Preventing birth defects even before pregnancy.
IT is common for women to start paying serious attention to their health and nutrition once they know they are pregnant.
Even women with the worst habits -- eating haphazardly, smoking cigarettes, overindulging in alcohol, abusing drugs -- often clean up their acts when they realize that they are eating and living for two, and one of the two is completely at the other's mercy.
But in recent years, a lot of new information has been gathered about the relationship between living habits before pregnancy and problems like miscarriage, birth defects, low birth weight and premature infants.
As a result, there is now a new focus on all women of childbearing age.


Sports of The Times; No Cause, No Testing For Drugs
"IF someone is going to jump off a bridge, does that mean that I have to jump off a bridge, too?" asked Rosa Lopez.
"Oh, no!"
Rosa Lopez is a 15-year-old sophomore at the Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan.


I.B.M. to Put Music on Line
I.B.M. will help EMI Music Publishing, a unit of Thorn EMI, make a portion of its vast music library available on line to production companies and advertising agencies around the world, the two companies are expected to announce today.
An International Business Machines executive declined yesterday to disclose the terms of the deal, but he said that one benefit would be to increase traffic on the I.B.M. worldwide telecommunications network, which serves large corporations and extends to more than 50 countries.
Recently, I.B.M. has been searching for ways to make the network, one of the largest in the world, produce more income.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 23
June 16
June 24
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
8.0
7.7
7.7
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
208.6
210.5
217.4
Distillate stocks
115.9
116.9
116.6
Crude imports, daily
6.8
8.8
7.6
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.7
1.9
Crude stocks
318.9
325.1
327.4
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
96.6
95.5
96.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


With Picnic Blankets Unfurled; Feasts of July And Memories Of an Army Chef
BEING a French-born American citizen, I have two national holidays to celebrate this month -- the Fourth of July and, 10 days later, Bastille Day.
Both will mean a picnic on the beach at my home on eastern Long Island.
For me, the July 4 holiday has more immediacy, since I have spent most of the last half century as an American, including three years in the United States Army during World War II.
Part of that time was spent in the Army's cooking school, from which I was expelled (I'll get to that later).


For Japan Auto Makers, It's Tougher in Europe
Switzerland's difference from the rest of Europe is clear in a Japanese car showroom here.
At Rolf Wirnsberger's dealership, a smart little two-door Mitsubishi Colt sells for a little less than $14,000, about $7,000 less than a comparable car, say, a Volkswagen Golf.
In Switzerland, the Colt sells relatively well.
Not so in Europe's largest auto markets -- Germany, France and Italy, which have effectively limited the sales of Japanese imports.


7 Wounded in Gun Battle On Busy Street in Brooklyn
Seven people were shot yesterday afternoon in a gun battle along a busy Brooklyn street that left a teen-ager near death.
It began, the police said, when one young man said something disrespectful about another youth's mother.
One eyewitness said, however, that the battle in Bedford-Stuyvesant began as a "fair fight" between two youths, after which the mother of one of the youths rounded up several of his friends to seek revenge.


Tartlets, Redefined
For the last five years, Maury Rubin, the owner of City Bakery, on East 17th Street, has been redefining the fruit-and-custard tartlet with geometric designs and unusual combinations.
Now, in "Book of Tarts" (William Morrow, $25), Mr.
Rubin explains his techniques and how he grew up loving Pop-Tarts and then had a culinary epiphany that led him to quit his job at ABC and go to France to learn to make pastry.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR BLOCKED ON SALE OF WATER SYSTEM
In a sharp rebuke of Mayor Giuliani's budget strategy, the city's Comptroller announced that he would block a plan to sell New York City's water system to a quasi-independent public agency.
He called the $2.3 billion deal a "fiscal gimmick."  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY


House Investigators Visit Texas To Prepare for Waco Hearings
A bipartisan delegation of six House staff members completed a field trip to Texas today in preparation for hearings next month into the two Federal raids on the Branch Davidian sect's compound there in 1993.
The hearings, originally set for the week of July 11, have been pushed back a week, in part because of scheduling conflicts with other House business but also to allow for additional fact-finding.


Hosts Greet Athletes Seeking Olympic Gold
Christopher Marriot, a 15-year-old from Zimbabwe, left his home near Bulawayo last Wednesday for an international adventure that landed him at a place of exquisite foreignness: Ken Robinson's house in suburban Connecticut, just in time for Sunday dinner.
Mr.
Robinson hung a Zimbabwean flag from his front porch and served lasagna and Italian bread, which he tore into large chunks and tossed on the dinner plates as Christopher watched, his eyes wide.


Voters Spurn a Tax Rise In Orange County Crisis
Orange County voters today soundly rejected a half-cent increase in the sales tax to help bail their government out of bankruptcy, increasing worries about how the county would pay its debts and avoid drastic cuts in its schools and municipal services.
With 60 percent of the vote running against the measure after a third of the precincts were counted, backers conceded that they had failed.


Cable and Wireless To Sell German Holding
Cable and Wireless P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it planned to sell a 5 percent stake in a German cellular phone company as part of a plan to create a Europe-wide mobile phone network with a German partner, Veba A.G.
Analysts said the stake in Mannesmann Mobilfunk G.m.b.H., a subsidiary of Mannesmann A.G., could be worth about $:200 million ($317 million).


Package Explodes in Pregnant Woman's Lap
A package bomb mailed to a Queens address exploded in the lap of an 18-year-old pregnant woman yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The victim, Denise Gaffney, and her 8-month-old fetus escaped serious injury when two bullets that fired when the package was opened missed them.
Ms.
Gaffney was taken to Jamaica Hospital, where she was reported in good condition.


Fatal Flooding in Virginia


House Unit Seeks to Soften Rule on Poor-Area Bank Loans
The House Banking Committee approved a measure today that would eliminate most enforcement of the Federal law that requires banks to lend in poor neighborhoods as well as rich ones.
Conservative Republicans forced through the amendment to a bank deregulation bill on a party-line vote of 25 to 17.
They argued that the measure would reduce the regulatory burden on banks by making enforcement procedures more efficient.


In America; Riding To Freedom
It was an old gag, and so corny it would make you groan.
The evil white restaurant owner in the heyday of the civil rights movement would announce defiantly: "We don't serve Negroes here!" And the leader of the well-mannered sit-in contingent would reply amiably: "That's all right. We don't eat them."
When James Farmer would tell that story he would throw his head back and erupt in a sonic boom of laughter.
You couldn't help but laugh with him.
You had no choice.


English-Language Teaching Deserves Its Due
To the Editor:
"Remedial Education at CUNY" (editorial, June 23) insightfully points out that English language skills will always be needed for foreign students whose valuable talents we wish to tap.
Less insightful is the use of "remediation" to describe the teaching of English as a second language.


No Headline
"We were in Europe, and now we are in the mud. I don't even think about this ending anymore. I'm just happy if my tomatoes grow." DARKO SLJIVIC, a former bank executive who lives near Sarajevo.  [ A8:2. ]


Bill Seeks 2-Day Maternity Stay
Seeking to give all Americans the protections embodied in a bill passed in Trenton, United States Senator Bill Bradley introduced a bill yesterday to insure minimum hospital stays for newborns and their mothers.


Mayor Blocked On Bid to Sell Water System
In a sharp rebuke of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget strategy, the city's Comptroller announced yesterday that he would block a plan to sell New York City's water system to a quasi-independent public agency.
He called the $2.3 billion deal a "fiscal gimmick" fraught with future risks and costs.
By blocking the sale, the Comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, appeared to kill the city's plans to use $400 million in proceeds from the sale to pay for a variety of construction projects this year -- half of it for repairs on the city's crumbling schools.


Foreign Affairs; Dust Off the SEATO Charter
The foreign policy establishment is currently wrapped up in a mind-numbing debate about whether NATO should be enlarged.
But if you think about it, the more urgent question for American foreign policy is whether SEATO should be revived.
Yes, you remember SEATO -- the "Southeast Asia Treaty Organization." Formed in 1954 by the Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, Britain, France and the U.S., it aimed to deter China and the spread of Communism in Asia.
SEATO was terminated in 1977, after the Vietnam war, leaving no trace outside of trivia quiz shows.


St. Petersburg Journal; If Poet's Room Could Speak, It Would Tell of Grief
In the diffuse, almost endless light of summer, it is hard to regard this city as a place of suffering.
Few people could gaze at the noble mansions and monuments and easily summon thoughts of despair.
In many ways St.
Petersburg has, since its creation, always been the spiritual center of the country, the center of science, sophistication, culture and art.
But for the last century and a half, culture has often been at war with Russia.
Pushkin died here in a foolish duel and Dostoyevsky was once taken from the city in chains.
Osip Mandelstam, one of Pushkin's heirs, was destroyed by Stalin.


Cellstar Corp.(CLST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Former Black Studies Head Vows to Press Court Appeal
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, whose long and tumultuous chairmanship of City College's Black Studies Department will end this week, said today that he would press his three-year legal battle against the college to the United States Supreme Court.
The day after the City University of New York's Board of Trustees approved the department's choice of his successor, Dr.
Jeffries, in a seemingly relaxed and talkative frame of mind outside his home here, explained his decision not to seek renewal of his three-year appointment as chairman.


Just Not Right
To The Living Section:
If the worst thing that ever happens to Jeremy Dorosin ("Customer Is Always Right, Right?" June 14) is having Starbucks Coffee Company send his friend a defective espresso machine and then amend its mistake by sending two new machines, coffee, a steaming pitcher, condiment shakers, cups and saucers and a $30 refund plus letters of apology, he is a very lucky man indeed.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.(BQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Simulated Game Big in Key's Future
With his left shoulder ailing and his mind filled with doubt, Jimmy Key will try to salvage his season by attempting to pitch in a simulated game Friday in Tampa, Fla.
Two days ago, Key lasted fewer than 10 pitches in a scheduled 60-pitch session before quitting because of severe pain.
Key's latest setback had the Yankees privately muttering that surgery was a possibility and Key telling them that he would like to make a quick decision because he did not want to interfere with next season.
The 34-year-old left-hander is in the third year of a four-year, $17 million contract.


With Money Threatened, Colleges Are Moving on All Lobbying Fronts
When Nannerl O. Keohane, the president of Duke University, recently visited Representative Richard A. Gephardt to seek his help in warding off proposed cuts in Federal support for university research, she was careful to say something nice about Matt.
Matt, who graduated from Duke two years ago, is the oldest son of Mr.
Gephardt, the House minority leader.


Haiti Leader Hails Election As Major Step
Brushing aside complaints that irregularities at the polls and in the counting of ballots made Sunday's election here so flawed that it cannot be accepted as valid, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide today described the vote as "a major step toward democracy for my country" and said its results would stand.
"The Haitian people demonstrated that they wanted to vote, and they did," Mr.
Aristide said during an interview this afternoon with a small group of American reporters in his office at the National Palace.
He promised that the second round of the vote would take place on July 23 as scheduled, and said Sunday's confusion was no reason to postpone or cancel the presidential election scheduled for December to choose his successor.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER REEVE is to be moved this week from the hospital in Virginia where he has been recuperating from a broken neck and spinal-cord injury since May 27.
"The family is making final arrangements for his release," said Marguerite Beck, a spokeswoman for the University of Virginia Medical Center in Charlottesville.
She added that they requested that no additional details be given out "until the move is complete."


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Some of This, Some of That,  With Possible Roots in Gospel  What Is Jazz?
Knitting Factory
The last 20 minutes of the drummer Gerry Hemingway's set at the Knitting Factory on Sunday night went from free improvisation to a pacific tune that might, some decades ago, have had its roots in gospel music.
Mr.
Hemingway's quartet, performing blissfully unamplified, featured the saxophonist and clarinetist Michael Moore.
Mr.
Moore showed that he had an easy way with a phrase, relaxed and a bit bluesy.
And he has a round, tight tone.


Yanks Turn To Untried But True
The Yankees gave the baseball last night to a pitcher who had not started a game in more than four years.
Their first reliever did not even play in the major leagues last season.
The player who knocked in their first run has 40 runs batted in -- in his career.
And the closer collected his first major league save.
Is this a winning strategy?


Stride Rite Corp.(SRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 2


To Preserve Afrikaners' Language, Mixed-Race South Africans Join Fray
Peter Marais worries as much about the future of Afrikaans in the new South Africa as the next guy.
But the next guy is likely an Afrikaner, a member of the white tribe that ruled South Africa until last year and forced its language on a dark-skinned majority.
Mr.
Marais is part of that abused majority, a man of mixed race.
"I'm a great advocate for the protection and guarding of Afrikaans as an official language," said Mr.
Marais, the minister of local government for the Western Cape province in southwestern South Africa.
"The colored people don't consider Afrikaans to belong to the white man. We believe it's our language, which the white man stole from us."


Strawberry Doesn't Take Minors by Storm
Kevin Bradshaw, manager of Detroit's rookie team in the Gulf Coast League, said that Lakeland's 4-2 victory today over the Tampa Yankees was just another game as far as his players were concerned.
That Darryl Strawberry, signed as a free agent by the Yankees on June 19, was making his 1995 debut with Tampa had little impact on the Lakeland players.


CHRONICLE
The British actor HUGH GRANT was arrested in Los Angeles early yesterday morning and charged with having sex with a prostitute in his car, a police spokeswoman said.
Mr.
Grant, the star of "Four Weddings and a Funeral," was booked on suspicion of lewd conduct and released on his own recognizance, as was the woman, identified as DIVINE BROWN, 23.
Both were ordered to appear in court on July 18.


Testing for Drugs Set at Wimbledon
The International Tennis Federation announced today that it would conduct anti-doping tests throughout the duration of the Wimbledon tournament.
The testing will be randomly administered during the first week of competition, but from the quarterfinals on, all players in contention will be tested at least once.
In all, the federation expects to test about 100 players.
Any player who refuses to be tested will be publicly suspended.


Anti-Semitic Remarks
To the Editor:
Re the anti-Semitic remarks of the Rev.
Henryk Jankowski, a Polish priest (news article, June 22):


Judge Links Test Scores To Poverty
Expanding on a ruling he issued in April, a state judge said today that poverty, not segregation, was the cause of the poor performance of students in the Hartford schools.
The finding came in a lawsuit seeking to integrate the city's schools with those of its suburbs -- a case that has already been appealed to the State Supreme Court.


Of Politics, Principle and Gun Control
The White House unconvincingly insists that President Clinton's appearance in paid television advertisements that debuted this week has nothing to do with politics.
The get-tough-on-crime spots, financed by the Clinton-Gore re-election treasury, are clearly calculated to establish Mr.
Clinton's credentials on an issue usually owned by the Republicans.
The advertisements are to run in 20 cities whose television markets cover a series of swing states for the 1996 election.
Further proof of the political nature of the commercials is Mr.
Clinton's unfortunate invocation of support for the increased death penalty provisions in the recent crime bill.
But the main message of the ads is that Mr.
Clinton is going to fight to preserve the ban on assault weapons, and for all the White House hedging about its political tactics, the President is right on the substance of this issue.
Nor is Mr.
Clinton the first to play campaign politics with this subject.
Senator Bob Dole is surely up to the same game when he promises to repeal the assault weapons ban as a favor to the National Rifle Association and like-minded voters.


Corrections
The Home Video column in Weekend on Friday misstated Amir Ma lin's position at October Films.
He is a co-managing executive, with John Schmidt and Bingham Ray.
The company does not have a president.


Efficient Pollution Rule Under Attack
Senators attacking Federal regulations have taken aim at what would seem to be one of the least burdensome but most effective of environmental rules: a requirement that manufacturers disclose how much they pollute.
Senators J. Bennett Johnston, Democrat of Louisiana, and Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi, are trying to narrow the program that costs little besides paperwork and requires no specific pollution controls but that has spurred industry to reduce emissions of toxic chemicals voluntarily by billions of pounds a year.


Jets Issue a Release, This Time to Johnson
With his salary bordering on the outrageous, the 27-year-old Johnny Johnson suddenly looked much older to the Jets.
And so the running back, whose style and salary were out of sync with Coach Rich Kotite's vision of the Jets, yesterday became the 10th regular from last season's roster to be given his walking papers or allowed to leave by the new regime.


James F. Greene, 80; Helped to Broaden Immigration Service
James F. Greene Sr., a Deputy Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in the 1970's, died on Sunday at the Vantage House Retirement Center in Columbia, Md.
He was 80.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Washington Memo; Drive for Block Grants Pitting State Against State
A new battle between the states is brewing on Capitol Hill, transcending the forces of partisanship and ideology.
It is fueled by the most primal of forces: the desire of 50 intensely competitive states to get their fair share -- at the very least -- of the Federal pie.
Republican leaders hoped to avoid it.
But by seeking to replace some basic antipoverty programs with limited lump-sum payments to the states, they have started a formula fight, the most dreaded of legislative struggles.


So What If Some Haven't Heard Of Him
John Schlesinger says he doesn't mind one bit that he often meets younger movie executives who have never heard of him or, worse yet, of his films of the 1960's and 70's, "Billy Liar," "Darling," "Sunday, Bloody Sunday" or "Midnight Cowboy," which won the Academy Award for best film of 1969 and the directing Oscar for Mr.
Schlesinger.


'Spider Woman' to Close
"Kiss of the Spider Woman," a musical based on the novel by Manuel Puig, with a book by Terrence McNally, music by John Kander and lyrics by Fred Ebb, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The evening performance of the play, directed by Harold Prince and starring Maria Conchita Alonso, will be its 906th regular performance; it had 16 previews.


Electoral Trial and Error in Haiti
Haiti's parliamentary and local elections, the first nationwide voting since the end of military rule, were badly marred by questionable rulings on candidate eligibility, careless handling of ballots and the reported killing of a legislative candidate.
Organizational chaos also barred more than a hundred thousand eligible voters from the polls.
Some candidates who ran against President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's Lavalas slate allege the vote count is being rigged against them.
Independent observers are uneasy about an election that could leave the new Parliament's legitimacy open to challenge.
A number of longtime campaigners for Haitian democracy are now calling for the election to be annulled and completely rerun.
Repeating some individual contests may prove necessary.
But unless later information shows more systematic irregularities than are now evident, it would be better to move ahead, learning from this election's shortcomings so that next month's runoffs and December's presidential vote will not be similarly flawed.


Strike?


Kerkorian Offer Clears a Hurdle
The tender offer by Kirk Kerkorian for up to 14 million shares of the Chrysler Corporation cleared a significant hurdle yesterday.
Insurance regulators in Michigan ruled yesterday that a law that might have delayed the offer was not applicable.
Under the law, an investor who seeks to purchase more than 10 percent of an insurance company with operations in Michigan must first be judged to be fit by the insurance commissioner.


English-Language Teaching Deserves Its Due; New Examiners' Board
To the Editor:
There is a significant juxtaposition between your editorial "Remedial Education at CUNY" and Harris L. Present's letter (both June 23).


Viacom to Pay Shareholders Of Paramount
Tired of dealing with arbitragers, Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it would pay investors a total of $83 million for securities issued to shareholders of Paramount Communications when Viacom acquired it last year.
The securities, called contingent value rights, or C.V.R.'s, will be purchased for $1.44 a right on July 7, although the price could fluctuate slightly based on the performance of Viacom's class B shares.
About 57 million C.V.R.'s are outstanding.


A General and His Cat Fly First Class, Air Force Style
Last September, Gen.
Joseph W. Ashy, an aide and the Ashy family cat stepped aboard a 200-seat Air Force C-141 for a 14-hour flight from Italy to Colorado that would cost the Government $116,000.
Had General Ashy waited one day, he could have flown commercially for $650.


Couple Feared Lost in Woods
The police say it is increasingly likely that the 1992 Buick Regal belonging to an elderly Teaneck couple who were last seen two weeks ago veered off the road in upstate New York and may be hidden by dense woods.


An Early Flood Of Users Is Seen For Microsoft's On-Line Service
How popular will the Microsoft Corporation's new on-line service be?
That is a question Microsoft's rivals, the Justice Department and many others are asking these days.
To help find an answer, the Government has looked to a small private firm in Atlanta, Pipeline Communications Inc.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Mike LaValliere, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Chris Tremie, catcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Anthony Young, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 23.
Purchased the contract of Rich Garces, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
Midwest League
BURLINGTON BEES -- Announced Cory Lintern, pitcher, and Eric Dantzler, outfielder, have been assigned from Bellingham of the Northwest League.
Northern League
SIOUX CITY EXPLORERS -- Signed Mark Merchant, outfielder.
Released Ricky Farley, outfielder.
SIOUX FALLS CANARIES -- Signed Eduardo Lantigua, infielder-outfielder.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Named Jerry Powell assistant coach.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Traded the eighth pick in the 1995 draft to the Portland Trail Blazers for the 18th, 19th and 58th picks.
Football  National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Blaise Winter and Shannon Clavelle, defensive ends, and Justin Armour, wide receiver.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Jeremy Patterson, wide receiver.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Dave Wohlabaugh, offensive lineman, and Carlos Yancy, cornerback.
NEW YORK JETS -- Released Johnny Johnson, running back.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Ken Moyer and Howard Smothers, offensive linemen, and Fred McCrary, fullback.
Canadian Football League
BALTIMORE -- Added Dan Crowley, quarterback, to the roster.
Released Keith Ballard, tackle.
MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Placed Marckarthur Johnson, defensive end, on the injured list.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Added Jed Tommy, fullback, to the roster.
Traded Darren Joseph, running back, to Saskatchewan for Chirs Burns, tackle.
SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Placed Ephesians Bartley, linebacker, on the injured list.
Added Kenny Neal, wide receiver, to the roster.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Added Brian Randall and Hency Charles, defensive backs; John Hood, running back; Timothy Broady, linebacker; Greg Fournier, offensive lineman; Reggie Brown, wide receiver; and Timothy Edwards, defensive tackle, to the practice squad.
Announced Gene Makowsky, offensive lineman, has rejoined the team.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Placed Steve Brannon, defensive tackle, and Peter Miller, linebacker, on the reserve list.
Placed Carlos Fowler, defensive tackle, and Bob Kronenberg, guard, on the injured list.
Claimed Greg Eaglin, defensive back, and Marquel Fleetwood, quarterback, off waivers.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Added Shawn Collins, wide receiver; Bill McCollins, defensive end; Colin Scrivener, tackle; and Kevin Williams, linebacker, to the roster.
Activated Brendan Rogers, linebacker, from the reserve list.
Placed Jamie Holland, wide receiver, and Ed Kucy, tackle, on the reserve list.
Arena Football League
CONNECTICUT COYOTES -- Waived Tom Fuhler and Eric Hayes, linemen, and Mike Morris, wide receiver.
LAS VEGAS STING -- Suspended Dmitri Markham, defensive specialist.
ST.
LOUIS STAMPEDE -- Announced the retirement of Vince Lobendahn, lineman.
Hockey  National Hockey League
BUFFALO SABRES -- Named Doug McKenney strength and conditioning coach.
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Darcy Wakaluk, goaltender, to a one-year contract.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Signed Ruslan Batyrshin, defenseman, to a three-year contract.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Named Howard Baldwin Jr. assistant to the president.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Agreed to share Worcester of the AHL as a minor-league affiliate with the New York Islanders.


Guatemalan Held in Document Sale in New York
The wife of the president of Guatemala's national archive was arrested in Manhattan last week and charged with selling 16th-century manuscripts and other rare documents that had been stolen from the collection and then sold to a New York gallery.
The General Archive of Central America, in Guatemala City, is equivalent to the National Archives in Washington in that it holds important national documents, prosecutors and academics said yesterday.
The archive holds a large collection of original documents from the Central American colonial period and is considered among the finest of its kind in Latin America.


It's First Class, All the Way to Atlanta
Roger Kingdom walked into Pittsburgh International Airport on Monday trailing two bags, his 4-year-old daughter, Jierra, and invitations to five track meets in Europe.
The man who won gold medals in the 110-meter hurdles at the 1984 and 1988 Summer Olympics was back in demand, if not yet back in first class.
One year ago, European promoters were saying, "Sorry, we're booked," as if their meets were oversold flights.
Few wanted a hobbled former champion, one past his 30th birthday and apparently long past his prime, a hurdler who had blown out his right knee in 1991 and now suffered from arthritis as acutely as he suffered from being forgotten.


U.S. Awards Housing Grants
The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency yesterday announced the allocation of $9 million in Federal low-income tax credits to 17 projects in 10 municipalities around the state.
Big winners included Trenton, the only city with multiple awards, where eight projects got a total of $2.7 million; Paterson, $1.25 million; Roxbury, $1 million; Camden, $850,000; and Wharton, $823,000.
The credits are sold to private investors to raise cash for construction.
TERRY PRISTIN


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $100 million of debentures due in 2005 through Morgan Stanley.
Callable in three years, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.13 percent.
Common


U.S. OFFICIALS SAY JAPAN EASES A BIT ON TRADE STANCE
As American sanctions loomed against Japanese luxury cars, Japan's Trade Minister showed new willingness to expand foreign access to the Japanese automotive market, American officials said early this morning.
But it was not clear whether Tokyo would offer enough to persuade President Clinton to call off the 100 percent tariffs that are set to take effect within 24 hours.
The sudden flexibility by the Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industry, Ryutaro Hashimoto, clearly took American officials by surprise.
Mr.
Hashimoto and Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, met three times on Tuesday, ending their final session at 1:45 this morning.
A Japanese official said the negotiators planned to meet again late this morning.


Patterson Is Confirmed
The New York State Senate yesterday unanimously confirmed the former heavyweight boxing champion FLOYD PATTERSON as the state athletic commissioner.
Patterson, a former Olympic gold medal winner and the world heavyweight champion from 1956-59 and from 1960-62, is replacing RANDY GORDON, who was fired this month by Gov.
GEORGE E. PATAKI. (AP)


Students Linked to Racism
Two Jewish students were banned from graduation ceremonies yesterday at Midwood High School in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn after they were linked to a yearbook advertisement construed as anti-Semitic and anti-black.
The matter was reported to school administrators on June 19, said John H. Beckman, a spokesman for Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.


Guards at Mall Escape Flogging Indictment
A Dallas County grand jury today declined to indict four mall security guards and their leader who were arrested after four youths suspected of theft were stripped and flogged.
The police had charged the guards, members of the Nation of Islam, and the group's local leader, Jeffrey Muhammad, with aggravated kidnapping, saying they had taken the law into their own hands.


Rapid Developments at the State House


Food Notes
A Taste From Wine Retailers
The New York chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food, an educational organization, is holding its annual summer wine tasting on July 10 from 6 to 8:30 P.M. at the Marriott Marquis, 45th Street and Broadway.
More than a dozen retailers will pour about 200 wines, and there will be food from more than 30 restaurants and shops.
Tickets, $25 for members, who will be admitted an hour earlier, and $35 for nonmembers, can be reserved at (212) 744-0465.
What's New in Chocolate Yogurts
Nabisco has entered the dairy case with with an array of chocolate yogurts, part of its Snackwell's line of nonfat foods.
The yogurts, selling for 79 cents to 89 cents for six ounces, are shiny, smooth and dark, with no acid tang.
They are more like chocolate pudding than yogurts (some have fruit as well) and have a somewhat starchy quality.
Though it is fat free, a container has 190 calories.
A spokeswoman said it was made with live cultures but added that in the manufacturing process, "they die." Foie Gras Sale
Through July 20, Paprikas Weiss, 1572 Second Avenue (near 82d Street), has reduced its prices on tinned French foie gras and pates by 30 percent.
Prices that were $4 to $160 are now $2.80 to $112.
Vegetarian Guide
A guide to vegetarian restaurants has been published by the nonprofit Vegetarian Resource Group.
Called "Vegetarian Journal's Guide to Natural Foods Restaurants in the U.S. and Canada," the 296-page book lists about 2,000 restaurants as well as vegetarian-friendly resorts and tour companies.
The guide, $14 including postage, can be ordered from the organization at P.O.
Box 1463, Baltimore 21203; (410) 366-8343.
A Party Expands
A party will start at noon on July 16 at Clinton Vineyards, Schultzville Road, Clinton Corners, N.Y., to celebrate the release of the vineyard's 1994 seyval blanc.
Ben Feder, the owner, who in the past has held the party just for friends, has opened the lunch to the public this year.
The cost is $25, and reservations can be made no later than July 5, at (914) 266-5372.
Food With Entertainment
A German comic extravaganza called Pomp Duck and Circumstance that combines performances (in English by an international troupe of jugglers, acrobats, musicians and singers) with dinner (chefs and waiters from 24 countries) opens in New York on Oct. 2 for a six-month run.
It will take place under an elegant mirrored tent in De Witt Clinton Park, 53d Street and 11th Avenue.
Tickets, $150 (including dinner but not drinks), are available through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-4100.
Off the Menu  A Touch of Brooklyn
Today, Sheldon Fireman, who was born in the Bronx but has strong ties to Brooklyn, is opening the Brooklyn Diner in Manhattan, at 212 West 57th Street.
It has all the visual references one would expect from a diner, like railroad-car windows, booths, glass brick and stainless steel -- and there's a mural of Ebbets Field.
Mr.
Fireman, who also owns Trattoria dell'Arte, among other restaurants, said that unlike most theme places on 57th Street, Brooklyn Diner's focus is the food, a melange that includes matzoh brei, hummus and chicken cacciatore.
"I'm still resisting the idea of selling T-shirts," he said.
Ribs, a Little Late
Stick to Your Ribs has finally opened on the Upper West Side, at 433 Amsterdam Avenue (81st Street) -- six months behind schedule.
It already has that tantalizing aroma of a barbecue joint, without the grease on the tin ceiling.
It is the first branch for the Texas-style barbecue place in Long Island City, Queens.
It was started by Robert Pearson but is now a partnership with Marshall Cogan and Fred Marcus (the owners of "21") and Ellen Goldberg.
Mr.
Pearson said the meats come from Long Island City 90 percent cooked and are finished in the wood-burning smoker on the premises.
Barbecued ribs, brisket, pork and other meats come in sandwiches (usually $6.95) or as plates and are also sold by weight (most are $14 a pound).
More Room to Barbecue
Also on the barbecue front, Brothers Bar-B-Que, 228 West Houston Street, will be moving across the street in the fall to 231 Varick Street.
Simon Oren, the managing partner, says the move will enable him to double the number of seats without doubling the rent.
Tea Aboard the Peking
T, the tea salon and restaurant in SoHo, has started selling boxed lunches with tea sandwiches, other light food, desserts and drinks from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. on board the Peking, a historic ship docked at Pier 17 in the South Street Seaport.
The food will be available daily through Oct. 10, including on Fourth of July during the fireworks.
Mediterranean Fragrances
In three weeks, Matthew Kenney, chef and co-owner of Matthew's, at 61st Street and Third Avenue, will open Bar Anise, an informal restaurant, half a block south, at 1022 Third Avenue.
His partner, Selim Jacobs, owns Sajo, a cafe now in the space.
Fragrantly spiced food and a blue-and-white decor will take their cues from the Mediterranean.
The cafe will be open until 2 A.M. daily, and it would be no surprise if it became an uptown hangout for chefs.


Justic Dept. Forces Changes In Law School Accreditation
The Government moved today to limit the power of law school professors to use the American Bar Association's accrediting process to increase salaries and fringe benefits and ease workloads at the nation's law schools.
Under pressure from the Justice Department's antitrust division, the A.B.A. agreed to change the way it bestows approval on law schools, a cumbersome and costly process that critics say has helped drive up tuitions for the 174 institutions that now have A.B.A. sanction.


AT WORK WITH: Nach Waxman; Need a Rain-Forest Recipe? He's the Man to Call
NACH WAXMAN is a man of infinite patience.
Consider the customer standing before him in Kitchen Arts and Letters, the only culinary bookstore in Manhattan.
He's just back from San Francisco.
"Chez Panisse was never singular," he sniffs.
"And Square One has lost its point. It isn't singing, isn't resonating. The best was Silk's."


To Preserve Afrikaners' Language, Mixed-Race South Africans Join Fray
Peter Marais worries as much about the future of Afrikaans in the new South Africa as the next guy.
But the next guy is likely an Afrikaner, a member of the white tribe that ruled South Africa until last year and forced its language on a dark-skinned majority.
Mr.
Marais is part of that abused majority, a man of mixed race.
"I'm a great advocate for the protection and guarding of Afrikaans as an official language," said Mr.
Marais, the minister of local government for the Western Cape province in southwestern South Africa.
"The colored people don't consider Afrikaans to belong to the white man. We believe it's our language, which the white man stole from us."


A Picadillo as a Partner to Chicken
NOW that tomatoes and corn are coming to market, it's time to cook in the summer mode.
Taking an extra minute or two to shuck fresh corn for a dish like corn picadillo is worth it.
Picadillo, ordinarily made with beef or pork, is a favorite in many Hispanic countries.


Where Hope Has Withered -- A special report.; As Lull in the War Ends, Sarajevo Is Shellshocked
Always, the stomach contracts.
When, through the still air, there comes the flat boom of rending and fracture that is the sound of another shell's impact, indifference can only be feigned.
Even the war-hardened of this city feel the familiar knife in the gut.
There are those who attempt a show of bravado.
"At least 100 meters away," they say with a dismissive wave of the hand.
There are those who rail.
"Idiots, fools, savages!" they scream at the encircling hills where the invisible Bosnian Serb gunners lurk.


Congressional Roundup; Congress and White House Make Last Effort to Compromise on '95 Budget
As the Senate today began considering the balanced-budget proposal worked out with the House last week, Congress and the White House made one last effort to compromise on the 1995 budget-cutting bill that President Clinton vetoed three weeks ago.
Both sides had ample reasons to forge agreement on the midyear cuts, even as they began work on a seven-year plan that starts with the 1996 budget.


Literary Upswing Changes New York
In his memoir, "New York Days," Willie Morris, nostalgic for the heady Manhattan of the 1960's when he was Harper's editor, cites a letter from Robert Kotlowitz about modern-day New York.
"There is no literary world, no music world, none of that, really," Mr.
Kotlowitz wrote.
"Just a lot of clashing social activity, mainly built on money and celebrity or access to both."


Pierce Falls, in England and in France
The newcomer was known as "the Body" in the tabloids here, where her blonde tresses and polka-dot dresses earned her top billing as a siren and a novelty.
But today fourth-ranked Mary Pierce, the Montreal-born Frenchwoman, was made to look like a nobody by Nathalie Tauziat, the authentic Frenchwoman she supplanted on that nation's national team.
Instead of making her debut here as memorable for its longevity as for its intrigue, a nervous Pierce had to be satisfied with only a cameo appearance on Center Court.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Sid Fernandez, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jimmy Myers, pitcher, to Rochester, of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Tom Gaudsen vice president of administration and human resources.


International Briefs; Malaysia Blocks Purchase in Indonesia
Malaysian regulators rejected a $1 billion bid by Construction and Supplies House to acquire PT Barito Pacific Timber of Indonesia.
The deal would have transformed Construction and Supplies House from an unprofitable building-materials company into one of Malaysia's biggest timber providers.


Nets Take a Big Chance And Select O'Bannon
The Nets have craved another player with superb athleticism to fill the passing lanes on the break, and tonight they drafted a marquee player to complement Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman in the open court.
Brushing aside serious medical concerns about his left knee, the Nets selected the U.C.L.A. all-American Ed O'Bannon with the ninth pick in the National Basketball Association draft at the Skydome.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on June 21 about Shepherd's Garden Seeds, a mail-order company in Felton, Calif., misstated its telephone number.
It is (408) 335-6910.


President of Mexico Abruptly Replaces a Key Cabinet Official
Responding to rapidly deteriorating political conditions, President Ernesto Zedillo today replaced his most important and trusted cabinet minister with a far more experienced political hand.
Esteban Moctezuma Barragan was ousted as Minister of the Interior Ministry, where he had control of national security and all issues involving politics, elections and political reform.
He also was responsible for talks to end to the rebel uprising in the southern state of Chiapas.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about a wine tasting on July 10 sponsored by the New York chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food misstated the incorrect telephone number for reservations.
It is (212) 447-0456.


Mail Bomb Linked To Three Others
A package bomb that killed a high-school supervising guidance counselor in 1982 was apparently sent by the same person who, after an 11-year hiatus, mailed three similar explosives, including one that sprayed bullet fragments at a pregnant woman in Queens on Tuesday.
Officials said they did not know why the packages had been sent, why the addresses to which they were delivered had been chosen, or why there was such a long gap between the first and second incidents.
All four devices had been camouflaged to look like books or videocassettes.
Article, page B3.


Efrem Kurtz, 94, a Conductor In Europe, Kansas and Houston
Efrem Kurtz, an American conductor of Russian birth who had been music director of the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo and orchestras in Stuttgart, Kansas City, Houston, Liverpool and Stuttgart, died on Tuesday at his home in London.
He was 94 and had residences in London, Monte Carlo and New York.
Mr.
Kurtz had a broad symphonic and operatic repertory and conducted the premieres of works by Copland, Barber, Walton, Hindemith, Stravinsky, Shostakovich and Khachaturian.
But he was most highly regarded for his interpretations of Russian music.


Duplicate Set of Parking Tickets Is Printed, in a Costly Mistake
The company newly hired to make tickets for the Parking Violations Bureau was mistakenly asked by New York City to print 300,000 duplicate tickets, a mixup that could cost the city as much as $100,000 in unpaid parking fines, officials said yesterday.
Officials scrambled to recover the duplicate tickets and by yesterday had retrieved more than 270,000 from the Department of Traffic.


Clinton Orders Tighter Security at U.S. Offices
President Clinton today ordered Federal agencies to tighten security to meet new standards recommended by the Justice Department in the aftermath of the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick said most Federal office buildings lacked some of the new security measures being required.


Agreement Is Reached On Allowing Casinos
State legislative leaders said today that they had reached agreement on a constitutional amendment that would allow casino gambling in designated parts of the state, including the Catskills and Niagara Falls but excluding New York City.
The leaders said they expect the resolution, the first step in a long process of removing the State Constitution's prohibition on casino gambling, to pass in both houses when it comes to a vote on Thursday.


Prosecution Rests Case In a Trial On Terrorism
After presenting more than 120 witnesses and more than 100 hours of secretly recorded conversations, Federal prosecutors rested their case yesterday against a militant Muslim cleric and 10 other men charged with waging a bombing and assassination conspiracy in and around New York.
For the last five months, in a heavily guarded courtroom in lower Manhattan, the prosecutors have presented extensive evidence to support their contention that the men plotted to blow up several local landmarks and to kill such figures as President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.


Workers to Be Told of Gaps in Pension Funds
Large companies that do not have enough money in their pension plans to pay promised benefits must send their workers letters this year disclosing the shortfall and the potential consequences under a new Federal rule.
The rule, issued yesterday by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, affects 4.3 million workers at 1,500 large companies whose pension plans have less than 90 percent of the money needed to pay promised benefits.


Serbs Get Subtle Reminder On Day Full of Symbolism
Because this is St.
Vitus's Day, the most sacred day on the Serbian national calendar, it seemed the right time for Bosnian Serb leaders to gather in one of their strongholds for a celebration of their military might.
All the most prominent Bosnian Serbs were here, starting with the leader, Radovan Karadzic, and his military commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, and proceeding through cabinet ministers and parliamentarians in a government that no foreign state recognizes.


Devils Think Pleasure, Not Business
The uncertainty over whether they will be playing in New Jersey next season diminished the luster of the victory celebration for the Devils players today.
All the players interviewed said the dispute between the team's management and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority was weighing on their mind.
They said it was a business decision and there was nothing they could do about it.


2 in a Row! It's a Hot Streak For Mets
For the first time in four weeks, the Mets are proud owners of a two-game winning streak.
And who can blame them if they're getting just a little carried away with themselves?
"Watch out Philadelphia, here we come," said Bret Saberhagen, who punctuated his third straight complete-game pitching victory with two sparkling defensive plays that helped the Mets ring up an 8-3 victory over the Florida Marlins tonight.


Washington Praise for Deal Mostly Muted and Cautious
The last-minute accord on trade with Japan was generally praised on Capitol Hill, but in muted and cautious terms as some Democrats made veiled complaints that the Administration should have done more and Republicans worried about the confrontational tactics that produced the agreement.
Following the tradition of rallying around the President after an international agreement, politicians initially expressed guarded support.
"On the face of it, it's a step in the right direction," said the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, the leading candidate for the Republican nomination, right after President Clinton's announcement at the White House of a deal.
"Having said that, I'd like to look at the details."


Supreme Court Pays Tribute to Former Chief Justice Burger


In El Salvador, U.N. Had a Success Story
To the Editor:
Representative Benjamin A. Gilman and others who see United Nations peacekeeping operations as wasteful (news article, June 25) might look at El Salvador, where a United Nations observer mission helped cement national reconciliation.
Four years after a United Nations-brokered settlement put an end to a brutal 12-year civil war, El Salvador is a developing pluralist democracy.
The former rebels are the second political force in the legislature.
The country has a professional Supreme Court and a new civilian police.
Political killings are rare.


Little Work Done, Ethics Panel Will Miss Deadline on Gingrich
With less than a week until the deadline its head had set for disposing of the charges against Speaker Newt Gingrich, the House ethics committee has yet to question many of the most obvious witnesses about a college course Mr.
Gingrich taught, a book contract or other allegations of misconduct.
Spokesmen for the political action committee Mr.
Gingrich headed and the college where he taught a course that has been criticized as an illegal, partisan use of tax-exempt funds said no information had been sought from them.
So did a publisher who publicly charged that the original $4.5 million deal for Mr.
Gingrich's book was improper, and a business organization from which Mr.
Gingrich was accused of improperly soliciting personnel.


Baseball Won't Allow Gooden Back This Season
Despite talk to the contrary, Dwight Gooden will not be reinstated early from his seasonlong drug suspension, a person close to major league baseball's ruling executive council said yesterday.
"He has no chance of coming back this year," the person said.


Sports Authority Makes Public Terms of Its Lease With Devils
As part of the legal fight to keep the Devils from moving to Nashville, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority yesterday made public the lease that the team charges is financially substandard and has been so flagrantly violated that the team will terminate it next Thursday.
Three newspapers had sued the sports authority to reveal the lease, an action settled Tuesday when the agency decided to enter it as evidence to get a temporary restraining order against the Devils in New Jersey Superior Court.


Cowboy Won't Be Indicted
ERIK WILLIAMS emerged from a two-month legal shadow yesterday when a grand jury declined to indict the Dallas Cowboys offensive tackle on sexual assault allegations.
The Collin County grand jury in McKinney, Tex., found insufficient evidence to indict the former All-Pro and a friend in the alleged sexual assault of a 17-year-old girl at Williams's home.
The decision came after the teen-ager reached a civil settlement with Williams and asked that Williams and RODERICK CARSON, both 27, not be prosecuted.


Biotechnology Gets a Boost
A bill intended to stimulate the development and expansion of biotechnology and other high-tech industries in New Jersey was signed into law yesterday.
The bill authorizes the State Economic Development Authority to establish a financial assistance program for new and growing companies that are often considered too high-risk to meet the agency's criteria for loans, said State Senator Robert W. Singer, a Republican of Ocean County and one of the bill's sponsors.
"This is a response to where we felt we were going as a state as to future jobs," Senator Singer said.


Pataki Signs Changes on Juries Into Law
Gov.
George E. Pataki today signed the final elements of a package of long-awaited changes aimed at making jury duty less frequent, more convenient and more lucrative for millions of New Yorkers.
The legislation, which was pushed by the state's Chief Judge, Judith S. Kaye, will end automatic exemptions from jury service for doctors, lawyers, law enforcement officers, small-business owners and parents who care for their children, among other groups.
The new law, which takes effect on Jan. 1, means that nearly 1 million New Yorkers will be added to jury pools, making service less frequent for jurors who are now called as often as every two years.


Many Beaches, Many Shutdowns
New Jersey experienced 238 beach closures and swimming advisories last year because of pollution, an environmental group said in a report released yesterday.
The state, which has one of the nation's most comprehensive beach-testing programs, was second only to California, which has the longest coast line, the Natural Resources Defense Council reported.
Overflowing sewers and storm-water systems were the chief culprits.


Criminal Charges Lifted In Inquiry on Packwood
The Justice Department told Senator Bob Packwood today that it would not prosecute him on charges that he arranged for lobbyists to offer jobs to his wife five years ago in exchange for legislative favors.
The decision, conveyed to Senator Packwood in a one-sentence letter to his lawyers, lifts one of the darkest clouds that has hung over the Oregon Republican since the Senate Ethics Committee opened a sweeping inquiry into his public and personal life two years ago.


Refugee Oil Platform: Hope for Growth Industry?
The British owners of the Brent Spar oil platform, who bowed to international pressure last week and canceled plans to dump the decommissioned rig at sea, asked Norway today to allow them to anchor it in a deep fjord while onshore disposal plans are worked out.
Norwegian officials said they would answer in about a week.
Eager to lure what is expected to be a growth industry -- dismantling defunct North Sea oil installations -- several harbors along Norway's west coast had offered refuge to the Brent Spar.
In its application to the Norwegian Government, Shell U.K.
Ltd. specified a mooring point in the deep Er Fjord 40 miles northeast of Stavanger.
It is the spot where the Brent Spar was assembled from 1974 to 1976.


Pepsico Consolidates Its Snack-Food Ads
Pepsico Foods International said yesterday that it would consolidate its global advertising efforts for its snack foods, which have worldwide sales of about $2.5 billion.
Where it once had 18 local and regional advertising agencies in 45 countries, the Pepsico unit would now have only three agencies for its creative work; local agencies would continue to handle media planning and buying.


New Creatures In the Garden
JULIE S. DERMANSKY, a SoHo sculptor, said that when she learned that her parents used her cut-steel totems to support ivy vines, "the proverbial light bulb went off." Ms.
Dermansky's flower boxes and stakes topped with grinning fish, birds and the like can be finished in black or green or left ready-to-rust.
Prices are from $140 for a four-foot stake to $550 for a six-and-a-half-foot trough.
Telephone: (212) 334-5571.


Town Tries to Comprehend Suicide Attempts of 8 Girls
The first cars to arrive at New Milford High School tonight carried mothers and their baseball-playing sons for evening games on the fields high above the Housatonic River here.
The next cars carried more parents, but also school officials, psychiatrists and hospital officials, to discuss how this rapidly growing Litchfield County town should respond to eight suicide attempts by teen-age girls this month.


Space Linkup With $100 Billion Future
If the linkup of Americans and Russians in space two decades ago was the equivalent of a date, the one set for Thursday is the start of a $100 billion marriage, a delicate one that could easily be undone by technical setbacks or political shifts.
The space shuttle Atlantis is to dock with the Russian space station Mir about 9 A.M., hooking up a pressurized tunnel through which astronauts can float in shirt-sleeves.
If successfully joined, the two craft will form a structure bigger and brighter than any other to probe the heavens in the 38 years since the space age began.


Computer Centers for Children
IF you have children, the chances are good that they know as much about personal computers and the latest software as you do -- or more.
This may be true even if you're the one with the computer and a respectable number of software programs.
So you're computer-phobic.
Why not admit it?
For parents who don't know how to use computers, don't have the time to teach their children or don't know which software is worth buying, a variety of services now offer assistance.


Number of Parts to Be Bought Is Unclear
While President Clinton praised the auto trade agreement for pushing Japan's automobile industry to buy more American-made parts, there are no concrete goals for how much in American or foreign parts the Japanese companies will actually buy.
Securing such goals had been a main Washington objective, and there seems to be a big discrepancy between what American officials said the new trade agreement will do and what the Japanese company plans actually say.


The Most Requested Of Library Books
SEEN any good books lately?
The cool, cloistered halls of the New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street have been echoing with the sound of gasps, laughter and, in a few cases, vociferous indignation, all in reaction to "Books of the Century," an exhibition commemorating the most influential and frequently requested books of the last hundred years.
"These are probably the most intense reactions we've ever seen at one of our exhibits," Liz Smith, a library spokeswoman, said, adding that "Books of the Century" was part of the library's yearlong centennial celebration.


Home Births Are Safer Than Hospital Births; On Medical Education
To the Editor:
Your June 25 Week in Review article on medical fads by my former surgery professor Sherwin B. Nuland brings to mind the Sidney Burwell aphorism we were taught at Yale in the 1980's: "Half of everything you learn in medical school is wrong. The problem is figuring out which half." DAN A. OREN , M.D.
Rockville, Md., June 25, 1995


Foundation Donors Sue Prudential Unit
Seeking to recoup some of the money they stand to lose in the bankruptcy of the New Era Foundation for Philanthropy, two small charities and an individual philanthropist in upstate New York have sued Prudential Securities, which held an investment account for New Era.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Syracuse, contends that Prudential offered assurances that it was placing money sent by charities to New Era in individual escrow accounts, when most of it was actually held in one big account that New Era drew on for its own purposes and also borrowed against.


A Brave Little Girl Who Has AIDS
"I've been keeping this secret because I don't want to lose friends," says Angelie Diya, an 11-year-old in Jupiter, Fla.
The secret, which you can see her revealing tonight to friends, schoolmates and the whole town, is that she was born with AIDS.
Angelie's mother, a prostitute and drug user, died after bequeathing her baby the disease.
When we meet Angelie, in the weeks before she goes public, she is with her adoptive parents, who have been helping her keep her secret.
That hasn't been easy, since she has missed 58 out of 180 school days, many of them spent at the National Institutes of Health, where a combination of three drugs has so far been containing the disease.


A Gardener in the Making
To The Home Section:
I am past 50 and not a gardener, but I wish to thank you for two extraordinary and wonderful articles filed from England by Anne Raver ("Sissinghurst Still Speaks of Vita and Harold," June 15, and "Cuttings: A Garden Quarterly With a Calming Influence," June 18).
Such rich writing, evocative and informative.
I shall now become a gardener!  (Check me next year.) Only The New York Times would reward us with this kind of gracious, graceful written inquiry today.
JAMES F. BELL 3d Scranton, Pa.


Rally Falters In Tokyo Stocks
Japanese stocks surged early today on optimism over the auto trade accord between the United States and Japan before retreating to close lower.
The dollar fell slightly here.
At the end of the day it stood at 85.31 yen, down from 85.52 yen in trading Wednesday in New York.


In Those Old Familiar Places
THE only way to understand the city is to read the city," said Peg Breen, the president of the New York Landmarks Conservancy. That observation accounts for "Touring the Upper East Side," the organization's first guidebook, which takes its readers on leisurely peregrinations through five of the city's more-or-less contiguous historic districts: the Upper East Side, Metropolitan Museum of Art area, Carnegie Hill, Treadwell Farm and Henderson Place.
Written by Andrew S. Dolkart, an architectural historian at Columbia University, the 120-page book highlights all the usual street-side suspects with tales of mansions, mansards and megalomaniacs, but numerous surprises abound.


Tax Defeat Makes Orange County's Fate More Perilous
Now that the voters of Orange County, Calif., have overwhelmingly said no to an emergency tax increase, it has become even trickier to resolve the severely pressed county's financial problems.
And chances that the state of California might immediately step in to help appeared to be diminishing.
In a watershed vote on Tuesday, the electorate of the conservative Southern California area rejected, by a margin of more than 3 to 2, a proposed half-cent sales tax increase intended to lift the county out of bankruptcy.


Morgan Stanley Posts Earnings Gain in Quarter
Morgan Stanley Group Inc. yesterday reported a healthy increase in profits for the quarter that ended on May 31.
The results reflected surging trading profits and strength in its mergers and acquisitions business.
Earnings for the quarter jumped 41.9 percent, to $166 million, or $1.90 a share, compared with $117 million, or $1.27 a share, in the quarter that ended April 30, 1994.


Internet Obscenity Bill Is Indeed Constitutional
To the Editor:
Re "Censorship on the Internet" (editorial, June 22): Again you join critics of the communications decency amendment, who know no bounds in their use of misinformation about this constitutional and needed legislation.
They will do anything to defend the status quo on the Internet with its obscenity, pornography, pedophilia and human-animal sexual debasement, all easily accessible, even to children.


Sports of The Times; Ah, to Be Young, Gifted And Drafted
AFTER months of grumbling about irresponsible neophytes tainting the sport, a teen-ager weeks removed from his high school prom was a focal point of the N.B.A. draft.
Chris Webber, this one's for you.
Not only did Kevin Garnett go fifth off the rack last night at the Skydome, but he was also thrown to the Minnesota Timberwolves, an unstable franchise, a pitiful team and one currently blessed with Christian Laettner and Isaiah Rider.
What a concept, adding a 19-year-old to those twin role models.


Enola Gay Exhibit Draws Protesters


Monsanto to Acquire 49.9% of Biotechnology Company
The Monsanto Company said yesterday that it would acquire a 49.9 percent stake in Calgene Inc., the biotechnology company best known for its development of a genetically engineered tomato, for $30 million.
As part of the transaction, Monsanto will turn over to Calgene its 50 percent interest in Gargiulo L.P., the largest packer and shipper of fresh tomatoes in the United States.
Analysts said the agreement would help all three companies by bolstering Monsanto's position in agricultural biotechnology -- in which it has already spent an estimated $1 billion on research and development -- and by making Calgene and Gargiulo the nation's predominant supplier of fresh tomatoes.


Smith's Saves Record Comes to a Stop at 19
Rangers 9, Angels 8
Lee Smith's record save streak ended at 19 games last night when the Texas Rangers rallied for three runs in the ninth inning and beat the visiting California Angels, 9-8.
Texas trailed by 8-2 in the seventh before coming back.
Smith (0-1), who had set a major league record with saves in 19 straight appearances, entered before the ninth inning for the first time in 21 games this season.
He struck out Benji Gil with runners on second and third to preserve an 8-6 lead in the eighth.


Serial Bomber Threatens Blast, Then Calls the Scheme a Prank
The self-described anarchist whose mail bombs have terrorized executives and researchers for 17 years has threatened to blow up an airliner flying out of Los Angeles International Airport within six days.
The threat, made in a letter received on Tuesday by The San Francisco Chronicle, set Federal authorities scrambling to tighten security at California airports today, delaying flights and disrupting mail delivery.


Insider-Trading Plea
A former senior associate at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, the blue-chip Wall Street law firm, and his brother, pleaded guilty to insider trading.
Article, page D1.


Corrections
Because of a production error, picture captions on Tuesday with an article about the slayings of three young people in Little Rock, Ark., misstated the order of the victims' photos in some editions.
From the left, they were Marcell Young, 17, and Malak Hussian, 10, both daughters of Mary Hussian, and Mustafa Hussian, 12, her son.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Gurdon Wallace Wattles Jr., a retired legal officer of the United Nations Secretariat, misstated his birthplace.
It was Hollywood, Calif., not Hollywood, Fla.


Officials Seize Explosives
Federal and local authorities found explosive materials today in a suburban Maryland apartment of a man whose son was arrested earlier this week on explosives charges.
But the Federal authorities said that although the material included ammonium nitrate, the chemical used in the Oklahoma City bombing, the man being held did not appear to be part of a conspiracy.


What's the Hollywood Topic? Hugh Grant's Future, Mainly
Forget Michael Jackson and those bigoted lyrics.
Forget the cost of "Waterworld," the forthcoming Kevin Costner epic and the most expensive movie ever made, at $175 million and climbing.
Forget the $20 million Jim Carrey will receive for his next movie.
Forget those last-minute plans for the Fourth of July weekend.
What has seized Hollywood the last 48 hours is the arrest of Hugh Grant, the suave, boyish-looking English star, early Tuesday morning in a sleazy section of Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood.
Mr.
Grant was charged with engaging in lewd conduct in public in his white BMW with a 23-year-old woman identified by the police as Divine Brown, a prostitute.


Last-Minute Deal With Japan Increases the Dollar's Value
The 11th-hour agreement between the United States and Japan on trade in autos and auto parts was greeted with enthusiasm on world currency markets yesterday, as dealers bought dollars and sold yen, relieved that a damaging -- and possibly widespread -- trade war had been averted.
"A cloud has been lifted," said Richard E. Witten, a partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
"Nobody likes trade wars."


N.B.A. Faces Antitrust Suit By Its Players
Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing and five others, representing more than half of the league's players, filed a class action antitrust lawsuit against the National Basketball Association yesterday and invited their union to join them.
"We want them to join in on the fight and stand firm with us," Jordan said, discussing the rift in the union over the results of its labor negotiations with the league.
"It's an opportunity for us to get a fair deal."


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about American and international menus for picnics misstated the lemonade brand name in the American menu.
It is Nantucket Nectars, not Nantucket Naturals.


The Lien King on the Attack
The recruiting session mixed the hope of a revival meeting with the anger of an anti-government rally.
Last year, in an Atlanta suburb, Lawernce D. Kenemore Jr. was busy enlisting people to sell what he said was an employee-benefits program for small businesses.
The program, he boasted, would be free from regulation by oppressive and overreaching state officials.
And those eager to be salespeople typically needed to pay only $150 for a half-day training session.


Rubin Wins on 32-Game Set
Chanda Rubin, the scrappy player who fought off nine match points when she upset Jana Novotna in the third round of the French Open, defeated Patricia Hy-Boulais today in a record-setting marathon on the scorching Court 16.
"I think we were both just happy to sit down," said Hy-Boulais after she netted a forehand to end the 7-6 (7-4), 6-7 (5-7), 17-15 second-round epic, which contained the longest set ever played in women's singles at Wimbledon and the most games in a set here.


Alleged Extortion Plan Against Strawberry Foiled
Federal agents arrested a woman in Manhattan on Tuesday for allegedly trying to extort $300,000 from Darryl Strawberry, the outfielder recently signed by the Yankees.
The woman was identified by Federal authorities as Judith Lee, 50, of Cathedral City, Calif.
Federal prosecutors said she threatened to peddle a story to a tabloid television program if Strawberry did not pay her the money.


International Briefs; Chevron to Sell Stake
Chevron said yesterday that a subsidiary, Chevron International Ltd., planned to sell a 35 percent stake in the Caipipendi exploration tract in Bolivia to British Gas.
The company also said it was in the final stages of an agreement to farm out an additional 25 percent equity interest in the site.
Chevron will retain 65 percent interest in the 2.5 million-acre tract and continue as the operator. (Reuters)


International Briefs; Europeans Seal Communications Pact
Veba A.G. and Cable and Wireless P.L.C. sealed an alliance yesterday to operate telecommunications services across Europe.
Veba, a German utility, and Cable and Wireless, a British telecommunications company, set up two jointly owned companies.
The first, Vebacom G.m.b.H., is to serve Germany, and the other, Cable and Wireless Europe, the rest of Europe.


Ups and Downs of Jazz and an Unrattled Master
Oscar Peterson's concert at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night could have been laced with sadness.
The 69-year-old pianist is suffering from the side effects of a recent stroke.
He was brought to the stage in a wheelchair, and for much of his brief concert his left hand was only barely functional, occasionally marking time with a few soft notes.
But Mr.
Peterson, who plays more with his right hand than most pianists play with two, still put on a show.
Mr.
Peterson is one of jazz's last stars, part of a generation that arrived in the late 1940's and early 1950's.
His rise as a concert attraction coincided with the demise of jazz as popular music and its renaissance as a more rarified form floating between the art world and popular culture.


Needed: Interactive Parents
To The Home Section:
"Should Your Toddler Be a Tech ie?" (June 1) quotes Warren Buckleitner, editor of the newsletter Children's Software Revue: "A new art form is opening up with interactive toys that never existed before. You push a button and get a result. Our 3 1/2-year-old daughter already knows all the letters of the alphabet without any formal training."


Outlook for Germany: Revealing the Doubts
AFTER THE WALL Germany, the Germans and the Burdens of History By Marc Fisher 350 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Officer Charged in Sex Abuse of 13-Year-Old Girl
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday on charges he sexually abused a 13-year-old girl on five separate occasions when he was off duty, the police said.
He was the fourth New York police officer in the last two years to be charged with sex crimes.
The arrested officer, Gerard Rutolo, 28, of Sunset Park, Brooklyn, was suspended from his assignment to the Brooklyn South Task Force, said Robert Samuel, a police spokesman.
Officer Rutolo was charged with sexual abuse and endangering the welfare of a minor at his arraignment yesterday in Criminal Court in Brooklyn, where he was released without bail.


The New Deal In Miami Beach
LISTEN here, all you beautiful people, very young and not so old.
There's a new fun place you can fly to in about the same time it takes to drive to the Hamptons, and where the sun is obscured only by television and magazine camera crews.
Call it Club Media?
It's the Delano -- the 48-year-old, newly renovated oceanfront Art Deco hotel in Miami Beach that is reopening tomorrow -- and it's the latest hotel to open in the $100 million chain of "rebuild it and they will come" edifices headed by Ian Schrager, the New York entrepreneur.
His empire also includes Morgans, the Royalton and the Paramount hotels in New York and the soon-to-be overhauled Mondrian in Los Angeles.


Technology's Not for All
To The Home Section:
While your article "Computer Gap Worries Blacks" (May 25) presented a fairly depressing array of statistics showing that ethnic minorities are substantially underrepresented in their utilization of the new technologies, it had an upbeat subtext that in a matter of time these disparities would be corrected.
This course of events is unlikely.


Judge Invalidates Creation Of Police Corruption Panel
A State Supreme Court justice ruled yesterday that the City Council overstepped its authority by creating an independent body to monitor police corruption, giving Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani a resounding political victory in a long-simmering fight with the Council.
Late last year, the Council passed a law creating an independent agency to monitor police corruption.
The Mayor vetoed the bill, but the Council overrode the veto.
The Mayor then established an anticorruption panel of his own and sued the Council, asking to have the Council's law invalidated.


Accidents Will Happen, But So Often?
MY office telephone is ringing, and to tell you the truth, I would rather let it ring.
Chances are it's my weary wife telling me once again that she is taking one of our children to the emergency room.
We were there in January, then March.
Before that, October and November.
Broken bones, busted heads, split chins.
Our newborn was home from the hospital only a few weeks before we rushed him back with a mysterious lung ailment.
Whoever said bad news comes in three's obviously just got tired of counting.


Atrocity Case In Amazon Is Botched
Two years after Brazilian gold miners killed 16 Yanomami Indians, all the suspects have vanished and there is little prospect that anyone will ever be prosecuted, human rights advocates say.
The rights workers plan to file a complaint before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in Washington in early July.


Swedish Retro, Circa 1750, Comes to Ikea
DESIGN'S latest immigrant, Ikea's 18th-century Swedish reproductions, is here.
Historical, yes, but nothing fancy.
"Sweden was a poor country" in the 1700's, said the author and curator Lars Sjoberg, who honed the 39-piece collection from originals whose modest dignity were echoes of trendy Paris styles.
"King or peasant, we could only afford simple, functional elegance," he added.


Gay Pride Marchers Suffered Neo-Nazi Taunts; No Cheering Section
To the Editor:
Re "Mayor's Mobile Cheering Section" (news article, June 26): You seem to raise suspicions that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration orchestrated a group of supporters to march with the Mayor in the Lesbian and Gay Pride March and to cheer him if and when he was confronted by booing spectators.


Elizabeth Flower, 80, Philosopher at Penn And Author of Text
Elizabeth Flower, professor emeritus of philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania and co-author of a standard history of philosophy, died on Monday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
She was 80 and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause was cancer, said Prof.
Gary Hatfield, chairman of Penn's department of philosophy, from which she retired in 1985.


Calendar: Shows, Tours And a Crafts Festival
Views of New York  Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.


Diplomas Are Denied to 17 In Washington Irving Furor
At 8:30 A.M. yesterday, the new graduates filed into the main office at Washington Irving High School and collected their diplomas.
But 17 of their classmates, whose diplomas had seemed certain at the graduation ceremony on Monday, were not among them.
Their principal, it was found, had improperly intervened to graduate them even though they had failed required courses.
Some teachers had complained that the principal, Robert B. Durkin, had bypassed their authority, and by early Tuesday evening, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines had removed Mr.
Durkin from his job, effective Friday.
He also ordered a review of the academic records of 19 students.


Underclassmen Rule Atop N.B.A. Draft Board
Joe Smith of Maryland was selected No. 1 by the Golden State Warriors tonight in the National Basketball Association draft, and afterward he said his mother was moving across the country with him.
"I'm still a teen-ager," said Smith, who turns 20 in July.
"She's coming to make sure I don't fool around with the wrong crowd. She's coming to watch my back."


Threat of a Weekend Strike On N.J. Transit Is Canceled
Faced with threats of jail, loss of their jobs, and fines levied by their international union, New Jersey Transit's railroad engineers last night called off their strike scheduled for tomorrow night and agreed to more talks on a new contract.
The end of the strike threat was announced in Washington shortly before 8 P.M., after a day of intensive talks between the National Mediation Board, New Jersey Transit's chief labor negotiator, William Murphy, and the head of the union for the transit agency's 280 engineers, D. Terry Abbott.


Vote by House Committee Threatens Bank Legislation
An alliance of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans threw prospects for broad bank deregulatory legislation into confusion today by amending a related bill so as to allow banks to merge with insurers, an idea that had previously been squelched.
The amendment vote on the House Banking Committee was driven by a variety of motives.
Conservatives were seeking a broad dismantling of barriers in the financial industry.
Liberals hoped that the amendment would be a "poison pill," killing the bill it was added to, which would repeal a number of laws meant to ensure that people in poor neighborhoods can get loans.
Many banks object to the laws, contending they require too much paperwork.


Four Are Injured by Gunman
The police were searching for a man who shot four people while they were sitting on a lawn in front of an apartment complex in the South Ward section of Newark.
The gunman stepped out of a car on Tuesday night and fired before the car drove off, Detective Daniel Collins, a police spokesman, said.
Three residents of the neighborhood -- Wendy Davis, 22; Larry Hill, 23, and a 16-year-old girl, whose name was not released -- were in stable condition yesterday at University Hospital after being treated for gunshot wounds.
Both Ms.
Davis and the teen-ager underwent surgery for torn livers.
A fourth neighborhood resident, Sultan Mack, 22, was treated for a gunshot wound to his right arm before being released.
The police did not say what prompted the shooting.


Nets Expected to Hire Wissel
Before the Nets pondered whom to choose with the ninth selection on the eve of the 1995 National Basketball Association draft, they had already made another important off-season decision to help erase their recent spell of misfortune.
The franchise is expected to hire the Milwaukee Bucks scout and former Fordham coach, Hal Wissel, as its player personnel director within the next few days.
Wissel, 56, would have a hand in all personnel matters and have a significant say in the club's decision-making.


DIARY
Yesterday in Washington
FLAG BURNING The House voted 312 to 120 in favor of a Constitutional amendment to allow the states to make it a crime to desecrate the American flag.
"If you need to burn something, burn your Congressman in effigy," Representative Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, exhorted on the House floor with the passion that typified this culturally divisive debate.


Protecting Rights of Callers
The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey and Bell Atlantic New Jersey have worked out an agreement to protect anyone who does not want his or her name and address listed in a proposed automated reverse directory.
The telephone company's new service, CALL 54, which has yet to be approved by the Public Utilities Commission, would let subscribers enter a phone number and obtain the name and address of callers.
The agreement provides that people who ask to be excluded and people with unpublished numbers will be left out of the directory, as will shelters of the New Jersey Coalition for Battered Women and the Coalition Against Sexual Assault.


CHRONICLE
The white suit worn by JOHN TRAVOLTA in the hit disco film "Saturday Night Fever" sold yesterday at auction for $145,500, which the auctioneer said was "certainly a record for polyester."
The buyer was unknown, but the seller was the film critic GENE SISKEL, who bought the three-piece suit and black shirt for $2,000 at a charity auction in 1979, outbidding JANE FONDA.


To Albany: Don't Undermine the N.Y.P.D.
The police officer's union has a history of trying to run the New York City Police Department through the State Legislature.
This year, the union and its surrogates in Albany have outdone themselves with an egregious series of bills that, if enacted into law, would strip the city of the power to deploy, discipline and pay its police officers as it sees fit.
In the wake of drunken rampages by New York City cops in Washington, D.C., and elsewhere, the Police Department has recently seemed willing to crack down forcefully on misbehaving personnel.
But now both houses of the Legislature have passed bills that would strip the Police Commissioner of final authority to terminate or suspend officers who flout department policy.
Suspensions and dismissals would become subject to mandatory arbitration -- by arbiters outside the Police Department.
This can only diminish public confidence in the department's ability to police itself.
Governor Pataki needs to veto this effort to undercut departmental discipline.


Cinderella and Her Match
Casting does make a difference, as Zhanna Ayupova and Vyacheslav Samodurov proved when they gave Oleg Vinogradov's "Cinderella" for the Kirov Ballet the vividness and depth that was missing earlier at the new production's local premiere.
Much of the conviction of this performance on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House was rooted in the sustained rapport between the new Cinderella and her Prince.
Evenly matched in technique, they managed to remember that Prokofiev's ballet score concerned a love story and they reacted to each other accordingly.


Sharpe Is Joining ESPN
STERLING SHARPE expects to miss at least the 1995 season, so the wide receiver will spend the year in the broadcast booth instead.
Sharpe has joined ESPN as an analyst.
"Football is my first love, but if I can't play again, ESPN will keep me close to the field and in the action," Sharpe said.


International Briefs; In Brief
The European Commission said it had cleared an operation under which Philips Semiconductors International, a unit of Philips Electronics, would acquire a 51 percent stake in an I.B.M. microprocessor unit in Boblingen, Germany, near Stuttgart.


Fans Caught Between Devils and Nashville
For a couple of hours tonight, New Jersey sports fans tried to focus on the fact that a team with their name on it had finally won a national championship, and tried to forget the glory might last, well, one night.
There they were, the New Jersey Devils hockey team, brandishing that gleaming Stanley Cup trophy aloft and drinking in the ecstatic roar of more than 25,000 fans at a victory celebration outside the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
And their next stop could well be Nashville.


21-Month Sentence In Whitewater Case
Webster L. Hubbell, the former No. 3 official at the Justice Department, was sentenced to 21 months in prison on mail fraud and tax evasion charges after the Whitewater independent counsel declined to recommend a lighter sentence on the basis of Mr.
Hubbell's cooperation.
Article, page B6.


Bridge
Collections of interesting deals are always popular, and the latest of them has a decidedly international flavor.
One author is Martin Hoffman, who was born in Czechoslovakia, was in a German concentration camp in World War II, became a bridge expert in England and now lives in Florida.
The other is Kathie Wei-Sender, who was born in China, has won four world titles representing the United States and now lives in Nashville.
The book is "On the Other Hand: A Bridge From East to West," available for $9.95 including postage from the publishers, C and T Bridge Supplies, 3838 Catalina Street, Los Alamitos, Calif. 90720.


Furniture With Pedigree
THE Georgian-style mahogany settee (above) may look parlor-perfect, but its openwork construction handily braves the elements.
"Back in the 18th-century, garden furniture looked a lot like what people used indoors," said John Ehrlich, the owner of the Federalist, a new shop in Greenwich, Conn., that offers specially commissioned reproductions of the best designs of Thomas Jefferson's time -- all handmade.


Chicago's Mayor Gains School Control That New York's Mayor Would Envy
Mayor Richard M. Daley will essentially take over the city's schools on Thursday with the announcement of his handpicked choices for a "superboard," a scaled-down panel of five members, to run the nation's third-largest school system.
The move is the culmination of what could prove to be a decisive springtime for public education in Chicago, whose school system has for years grappled with financial crises, low test scores and high dropout rates.


Yankees Drum Up Solution of Their Own
The Yankees played three games yesterday: the one at the Stadium and the two Darryl Strawberry participated in for Tampa during a Gulf Coast League doubleheader in Kissimmee, Fla., as he prepares to play the Big Apple once more.
You remember Strawberry, the savior, the left-handed bat signed by George Steinbrenner to prod a meandering, disappointing team back into the race.
Well, guess what?
The team that signed the Straw on June 19 no longer exists.


Yankees Drum Up Solution of Their Own
The Yankees played three games yesterday: the one at the Stadium and the two Darryl Strawberry participated in for Tampa during a Gulf Coast League doubleheader in Kissimmee, Fla., as he prepares to play the Big Apple once more.
You remember Strawberry, the savior, the left-handed bat signed by George Steinbrenner to prod a meandering, disappointing team back into the race.
Well, guess what?
The team that signed the Straw on June 19 no longer exists.


The Choice in Chicago
CRAIG HARTSBURG, a former defenseman for the Minnesota North Stars, will be introduced today as the next coach of the Chicago Blackhawks, a person familiar with the team told The Associated Press yesterday.
Hartsburg, 36, would succeed DARRYL SUTTER, who resigned last week to spend more time with his family.
Hartsburg coached the Guelph Storm into the Ontario Hockey League championship series last season and was an assistant with the Philadelphia Flyers for four years before that.
Hartsburg had 98 goals and 315 assists in his 570-game career, all with the North Stars. (AP)


The Rise of the Two-Computer Family
THE 1960's brought the two-car garage, the 1980's the two-income family.
Evidence is now emerging that the 90's are witnessing the arrival of the two-computer family.
Two recent surveys have found that roughly 25 percent of the American homes that have computers indeed have more than one computer.
And among homes with children under age 18 and a computer, an even higher percentage have two or more.


Congressional Roundup: Congress and White House Make Last Effort to Compromise on '95 Budget; Medicaid Politics Get Rough
The rough new politics of Medicaid erupted before the Senate Finance Committee today as a panel of governors debated Republican proposals to cut $180 billion over seven years from the health insurance program for the poor and the disabled.
Democratic governors contended that the cuts could be devastating and far exceeded what could be achieved through greater use of managed care or giving the states greater administrative flexibility, as the Republicans have promised.
Republican governors were generally more supportive.


Grozny Journal; Guns Pound by Night, and Jackhammers by Day
Machine-gun fire still rattles loudly at night, but by day, the dull pounding sound that echoes through collapsed buildings and rubble-strewn streets is that of hammers and pneumatic drills.
The war in Chechnya is not over, and the temporary cease-fire is as fragile as the peace talks going on here.
But refugees are returning to Grozny and slowly beginning to patch their lives back together.


Mr. Hevesi's Timely Warning
Selling New York City's vast water system for an infusion of budget funds was always an unsettling proposal.
But Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Council President Peter Vallone made a sincere and forceful case that the transfer of ownership of the city's network of reservoirs, pipelines and sewers to another government entity was a risk-free step to raise a billion dollars for much-needed capital improvements.
We initially supported their approach, with certain reservations about how the money was spent and about the general wisdom of ownership transfers.
But now the City Comptroller, Alan Hevesi, has raised more searching, fundamental questions about the sale that need to be addressed.
Under the Mayor's proposal, the water system, with its network of upstate reservoirs, would be sold to an independent agency, the New York City Water Board, which was created years ago by the State Legislature.
Mr.
Hevesi believes that the system is a core asset that should not be sold off, especially for a $400 million boost to the capital budget.
In the long run, he believes it is better to let the capital budget decline from $4.2 billion to $3.8 billion, even though half of the lost revenue was targeted on school repair.


Bodies of Couple Found in Car
The decomposed bodies of an elderly couple from Teaneck were found in their car yesterday in a densely wooded area several hundred feet off Interstate 87 in the Adirondacks of New York State.
State Trooper Steve Smith said Edward Kirvin, 74, may have fallen asleep at the wheel.
Mr.
Kirvin and his wife, Audrey, who was 70 and suffering from Alzheimer's disease, had been on vacation and had last been seen two weeks ago.


Rail Strike Is Averted
Faced with threats of jail, loss of their jobs and fines levied by their international union, New Jersey Transit's railroad engineers last night agreed to more talks on a new contract and called off their strike scheduled for tomorrow night.
The agreement to cancel the strike ended days of tense uncertainty for holiday travelers.  [ Page B5. ]


Javits Center Getting A New Work Force
In the the latest campaign to rid the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center of mob influence and reduce labor costs, the state will begin hiring a new work force tomorrow and Saturday, officials say.
Robert E. Boyle, the center's president, said yesterday that the job openings will be listed in newspaper advertisements to be published today in New York City and the suburbs.
Mr.
Boyle said that he expected that about 400 employees would be hired over the weekend and another 400 later.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER REEVE, who suffered a broken neck and spinal injuries in a fall from a horse last month, was admitted yesterday to the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West Orange, N.J.
He was flown there by air ambulance from Charlottesville, Va., where he had been hospitalized since the accident.
The actor was accompanied by his wife, DANA, and 3-year-old son, WILL.
He is expected to remain at Kessler for months, said a spokeswoman for the institute, Kathy Lewis.


House Easily Passes Amendment to Ban Desecration of Flag
In fevered tones, the House today asserted its devotion to Old Glory and voted for a constitutional amendment to allow the states to make it a crime to desecrate the American flag.
"If you need to burn something, burn your Congressman in effigy," Representative Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, exhorted on the House floor with the passion that typified this culturally divisive debate.
"But don't burn the flag."


At 2, Rosie O'Greta's Future Looks Rosy
Was that one of the leading contenders for next year's Kentucky Derby racing home first in the Tremont Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday?
The Derby is still 10 months away, this year's juveniles are just now starting to make debuts and reputations, and the horse who won the Tremont was a filly.


A Good, if Oversold, Trade Deal
Although the trade deal struck with Japan yesterday is not the grand breakthrough advertised by the Clinton Administration, it represents a substantial achievement.
If details still to be disclosed sustain the outline described by negotiators, the accord should break down protectionist barriers that unnecessarily keep down sales of American autos and auto parts to Japanese manufacturers and repair garages.
That would help Japanese consumers and American auto workers.
What the agreement does not do -- and should not do -- is meet the Administration's desire to impose enforceable, presumably numerical, targets on the Japanese Government that could serve as a basis for later sanctions.
The demand for enforceable targets delayed negotiations and led to the Administration's threat to levy sanctions, which would violate United States obligations under international trade rules.


Quirot Is a Winner Again
ANA FIDELIA QUIROT, an Olympic middle-distance runner who sustained severe burns two years ago, won last night for the first time since reconstructive surgery.
She won the 800 meters in 2 minutes 3.55 seconds in a Cuban national championship event in Havana.
Quirot, 31, was burned on the face, neck and abdomen in a domestic accident in early 1993. (Reuters)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Bemis Co., Minneapolis, is selling $100 million of notes due in 2005 through Goldman, Sachs.
The notes are priced at 99.768 to yield 6.732 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Violence Flairs in the Crimean Peninsula


What's Next: Ads on School Buses?; In Tune With Giuliani, Agencies Ponder Billboard Revenue
Most people look at New York City's litter baskets, schoolhouses, parking meters, garbage trucks and the like and see the chattel of municipal government.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration sees a far more lucrative possibility: ad space.
And it's for sale.
The city's Parks and Recreation Department hopes to raise $10 million this year by selling ads on virtually anything in its domain other than rocks and trees.
The Board of Education plans to offer the sides of yellow school buses for advertising.
The Sanitation Department wants to sell prime space on 25,000 sidewalk trash cans -- and even its garbage trucks.


Journal; Smoking G.O.P. Guns
The Republican party has owned law and order as a campaign issue since Richard Nixon and Spiro Agnew seized it in 1968 -- just a few years before they went on a crime spree of their own.
But the G.O.P.'s unbroken run as top cop may finally be coming to an end.
"It's utterly amazing and confounding," says Charles Schumer, the Democratic Congressman from Brooklyn whom the National Rifle Association loves to hate, as he describes the parties' role reversal.
Republicans who once ritualistically attacked Democrats for favoring "criminals' rights" now endorse policies that make life easier for violent criminals and harder for local police and their Federal counterparts.


Plan to Cut House Costs Puts Private Hands at Barbers' Chairs
In the grand scheme of Speaker Newt Gingrich's Contract With America, the plight of Nurney Mason, newly slated to be privatized out of his job as a barber in the House of Representatives, merely amounts to a little off the sides.
"Never thought it would happen to me here, right here in the Capitol," said Mr.
Mason, snipping at the hair of a Congressional politician and pondering the termination notice he received, which read like a sound bite from a campaign brochure.


Graffiti Maker 'Cost,' a Prankster to Some but a Criminal in the Law's Eyes, Is Sentenced
The words are everywhere.
They have been writ large on the walls of the Queens-Midtown Tunnel, plastered on Walk-Don't Walk signals in Bay Ridge, wheat-pasted on fruit stands in Forest Hills and tattooed on the templates of Lincoln Center.


Economic Scene; Will Presidents miss a few economic aides? Some say yes.
WHEN the President wants economic advice, he can always turn to his National Economic Council, the Office of Management and Budget or the Cabinet agencies.
So why not jettison the Council of Economic Advisers, a 48-year-old symbol of an era when economists had the hubris to believe they could smooth the way to permanent prosperity?
Such reasoning, spiced with more than a dash of partisanship, apparently explains the House Republicans' inclination to deny funds for the council.
But in the view of conservative as well as liberal economists, it represents myopia with a capital M. "It would be a pity to throw away a bargain," argues Martin S. Feldstein, chairman of the council under President Ronald Reagan.


Home Births Are Safer Than Hospital Births; Midwives Maligned
To the Editor:
Your assault on midwives appears to be endless.
First we are forced to endure a three-part series in March on problems in the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation that all but accused "poorly supervised" midwives of standing by idly while innocent babies died in city hospitals.


INSIDE
China Shows Anger at U.S.
By detaining two prominent dissidents, China has served notice on the United States that it does not intend to make concessions to end the downward spiral of relations between the countries.
Page A8.
Schools Takeover in Chicago
Chicago's Mayor will effectively take over the city's schools today by announcing his choices for a five-member school board.
Page A14.
Maternity Bill Passes
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed a bill requiring insurers to pay for a second day of hospital maternity care, making New Jersey the second state to regulate what critics call "drive-through deliveries." Page B1.


Human Rights Group Denied Accreditation for U.N. Event
Freedom House, the New York-based human rights organization that monitors political liberties, civil rights and press freedom worldwide, has been denied participation in United Nations events as an accredited unofficial group.
Several other organizations faced challenges last week from a loose coalition of nations, including China, Cuba, India, Indonesia, Iran and the Sudan, which has been campaigning to curtail the growing influence of human rights groups in international affairs.
These countries are all members of a committee within the Economic and Social Council that recommends what organizations should be given the right to take part in United Nations conferences and other meetings.


Mantle Is Released From Hospital
Mickey Mantle eagerly walked out of the hospital today almost three weeks after an emergency liver transplant to save his life.
Doctors said his impatience at being largely confined to a guarded hospital room at Baylor University Medical Center here had mounted and the 63-year-old Yankee legend had been pressuring them to let him out.
But some signs last week that he was rejecting his new liver, they said, argued for treating him in the hospital until the risks had abated.


New Editor Is Appointed For Delphi
In a clear signal that he intends to compete vigorously in the increasingly competitive on-line information industry, Rupert Murdoch yesterday appointed Anthea Disney, editor in chief of TV Guide, to be the top editor at the News Corporation's Delphi Internet Services.
Ms.
Disney's appointment is the latest of several bold moves intended to revitalize Delphi, which languishes far behind such rivals as America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy, and which faces formidable and imminent competition from the Microsoft Network and AT&amp;T's Interchange service.
Compuserve is owned by H &amp; R Block; Prodigy is a venture between I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.S. and Japan Set Deal With Just Hours to Go  With just hours left before $5.9 billion in sanctions were to kick in, the United States and Japan found common ground on automotive trade.
After long, turbulent talks, the key bargainers proclaimed a new era for two scrapping nations.
But a close look shows an accord that is often deliberately vague and may fall short of President Clinton's goal of cracking open Japan's markets.  [ Page A1. ] On Capitol Hill, praise was cautious and muted.
Some Democrats wanted more, while Republicans fretted about confrontational tactics.
And Phil Gramm said, "The President was only shooting blanks."  [ D7. ]


Market Place; New strategy: Buy what Buffett doesn't like, in this case US Air.
MOST people who take their cues from the investor Warren E. Buffett follow a simple formula: Buy what the Great One likes, sell what he hates.
But an alternative strategy has so far produced handsome gains for a couple of institutions that stepped up purchases of US Air stock barely one month after Mr.
Buffett signaled his displeasure with the airline operator.


U.S. Issues New, Strict Tests For Affirmative Action Plans
Reacting to a recent Supreme Court ruling, the Clinton Administration today issued guidelines for evaluating Federal affirmative action programs that may make many of them harder to justify legally.
But even as the Administration took the first step in what could be an overhaul of those programs, Republicans in Congress were moving forward with plans to do away with all Federal efforts intended to give women and minorities extra help in employment and contracting.


Dispute Flares Over Late Evidence, Halting Simpson Trial
Testimony in the O. J. Simpson trial came to an abrupt halt late today, as defense lawyers accused prosecutors of springing on them at the 11th hour various photographs of hair and trace evidence.
These included photographs of bluish-black cotton threads from the clothes that prosecutors say Mr.
Simpson wore when he killed Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The threads -- their images magnified and placed on display boards -- were found on three exhibits: the leather glove found behind Mr.
Simpson's home, Mr.
Simpson's socks and Mr.
Goldman's shirt, where they were wrapped around a bloodied blond hair.
That hair, said Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark, came from Mrs.
Simpson; Mr.
Simpson, she suggested, ferried it from one victim to the other.


Daimler Loss Shows Danger of Mark's Rise
In the most sobering signal yet that Germany's strong currency is weakening its economy, Daimler-Benz A.G. shocked analysts and investors today by announcing it would report a "severe loss" for 1995.
The maker of Mercedes-Benz automobiles said the rise of the mark, which has appreciated more than 20 percent against the dollar in the last year, was hurting the company, particularly in the aerospace division, and it would report its second annual loss in three years.
The company said it planned to review its 35 business segments with an eye to either selling some or transferring production abroad.
Daimler, Germany's largest industrial concern, said it would have to set aside more than $700 million to counter the mark's rise -- and the amount might be even higher.


Jonathan S. Berg, AIDS Educator, 34
Jonathan S. Berg, a real estate broker and former vice president of the Corcoran Group who was active in AIDS education, died on Saturday at his summer home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He was 34 and also lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Steven Yee of Manhattan.


Threat Delays Air Travel And Mail in California
Air travel and air mail deliveries were delayed throughout California today when airport authorities tightened passenger and baggage security in response to a terrorist threat to blow up a California flight.
Just as the annual Fourth of July holiday travel crush was beginning to build, scores of plane departures were delayed for 30 minutes or more as airport authorities here and elsewhere in the state began checking the identities of all passengers and increased the X-raying all bags, whether destined for the cabin or the hold of planes.


U.S. Dealers in Japanese Cars Relieved at Escaping Big Tariffs
Yesterday's trade agreement averts the punitive tariffs that would have made Japanese luxury cars so expensive in America that practically no one would have bought them.
Auto importers hailed the accord, saying it would preserve jobs at dealerships that sell the Lexus, Infiniti, Acura and other models.
Typical was the statement from Nissan North America, which handles Infiniti imports.
"The real winners in this settlement," said Timothy MacCarthy, vice president of government affairs for the importer, "are the thousands of dealers and employees, whose jobs were saved, and American consumers, who will continue to benefit from free trade and competition."


International Briefs; India May Scrap Enron Project
A state government committee has recommended scrapping a power project being built by the Enron Corporation without compensation, Indian press reports said yesterday.
The 2,015-megawatt plant being built 120 miles south of Bombay would be the nation's biggest power plant.
Opposition leaders who won elections in March in Maharashtra state set up the committee to review the terms of the $2.5 billion deal.
They say the price of the electricity to be generated will be too high.


The Pop Life
No. 1, but That's All
Michael Jackson's much touted, much criticized new record, "HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I," sold 391,000 copies in its first week, according to statistics released yesterday by Soundscan, a record tracking company in Hartsdale, N.Y. (Approximately one-sixth of those were sold in the New York area.) That figure is lower than some people expected, especially executives at Sony Music, which is marketing it at a reported cost of about $30 million.


Treasury Prices Rise After Trade Accord Spurs Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities bounced higher yesterday, erasing early losses after a breakthrough in trade negotiations with the Japanese buoyed the dollar.
Before that, prices were down as the market geared up for a five-year note auction after a mediocre two-year auction on Tuesday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.94
4.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.40
4.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.35
4.56
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.13
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.51
6.54
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.46
7.52
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.17
6.16
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SENATE VOTES BILL TO CURB LAWSUITS BY STOCKHOLDERS
By a surprisingly large margin, the Senate today easily approved a measure to discourage lawsuits by shareholders alleging fraud by stockbrokers, accountants or corporate officials.
The issue pitted powerful interests against each other and produced a flood of television commercials and advertisements from both sides.
Supporting the bill were large accounting firms, brokers and business groups, especially those from the more financially volatile high-technology industry, who argued that the legislation was needed to discourage a flood of frivolous lawsuits that occur when a company's share price drops suddenly.
On the other side were consumer groups, lawyers and government regulators who said the changes in the bill would mean that small investors who are deceived would be left with little recourse.


Some Lehman Claims Dismissed
A Federal judge has dismissed claims by subsidiaries of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. that a Chinese metals and minerals company was legally bound to repay $53.5 million in trading losses accrued by one of its subsidiaries.
United States District Judge John F. Keenan ruled on Monday that a guarantee signed by Hu Xiangdong, the general manager of Minmetals International Non-Ferrous Metals Trading Corporation, was not binding on Minmetals' parent company, the China National Metals and Minerals Import and Export Company.


CHRONICLE
DIANDRA DOUGLAS, wife of the actor MICHAEL DOUGLAS, has filed for divorce after 18 years of marriage.
But the couple are treating the matter as a separation, during which they will try to "work on their marriage," her lawyer, Dennis Wasser, said yesterday.


CHRONICLE
The PRINCESS OF WALES, sleek and sun-tanned, viewed contemporary art and attended a dinner and auction to benefit the Serpentine Gallery in London last night.
The Princess, wearing a short beaded dress, visited the contemporary-art museum, where she is a patron, with JULIA PEYTON-JONES, its director, and GRAYDON CARTER, editor in chief of Vanity Fair magazine, which sponsored the dinner.


F.A.A. Panel Chief Pledges Fast Report on Turbulence
The head of a new Federal Aviation Administration panel studying turbulence-related injuries said yesterday that he planned to have preliminary recommendations by next week.
Since 1978, the agency's statistics show, turbulence has injured at least 1,000 people on about 250 passenger planes, including those hurt in three incidents in the last few days.
Citing the Transportation Secretary's goal of eliminating airline accidents, the official, David R. Harrington, the manager of the agency's Air Transportation Division, said of turbulence: "Here's something that pops up year after year. If we're serious about zero accidents, we have to fix it."


Voting Puts Dickstein in Control of Hills
Dickstein Partners Inc. has won its bid for control of the Hills Stores Company by a wide margin, according to preliminary results of a shareholder vote released yesterday by an independent inspector of shareholder elections.
The directors on Dickstein's slate have pledged to put Hills, a regional discount store chain, for sale, a strategy the company and its board strongly resisted.
But 5,844,403 shares, about 76 percent of the total number shares voted, were cast in favor of the Dickstein nominees; the incumbent directors received votes of 1,790,894 shares, or 24 percent.


H.B.O. Signs Studios' Deal
Home Box Office said yesterday that it had signed a deal with with two Sony Corporation studios, Columbia Pictures and Tristar Pictures, for exclusive pay-television rights to their movies through 2004.
One person familiar with the negotiations said that if the studios' films do well, Sony could receive revenues of about $1 billion over the duration of the contract.


Union's Oxymoron: A Quiet Leader
WHAT people say tends to get more attention than what they do not say, which might explain why an intriguing aspect of New York City's latest school war has drawn so little attention.
The president of the teachers union, Sandra Feldman, has become the model of a reserved union leader.
Which is, or was, an oxymoron.
"I know what people are saying, but it just isn't true," Ms.
Feldman said in an interview the other day.
"I'm very tough. But I don't feel the need as some do to bluster and scream and yell."


Girl, 12, Reports Rape at Gunpoint by 5 Youths
A 12-year-old girl reported that she was raped early yesterday in an elevator at a Harlem housing project by a group of five teen-age boys wielding a gun, the police said.
The police questioned several youths yesterday, but no one had been charged last night in the attack.
One youth, Paul Melvin, 16, was charged with sexual abuse in connection with what the police said was an earlier encounter with the girl.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  American Crews Excel at Henley
American victories were the order of the day as the Henley Royal Regatta began yesterday at Henley-on-Thames, England.
The Syracuse varsity eight defeated Ireland's Defense Forces Rowing Association by two and one-quarter lengths in the Thames Challenge Cup, followed in the afternoon by Syracuse's four with coxswain victory over another Irish crew, Queen's University, Belfast, in the Britannia Challenge Cup.
Washington University's junior varsity heavyweight eight knocked Japan's Mitsubishi Boat Club out of the Thames Cup and advanced to a race today against Brown's freshman heavyweights.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Stanford also advanced to the next round of the Thames Cup.


How to Understand John Major's Britain
To the Editor:
With regard to your June 25 news article on Prime Minister John Major of Britain, you really must restrain yourself from giving the impression that politics in other industrialized countries is driven by the extreme right wing to the extent that it is here.
On the contrary, no one could win a national election in any European country on a program like the Republican Contract With America.


Dominic Tang Yiming, 87, Dies; Archbishop in Exile From China
Dominic Tang Yiming, the Pope's Archbishop in exile for the city of Guangzhou, China, who personified the schism between the Vatican and the state-affiliated Patriotic Association of Catholics, died on Tuesday during a visit to Stamford, Conn.
He was 87 and spent his exile in Hong Kong until he moved to San Francisco early this year.
His death at St.
Joseph Medical Center was reported yesterday by officials of the Roman Catholic Church in Hong Kong.
The cause was pneumonia, said the Rev.
Christopher Walsh, a spokesman for the Diocese of Bridgeport.


Yankees Drum Up Solution of Their Own
The Yankees played three games yesterday: the one at the Stadium and the two Darryl Strawberry participated in for Tampa during a Gulf Coast League doubleheader in Kissimmee, Fla., as he prepares to play the Big Apple once more.
You remember Strawberry, the savior, the left-handed bat signed by George Steinbrenner to prod a meandering, disappointing team back into the race.
Well, guess what?
The team that signed the Straw on June 19 no longer exists.


Foreman Giving Up Title
GEORGE FOREMAN has decided to relinquish his International Boxing Federation heavyweight championship and not give AXEL SCHULZ of Germany a rematch, The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday.
The move would leave Foreman, who won the I.B.F. and World Boxing Association heavyweight titles last November when he knocked out MICHAEL MOORER, without a major title.
Foreman, 46, was stripped of the W.B.A. title because he would not sign for a mandatory defense against the No. 1 contender, TONY TUCKER.
Instead, he fought Schulz in Las Vegas, Nev., on April 22 and won a controversial majority decision.
The I.B.F. ordered Foreman to give Schulz a rematch and said it would strip him of the title if he refused.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Junipers and Gin
Q.
What species of juniper produces the berries used to flavor gin?
And will it grow in my garden? -- Susan Felleman, Brooklyn


Home Births Are Safer Than Hospital Births
To the Editor:
Re "Medical Fads: Bran, Midwives and Leeches" by Sherwin B. Nuland of the Yale School of Medicine (Week in Review, June 25): Nowhere is "the less solid scientific evidence" for medical care better demonstrated than in a hospital birth.
The multitude of procedures accepted as a standard of care for childbirth have no basis whatever.


For Salomon, A Return to Old Methods on Pay
Salomon Brothers Inc., which tried to forge a new standard for compensation on Wall Street last year by adopting an unpopular pay plan, told its senior executives yesterday that it would return next year to more tried-and-true methods of calculating pay.
At a meeting yesterday with managing directors in New York, Deryck C. Maughan, the chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers, and Robert E. Denham, the chairman and chief executive of its holding company, Salomon Inc., said executives' compensation in 1996 would be based on a combination of the firm's return on equity, the profits generated by their particular business unit and individual productivity.


China Beckons and Car Makers Pant
China hungers for new cars. American car makers are dying to sell here.
At China's annual car show, which opened here on Tuesday, thousands of eager buyers pawed at an array of shiny new models and car sellers did their best to tempt them with glossy handouts, flashy videos and seductively dressed women.


Yankees Drum Up Solution of Their Own
The Yankees played three games yesterday: the one at the Stadium and the two Darryl Strawberry participated in for Tampa during a Gulf Coast League doubleheader in Kissimmee, Fla., as he prepares to play the Big Apple once more.
You remember Strawberry, the savior, the left-handed bat signed by George Steinbrenner to prod a meandering, disappointing team back into the race.
Well, guess what?
The team that signed the Straw on June 19 no longer exists.


N. W. Ayer Loses Lechters Account
Lechters Inc., the housewares and kitchen accessories retailer based in Harrison, N.J., has withdrawn its account from N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York after a year and moved it, without a review, to the TKO Design Group, a small firm in Lambertville, N.J.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.


METRO DIGEST
But 17 of their classmates, whose diplomas had seemed certain on Monday, were not among them.  [ B2. ] AN OXYMORON FOR MODERN TIMES What people say tends to get more attention than what they do not say, which might explain why an intriguing aspect of New York City's latest school war has drawn so little attention.
The president of the teachers union, Sandra Feldman, has become the model of a reserved union leader.
Which is, or was, an oxymoron.


U.S. SETTLES TRADE DISPUTE, AVERTING BILLIONS IN TARIFFS ON JAPANESE LUXURY AUTOS
The United States and Japan reached a broad but ambiguously worded accord today on automotive trade, ending a two-year dispute just hours before $5.9 billion in tariffs against Japanese luxury cars were scheduled to go into effect.
President Clinton canceled the trade sanctions after a settlement was reached in marathon and turbulent negotiations here between the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, and his Japanese counterpart, Ryutaro Hashimoto.


English Gardeners; No Hedges, Please! (This Is England?)
WE were walking in the Beth Chatto Gardens when a plant near a sunny pond brought us up short.
Its six-foot purple blades sliced the sky like a fan of swords.
"Phormium teenax purpureum," Beth Chatto said. "It's one of my full-stop plants."
At 72, Mrs.
Chatto is a wiry, opinionated 5-foot-3 bundle of pure energy.
But this creature, bristling against the sky, made her look tiny, almost subdued.


Losing Paradise, Keeping His Faith
ON a recent summer afternoon, humidity as dense as shrubbery, the Rev.
Howard Finster was in his studio finishing up his 36,892d piece of art, glitter on the floor, pondering life, art, God and Elvis.
"Elvis appeared to me while I was working in the garden," said Mr.
Finster, the self-described Man of Visions.
A 78-year-old folk artist, he was referring to Paradise Garden, his rapturously eccentric two-and-a-half-acre ode to God and humanity that took him more than a decade to create.
"I was in the flower bed. He was wearing a light shirt and blue pants. I talked to him and asked him to stay a while with me. But he said, 'Howard, I'm on a tight schedule.' "


Trumpy Off NBC's Top Unit
NBC Sports yesterday demoted BOB TRUMPY, its No. 1 pro football analyst, and created a three-in-the-booth team with DICK ENBERG, PAUL MAGUIRE and PHIL SIMMS, who worked for ESPN last season.
Trumpy will work with TOM HAMMOND; MARV ALBERT, Maguire's partner, will be paired with CRIS COLLINSWORTH.
"Being No. 1 was the farthest thing from my mind," Simms said.
"Coming to NBC was just a chance to call games."


Tigers Enjoy A Super Day Vs. McDowell
The Yankees had Jack McDowell, and Sparky Anderson had his Superman theory.
In the end, as the Yankees' six-game winning streak ended yesterday against the Tigers, it was a case of not enough McDowell, the onetime Cy Young Award winner, and maybe a dose too much of comic-book strategy by Anderson, the effervescent manager.


Tap as Genial Conversation
The Jazz Tap Ensemble was in a particularly amiable mood when it opened its engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night.
The Los Angeles-based troupe, which Lynn Dally directs, favors a relaxed style.
Everyone's footwork is clear and intricate.
Indeed, this year it looks more finely honed than ever.
Nevertheless, when the dancers show off, they do so in a genial manner.
This is a company that appears to be made up of good friends.
The program featured "Interplay," a new work by Jimmy Slyde, which resembled a lively conversation between the dancers (Ms. Dally, Sam Weber, Derick Grant, Lainie Manning, Dormeshia Sumbry and Mark Mendonca) and the musicians (Doug Walter, Eric Ajaye, Stacy Rowles and the group's musical director, Jerry Kalaf).
Mr.
Slyde, who is now 67, is a veteran tap dancer.
Yet never before had he choreographed a piece for anyone other than himself.


International Briefs; Danish Stock Drops
Shares in ISS International Service System of Denmark dropped 10 percent yesterday after the company said that it would not be able to meet its earlier earnings forecast.


Congressional Roundup: Congress and White House Make Last Effort to Compromise on '95 Budget; New Economic Adviser
The Clinton administration chose a new head of its Council of Economic Advisers today, even as House Republicans moved forward in an Appropriations subcommittee to eliminate the panel's financing.
The subcommittee restored some money the Republicans had sought to remove from the National Security Council, leaving that agency with only slightly less financing than President Clinton had requested in his budget in February.
The votes were along strict party lines and left some Democrats unhappy at what they said were incursions into Presidential prerogatives.


Ex-Clinton Confidant Gets 21 Months
Webster L. Hubbell, who once stood at the pinnacle of the legal establishment in Arkansas and Washington, was sentenced today to 21 months in prison for mail fraud and tax evasion after the Whitewater independent counsel declined to recommend a lighter sentence on the basis of Mr.
Hubbell's cooperation with investigators.
Mr.
Hubbell, once one of President Clinton's closest confidants, will be the most prominent person to go to prison as a result of the inquiry into the Whitewater real estate venture and other matters led by the independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr.
But Mr.
Hubbell was not involved in the Whitewater Development Company, of which Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, were partners, and the charges were not directly related to Mr.
Starr's investigation of whether a failed savings and loan institution improperly funneled money into Whitewater.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP., El Segundo, Calif., a provider of consulting and information technology services, said a joint venture led by the company had received a five-year $460 million contract to provide support services at an Air Force testing site in Tullahoma, Tenn.


Whimsy As a Tool To Deal With AIDS
There are many, many ways of dealing with the forbidding darkness that surrounds every human life, from poetry to primal screams.
And whimsy is probably as legitimate a means as any.
It has certainly sustained many writers in this century.
Think of Jean Giraudoux or E. E. Cummings or Thornton Wilder.
Or for more immediate evidence, there is Steven Dietz's "Lonely Planet," which was first produced in New York last year by the Barrow Group and has now been revived, with the same actors and director, with admirable finesse by that troupe and the Circle Repertory Company.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  TRADE ACCORD IS REACHED  The United States and Japan reached a broad but ambiguously worded accord on automotive trade, ending a two-year dispute just hours before $5.9 billion in tariffs against Japanese luxury cars were set to go into effect.
A1  EGYPT AND THE SUDAN CLASH  Egyptian and Sudanese security forces clashed at a disputed border area, and Egypt's President in a televised address urged the people of the Sudan to overthrow their Islamic Government.
A3  CHINA ACTS IN WARNING TO U.S.
With the detention in the last several days of two prominent dissidents, China has served notice to the U.S. that it does not intend to make concessions to end the downward spiral of relations between the two countries.
A8  RIGHTS GROUPS ARE CHALLENGED  Several human rights organizations face challenges from a loose coalition of nations, including China, Cuba, and Iran, which has been campaigning to curtail their influence in international affairs.
A8  SERBIAN NATIONAL DAY DISRUPTED  The threat of attack on Bosnian Serb festivities marking the most sacred day on the Serbian national calendar illustrates the Bosnian Army's new assertiveness.
A12  The Serbs hit Sarajevo's television center with rockets.
A12  The suspects in a Brazil Indian massacre have vanished.
A6  South Korean President's party suffered in regional elections.
A7  The British owners of an oil rig ask Norway for a harbor.
A12  Grozny Journal: Chechens labor to rebuild their destroyed capital.
A4  National A14-19, B6-8  BOMB THREAT IN LOS ANGELES  The self-described anarchist whose mail bombs have terrorized executives and researchers threatened to blow up an airliner flying out of Los Angeles in six days but said later that the threat was a hoax.
A1  SENATE BACKS LAWSUIT CURBS  The Senate approved a measure to discourage suits by shareholders alleging fraud by stockbrokers or corporate officials.
A1  RULES FOR AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  The Clinton Administration issued guidelines for evaluating Federal affirmative action programs that may make many of them harder to legally justify.
A1  GINGRICH INQUIRY SLOW  The House ethics committee investigating Newt Gingrich has yet to question many of the most obvious witnesses about a college course taught, a book contract or other accusations of misconduct.
A1  FLAG-BURNING AMENDMENT PASSES  The House voted for a constitutional amendment to allow the states to make it a crime to desecrate the American flag.
A1  SCHOOL TAKEOVER IN CHICAGO  Chicago's mayor will effectively take over city schools today with the announcement of his choices for a five-member school board.
A14  LOOKING FOR COMPROMISE CUTS  Congressional Roundup: Congress and the White House made one last attempt at finding a compromise on the 1995 budget cutting bill that President Clinton vetoed.
A18  CAPITOL BARBER TO GO PRIVATE  Capitol Sketchbook: The Congressional barber is about to be privatized.
A18  NO CASE ON PACKWOOD  The Justice Department told Senator Bob Packwood that it would not prosecute him on charges that he arranged for lobbyists to offer jobs to his wife in exchange for legislative favors.
A19  HUBBELL GETS 21 MONTHS  Webster Hubbell was sentenced to 21 months in prison on mail fraud and tax evasion charges in the Whitewater investigation.
B6  SIMPSON CASE HALTED  Testimony in the O. J. Simpson trial came to a halt when defense lawyers accused prosecutors of springing on them photographs of hair and trace evidence in the case.
B6  PLANE INJURIES RAISE CONCERN  Safety authorities despair of what to do about the unexpected turbulence in flight that hits passenger and have hurt about 1,000 people since 1978.
B6  NEW RECORD IN SPACE  When the space shuttle Atlantis docks with the Russian space station Mir, the two craft will form the biggest structure to orbit the earth since the space age began.
B8  Federal agencies were ordered to tighten security.
A15  A gene that causes a form of Alzheimer's disease was found.
A17 Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-20  Literary revival in New York.
C11  The Hugh Grant scandal.
C16  Theater: "Lonely Planet." C11  Music: Oscar Peterson.
C11  Pop Life.
C14  Dance: Jazz Tap Ensemble.
C11 Casting choices in the Kirov Ballet's "Cinderella." C15 Books: "After the Wall." C18  Television: "Angelie's Secret," on CBS.
C18  The Home Section C1-9  At home with Howard Finster: Losing Paradise, keeping his faith.
C1  The new deal in Miami Beach.
C1  Sports B9-16  Baseball: No early return for Gooden.
B9  Yanks lose to Tigers as streak ends at 6.
B9  Mantle is released from hospital.
B12  Basketball: N.B.A. players file antitrust suit.
B9  Underclassmen dominate N.B.A. draft picks.
B9  Columns: Araton on N.B.A. draft.
B9  Horse Racing: Winning filly stirs early Derby talk.
B15  Tennis: Mary Pierce eliminated at Wimbledon.
B12  Obituaries D21  Dominic Tang Yiming, the Pope's Guangzhou Archbishop in exile.
Efrem Kurtz, conductor.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Mr.
Hevesi's timely warning.
Good if oversold agreement.
Albany: Don't undercut N.Y.P.D.
Letters  Frank Rich: Smoking G.O.P. guns.
William Safire: Stop harassing Packwood.
Jack F. Matlock Jr.: Russia's center does not hold.
Chronicle B20 Bridge C16 Crossword C14


New Mothers Gain 2d Day In Hospital
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman came to Holy Name Hospital today to sign a bill requiring insurers to pay for a second day of hospital care for mothers and their newborns, making the state the second in the nation to regulate what critics have called "drive-through deliveries."
It was the latest result of the growing public backlash against the decision by health maintenance organizations to cover only 24 hours of hospital care after normal births.
A decade ago, most women and their infants remained in a hospital for three or four days for rest, observation and tests.


Serial Slayer Pleads Guilty To a Murder
In a move that surprised prosecutors, Ricardo S. Caputo, the serial killer who turned himself in after 20 years as a fugitive, pleaded guilty today to strangling his psychologist in 1974.
"There is no real way to know why the defendant pleaded as charged," said Jeanine Pirro, the Westchester County District Attorney, who had been preparing to fight Mr.
Caputo's claims of insanity at a trial in August.
"We haven't been negotiating with him. We found out when we walked into court this morning."


Essay; Stop Harassing Packwood
Remember what the accusations against Senator Bob Packwood were supposed to be about?
Thirty-one months ago, headlines charged that 29 women over a course of 26 years accused him of unwanted advances.
One network described the Packwood affair as "the biggest sex scandal since the Clarence Thomas/ Anita Hill hearings." Last month, in a lip-smacking report graphically recording accusations decades old, the Senate Ethics Committee claimed to find "substantial credible evidence" that Packwood had engaged in a "pattern of sexual misconduct."


Broadway mounts a brand-new production, a marketing campaign in which it's the star.
WHAT?
Advertise the Broadway theater as a national branded product?
Treat it like a fine wine, a luxury sedan, or, well -- a premium beer?
For years this notion has been the goal of a few quixotic theater marketers.
Now this dream -- pipe dream, some naysayers have called it -- is closer than ever to becoming a reality.
Traditionally, Broadway has been a conglomeration of individual shows produced by disparate entrepreneurs, "and there haven't been collective advertising efforts, coordinated marketing plans or ticket-buying mechanisms to give Broadway a distinctive identity," said Susan Lee, marketing director for the League of American Theaters and Producers, the trade association for Broadway productions appearing in New York and throughout North America.


History and More at Rest Stops
Rest stops on the New Jersey Turnpike are named after famous New Jerseyans, but that is where their educational value ends.
Until now, that is.
The Turnpike Authority yesterday unveiled $11.4 million worth of improvements to its Molly Pitcher rest stop, including a new restaurant, self-flushing toilets, fax and copy machines and 262 additional parking spaces.
But curious motorists will also find an informational display on Mary Ludwig Hays, nicknamed Molly Pitcher, who carried water and shot a cannon in the Battle of Monmouth on June 28, 1778.
Similar modifications are planned for the turnpike's 10 other rest stops.
TERRY PRISTIN


Bomb in Queens Is Linked To Others, Dating From '82
A package bomb that killed a supervising high school guidance counselor in 1982 was apparently sent by the same person who, after an 11-year hiatus, mailed three similar explosives, including one that sprayed bullet fragments at a pregnant woman in Queens on Tuesday.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton and Greg Rhatigan, a Postal Service investigator, said they did not know why the lethal packages had been sent, why the addresses to which they were delivered had been chosen, or why there was an 11-year gap between the first and second incidents.
All four devices had been camouflaged to look like books or videocassettes, the officials said.


International Briefs; Indian Power Contract
A Japanese consortium of Sumitomo and Mitsubishi has received a $1 billion contract from National Power P.L.C. of Britain and the Hinduja Group to build a 1,000-megawatt power station in India, the companies said yesterday.
National Power said the plant in Andhra Pradesh state is scheduled to begin operations within four years.
National Power will retain the responsibility to operate and maintain the station. (Dow Jones)


Vendors, Not Veterans, Create Milieu for Crime
To the Editor:
A few sentences by your reporter June 6, summarizing two hours of discussion, have been misinterpreted by John L. Behan, Director of Veterans' Affairs for New York State (letter, June 10).
Mr.
Behan characterizes me as impugning "the integrity of a class of citizens who patriotically and bravely served their country."


No Headline
How far can you go to keep people in their seats?
Get cattle prods? -- ALAN POLLOCK of the National Transportation Safety Board, on airliner turbulence.  [ B6:5. ]


In Warning to U.S., China Cracks Down on 2 Dissidents
With the detention in the last several days of two prominent dissidents, China has served notice on the United States that it does not intend to make concessions to end the downward spiral of relations between the two countries.
The detention of Harry Wu, a naturalized American human rights advocate, as he crossed into China from Kazakhstan, and the imprisonment of Chen Ziming, a Chinese dissident whose release last year was personally requested and then praised by President Clinton, has aroused a great deal of consternation in Washington.


Hearty Cheers In Detroit as Japan Renews Earlier Goals
After President Clinton announced today that the Japanese auto makers had promised to build more cars and trucks in the United States, the Honda Motor Company said it would raise production by a whopping 18 percent by 1998, to 720,000 vehicles a year.
The funny thing is, Honda made the same announcement almost a year ago.


Jacques Berque, 85, Expert on Islam and Arabs
Jacques Berque, a leading French expert on Islam who worked assiduously to make the Arab world better understood by the West, died on Tuesday at his home in St.-Julien-en-Born in the Landes region of southwest France.
He was 85.
A tall elegant man renowned for his intellectual free spirit, Mr.
Berque wrote a score of academic books about Islam and Arab civilization, but the crowning achievement of his career came in 1991 when, after 20 years' work, he published his French translation of the Koran, the Muslim holy book.


Firefight on Border Worsens Egypt-Sudan Political Feud
Egyptian and Sudanese security forces clashed at a disputed border area overnight, and Egypt's President urged the Sudanese people today to overthrow their Islamic militant Government.
The fighting, at the Red Sea border area of Halaib, left three Egyptian and three Sudanese soldiers wounded, according the official Middle East News Agency.
Egypt has not confirmed any casualties; the Sudan said two of its border police were killed.


T.W.A. Cleared for 2d Bankruptcy Filing
Trans World Airlines celebrated in the fall of 1993 when it emerged from bankruptcy.
But the company's executives were cheering again yesterday because T.W.A. is headed for bankruptcy court for its second filing in less than four years.
The twist stems from winning approval late Tuesday night from its creditors for a restructuring plan to be submitted to bankruptcy court this week.
The result, T.W.A. expects, will be to emerge from bankruptcy with a lighter debt burden and a more realistic business plan as early as September -- a quicker and more certain timetable than trying to seek an out-of-court settlement.


Cravath Lawyer and Brother Are Guilty of Insider Trading
A former senior associate at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, the blue-chip Wall Street law firm, and his brother, pleaded guilty yesterday to insider trading in a case that shows how even well-paid young lawyers can fall prey to the temptation to pass on confidential information.
With the recent upswing in big mergers and takeovers, there has been a steady increase in insider trading cases, some of them involving lawyers and investment bankers and their family members.
But yesterday's guilty plea is the first such case to involve Cravath, a firm that represents many of the biggest American companies, and that has prided itself on its clean record.


Gay Pride Marchers Suffered Neo-Nazi Taunts
To the Editor:
The irony of your June 26 front-page article on gay Holocaust survivors, appearing on the day after New York City's Lesbian and Gay Pride March, and on the same page as your coverage of that event, will not be lost on those of us at the march.


L.I. Pine Barrens Becomes 3d State Preserve
After years of negotiations among developers, environmentalists and politicians, Gov.
George E. Pataki today signed a plan designating the 100,000-acre Long Island Pine Barrens as New York State's third forest preserve.
The plan will halt development in 52,500 acres in the core of the preserve and regulate development in the surrounding 47,500 acres.


Agreement On Which Both Sides Disagree
After two years of arduous and often bitter negotiations over automobile trade, the United States and Japan have ended up as they started out -- announcing an agreement over which they don't agree.
So it wasn't surprising that even as Japanese Government officials were claiming a huge victory in the trade talks, a few doubts were arising here about whether the victory was really that secure.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about a government bailout of Mexican banks referred incorrectly to the condition of the Banco del Norte.
It is considered profitable and well capitalized; it is not among the Mexican banks thought most likely to need some sort of restructuring or a merger in the next few months.


Gant's Bat Silences All Doubters
If you win a comeback player of the year award, the suggestion is that you've been able to come back from something as well as to something.
For a long time, as Ron Gant sat and waited for a multiple compound fracture of his right leg to heal, he may have been the lone man in baseball who thought he could come back to what he was, a hitter who had produced 386 runs batted in and 117 home runs from 1990-93 and who in two of those seasons had joined the exclusive 30-30 club by hitting at least 30 homers and stealing 30 bases.


For Power Rangers, Bikinis Are Not The Issue
If the words "Go, go, Power Rangers!" don't make you hear the television theme song ringing in your head, if you have to ask what a zord is, the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers have bypassed your household, saving you a bundle of money.
If, on the other hand, you actually know that Tommy is the White Ranger and Billy is the Blue Ranger, you are bound to end up at "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: The Movie." It may give you a headache, if only from thinking about all the new toys it will spawn, but your 5-year-old will probably find it irresistible, more than once.
The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers are to children today exactly what the Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles were to children five years ago: a television series about martial-arts teen-agers who turn into superheros, a merchandising gold mine, and finally a movie.
The film resembles three episodes of the television series strung together, with slightly better, splashier special effects. (Given the shabby production values of the series, that isn't hard.)


Lana Turner, the Sultry Actress, Is Dead at 75
Lana Turner, who built a successful movie career on her first screen appearance as a teen-age "sweater girl," died yesterday.
She was 75 and lived in Los Angeles.
"She just took a breath and she was gone," her daughter, Cheryl Crane, was quoted as saying in Daily Variety, a trade newspaper.
Miss Turner, who had been treated for throat cancer, apparently died of natural causes, a police spokeswoman, Ramona Baety, confirmed to The Associated Press.


Edgar Williams, 82, Planner Of Allies' Alamein Victory, Dies
Sir Edgar Williams, a British Army officer and scholar who helped to win a key World War II battle and to get Rhodes Scholarships awarded to women, died on Monday in Oxford, England, where he lived.
He was 82.
His death was reported yesterday by The Associated Press.


Tele-Metropole reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Renovation in Cleveland
In a step aimed at keeping the Cleveland Browns from leaving town, the City Council approved a $154 million tax package last night to help finance the renovation of Depression-era Cleveland Stadium.
The tax package, which has the support of Mayor MICHAEL WHITE, was approved by a 16-4 vote.


Toll Takers in Contract Talks
Holiday travelers, who were spared the possibility of a strike by N.J.
Transit engineers, now have something new to worry about.
With contracts for toll collectors and maintenance workers on both the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway set to expire this weekend, both sides were engaged in intensive bargaining yesterday.
About 300 management workers and nearly 600 part-time toll collectors are ready to staff booths if the turnpike's 860 regular collectors walk out when their contract expires at 11:59 P.M. on Sunday, officials said.
Contracts for the parkway's 382 toll collectors and 401 maintenance workers expire at 11:59 tonight.


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


We've Already Said No to the $1 Coin
To the Editor:
Proponents of a $1 coin to replace the $1 bill are touting the saving that will result if long-lasting coins replace the short-lived bill.
While champions of the bill dispute that there will be any saving, the issue of saving through the use of the coin should be only one factor in considering a changeover.


Tribute to a Swing-Era Saxophonist
For the last decade, swing-era shows have produced some of the JVC Jazz Festival's best music, in part because swing musicians remember their audiences: entertainment isn't a bad word.
And it's also because swing musicians know the value of brevity, of editing and of the drama that comes from it all.
At Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night, a group of musicians settled in to pay tribute to the tenor saxophonist Flip Phillips, celebrating his 80th birthday this year.
Mr.
Phillips himself appeared; he's one of the last important swing-era musicians alive, and he and his friends produced a faultless performance, at least for the first half of the show.


Corrections
Because of an editing error an entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Wednesday omitted part of a sentence about the departure of the consumer health care division of SmithKline Beech am P.L.C. from BBDO Worldwide.


Sylvester Stallone, Judge. Uh-Oh.
As the futuristic man of justice Judge Dredd, Sylvester Stallone looks as if he has been visiting Michael Jackson's tailor.
Where else would he have found that black cat suit with the giant gold epaulets?
He is as pumped up as Rambo.
And his heroic, letter-of-the-law character has all the power and stern authority of, say, Bugs or Mickey or Daffy.
Based on the British cult comic books, "Judge Dredd" is evidence that there is such a thing as being too faithful to another genre.
Like a comic book, the film is busy and flat, and in this case mercifully short.
Unlike Bugs or Daffy, though, Dredd has neither a good sense of humor nor a glimmer of how to bring cartoons to life.
And where other big-ticket movies at least have terrific action to keeps things whizzing along, "Dredd" relies on computer-generated special effects so laughably dull the film resembles a video game.


International Dairy Queen Inc.(INDQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Egyptian Leader Steps Up Condemnation of the Sudan
Egypt stepped up its condemnation of the Sudan today and ordered 70 Sudanese guards expelled from a disputed border region where the two countries clashed this week, while the Sudan vowed today to "fight to the death" against any Egyptian incursions.
The exchange of harsh words was accompanied by President Hosni Mubarak's assertion that the chief suspect in an attempt to assassinate him in Ethiopia on Monday is a Sudanese operating on instructions from the Khartoum Government.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; Allianz in Exchange With Munich Re
Europe's largest insurer, Allianz Versicherungs A. G., and Munich Re, the largest reinsurer, have agreed to exchange certain shareholdings to focus better on certain businesses.
Under the agreement, Allianz will take over Munich Re's 35 percent stake in Allianz Allgemeine Rechtsschutzversicherungs A. G., increasing its stake to 100 percent.
In return, Munich Re will take over a joint 9.3 percent stake in the nonlife insurer Hamburg-Mannheimer Sachversicherungs A. G. and a 10.6 percent stake in the Berlinische Lebensversicherung.


Environmentalists Gain in High Court
Giving environmentalists an important victory today, the Supreme Court upheld Federal rules that protect endangered species by barring the destruction of essential habitat on private land.
The court, ruling 6 to 3, rejected arguments by business interests that Congress meant the 1973 Endangered Species Act to apply only narrowly to private land.
The property owners had claimed that while the law prohibited them from killing protected wildlife outright, it should not prevent activities like logging that would indirectly deplete a forest's imperiled creatures.


Prices of Treasuries Tumble On Signs of Economic Heat
Treasury prices tumbled yesterday after a report showing unexpected strength in the housing market dashed many traders' hopes of a cut in short-term interest rates next week.
A string of reports in recent months have portrayed an economy slowing sharply, raising expectations that the Federal Reserve would be compelled to cut rates to avert a recession, despite some public reservations by its chairman, Alan Greenspan.


Irate Democrats Tie Up The House Till Daylight
It would be wrong to say that decorum broke down in the House of Representatives today; in the rowdy House, decorum has been in the repair shop awaiting back-ordered parts for some years.
But the chamber's Democrats, who have been seething ever since Republicans gained power last fall, did find a new way to rail against the indignities of being in the minority: they kept the House up all night.


Croats and Yugoslavs May Meet on Court
They are one victory away from putting the new and considerably less spacious Yugoslavia into the 1996 Summer Olympics, but for Vlade Divac and his fellow Serbian basketball stars, there is no forgetting the Summer Olympics they missed.
It was in Barcelona in 1992: the year of the Dream Team, the year basketball broke into a gallop internationally and the year in which a unified Yugoslav team just might have made Michael Jordan and friends break into something resembling a sweat.


Hot Yanks Go West; Strawberry Won't Go
Suddenly on course in their respective fashions, the Yankees move west tonight while Darryl Strawberry stays south.
But they will intersect at Yankee Stadium in about two weeks.
The Yankees head to Milwaukee to begin what is very likely to be a pivotal, and tiring, 10-games-in-10-days trip.
The pitching had been superb for most of their six-game winning streak and then Jack McDowell suffered through the worst outing of his career in Wednesday's 8-4 loss to the Tigers.


CHRONICLE
Speaking of dialogue, a New York City woman has won a national contest that posed the question, "What's wrong with America?"
The winner, CAROLINE PADRON, said, "The greatest thing wrong with America is the fact that we think there is something wrong with America in the first place." The contest was sponsored by America's Talking, a cable network.


Bomb Hoax Leaves Los Angeles Airport With the Jitters
Passengers at Los Angeles International Airport found themselves facing disconcerting personal interrogations today as they checked their luggage with blue-shirted skycaps on the sidewalks outside the terminals.
In the wake of a bomb threat in the Unabom case on Wednesday, officials said the interrogations and heightened security at the airport would continue indefinitely.


Labor Board Joins the Act In Growing N.B.A. Dispute
Developments on the increasingly complex National Basketball Association labor front broke out in three different directions yesterday.
Eight days after the league and its union thought they had a new six-year agreement, negotiators returned to the bargaining table and met for four hours.
Neither side commented on the substance of the meeting but said they would meet again without specifying when.


Officer Says Youths' Blows Fell 'Like Raindrops'
The kicks and punches poured in "like raindrops," a veteran transit police sergeant testified yesterday at the trial of four young men accused of savagely beating him last October -- even though, he said, he had identified himself as a police officer and flashed his badge.
The incident, which began as a resident confronting a bunch of beer-drinking, pot-smoking young men in front of his building in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, turned into an attack that left Detective Sgt.
Louis Cosentino, 56, with 30 titanium screws and 7 plates holding his face together.


Spill Puts a Spotlight On a Powerful Industry
The slogan of this town is "land of perfect waters." Until a week ago, hyperbole notwithstanding, it may even have been true.
But then 25 million gallons of watery waste from 10,000 hogs spilled out of a holding lagoon at the Oceanview Hog Farm and poured over soybean plants, tobacco fields and into creeks and rivers.


Hartmarx Corp.(HMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Holiday on Tuesday
The Fourth of July falls on Tuesday.
On Monday, government offices, banks, post offices and transportation will operate on normal weekday schedules.
Financial markets will close at 1 P.M.
Following is Tuesday's schedule.
NEW YORK FIREWORKS Two shows: downtown, 9:15 P.M., south of the Brooklyn Bridge; midtown, 9:30, 25th to 42d Streets in the East River.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive closed from the Battery to 96th Street from 6 P.M. to 1 A.M.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No collection and no street sweeping.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways, L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedule. NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on Sunday schedule.
Buses on holiday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


After Injury, O'Bannon Just Glad to Play
Ed O'Bannon heard the whispers.
He understood the concern.
But most people don't know what was running through his mind five years ago when he was lying in a hospital bed.
For three days back in October 1990, O'Bannon contemplated life without basketball.
He had just undergone major reconstructive surgery on his left knee after falling in a pickup game on the U.C.L.A. campus.


Seizing the Day, and Making It Last; A Working Consensus on July 4: If It's Tuesday, This Must Be a Four-Day Weekend
The Fourth of July will last an ordinary 24 hours this year, with a traditional sunrise and sunset.
Because the holiday falls on Tuesday, however, much of the rest of the coming weekend is open to semantic interpretation: Is Monday a holiday?
Is Friday?
At many companies in the region, from Time Warner and Philip Morris in Manhattan to Coopers &amp; Lybrand on Long Island, the version of reality favored by employees has won: July 3 has been named -- for this year only -- an additional companywide day off.
Other companies are demanding devotion and courting fate.


The Supreme Court's Final Day; Protecting Endangered Species
In a sweet victory for the environment yesterday, the Supreme Court upheld a regulation used to protect the northern spotted owl and the red-cockaded woodpecker.
That victory depended on the Court's interpretation of one word.
The word is "harm." Arguments before the high court turned on whether Congress intended that word to include the destruction of an endangered animal's habitat.
Last year a Federal appeals court said no, and the Supreme Court yesterday reversed that decision.


No Headline
"Private religious speech, far from being a First Amendment orphan, is as fully protected under the free speech clause as secular private expression. A free-speech clause without religion would be 'Hamlet' without the prince." JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA, upholding the right to erect a cross in a public park.  [ A24:1. ]


CHRONICLE
Some things do change.
JOHN F. KENNEDY JR. had an amicable meeting in Montgomery, Ala., this week with his father's nemesis on the civil rights front, GEORGE C. WALLACE.
Mr.
Kennedy, 34, is the publisher of a not-yet-published magazine on politics and personalities that will be called George -- after the first President, not Mr.
Wallace.
Working on an article on state and Federal powers, Mr.
Kennedy interviewed Mr.
Wallace, 75, who is hard of hearing, by passing him written questions.
As Governor more than 30 years ago, Mr.
Wallace refused to permit the Federally ordered desegregration of the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, planting himself at the door of the school's main building in 1963 and backing down only after President Kennedy sent in troops and Justice Department aides.
Mr.
Wallace also battled civil rights marchers in Selma and made a run at the Presidency as an independent in 1968.


The M.T.A. Settles A Battle on Bus Ads
The Natural Resources Defense Council has reached a final agreement with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which had initially refused to run the environmental advocacy group's advertisement.


2d Bombing Driver?
The man charged with engineering the World Trade Center bombing has told the authorities that he and another man not charged in the case drove the van carrying the bomb into the center's underground garage shortly before it exploded, people familiar with the case said.
The suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, reportedly did not name the other person in the accounts he gave to Federal agents and prosecutors.
Article, page B3.


Food Lion Inc.(FDLNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Park Electrochemical Corp.(PKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in September.


For Children
American Indian Dance
National Museum of the American Indian  1 Bowling Green  Lower Manhattan  (212) 825-6922  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow through Monday
In between stoking the barbecue and staking out territory for the fireworks, you might let someone else burn some energy.
This museum has invited Daystar, a contemporary dance company based in Santa Fe, N.M., to show off its work.
The choreographer, Rosalie Jones, is of Blackfoot and Pembina-Chippewa ancestry and a recipient of a fellowship from the National Endowment for the Arts.


5 Issues Guaranteed To Upset Someone
"America, 200 Years and Counting" is the overblown title of a modest hourlong report on five issues that are agitating the nation: welfare, immigration, affirmative action, guns and, for part of the country, land use.
It takes us first to New Hampshire, a state with neither an income tax nor a sales tax, where the needy are cared for by a combination of local property taxes and volunteers.
These days the pressures on communities are increasing.
The segment on immigration offers a quick but pointed history of what it calls America's love-hate relationship with immigrants: welcoming them in prosperous times when labor is needed, cracking down when things get tough.
As the anti-immigration movement in California demonstrates, the nation is in a tough phase.


Art in Review
'Way Cool'
Exit Art/The First World  548 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 14
This large show looks surprisingly tired considering the average age -- 20-something -- of the artists included.
Although Exit Art bills it as a tracking device for new trends, that's not the impression it gives.


NEW VOTING RULES
In a bitterly contested decision that could erase some of the recent electoral gains made by blacks in Congress and state legislatures, the Supreme Court ruled today that the use of race as a "predominant factor" in drawing district lines should be presumed to be unconstitutional.
The 5-to-4 decision declared unconstitutional Georgia's 11th Congressional District, now represented by a black Democrat, Cynthia A. McKinney, which the Georgia Legislature drew in 1992 to satisfy the Justice Department's insistence that a third majority-black district be created for the state's 11-member Congressional delegation.


Corrections
The list of winning lottery numbers published on Wednesday omitted one number from the New York Pick 10 results for Tuesday.
The complete number was 2, 4, 5, 6, 17, 19, 30, 39, 42, 43, 48, 51, 54, 62, 64, 67, 71, 74, 75, 77.


Walking Tours, Music, Fireworks and Fairs
The Fourth of July falls on Tuesday, but it will be celebrated all weekend long.
Here is a sampling of activities in the metropolitan region.
New York City Today HERITAGE TRAIL NEW YORK, lower Manhattan.
Four free, self-guided walking tours past 50 historic sites and attractions in lower Manhattan.
The trails are indicated by painted dots on the sidewalks and streets.
A free brochure indicating the trails is available at Federal Hall, Wall and Broad Streets; the South Street Seaport, near Pier 17; World Trade Center Plaza, near Tower 2, and Battery Park, south of Castle Clinton.
A larger, more descriptive guidebook is available for $5.
Landmarks on the tours include the Tweed Courthouse, the Vietnam War Veterans Memorial, Castle Clinton and the Shrine of St.
Elizabeth Ann Seton.
Information: (212) 767-0637.


Art in Review
Emil Nolde
John McEnroe Gallery  41 Greene Street  SoHo  Through July 23
Emil Nolde (1867-1956) was the Darth Vader of modern art: trained in the ways of the Force (Post-Impressionism), but seduced by the forces of the Dark Side (anti-Semitism and Nazism).
He wanted to use the language of modern art to express the depths of the German soul.
Instead, his paintings were condemned and confiscated by the Nazi Party he had ardently supported.


Ebola Virus Spreads in Zaire After a Lull, Health Officials Say
The epidemic of Ebola virus infection in Zaire continues, with the number of cases nearing 300, the death rate about 80 percent and deep concern that each case could lead to a surge in new infections, Federal and World Health Organization officials said today.
In late May, W.H.O. officials said they thought transmission of the virus had probably stopped.
But then an individual was misdiagnosed as having amebic dysentery, a parasitic infection.
Before the correct diagnosis of Ebola infection was made, the virus infected about a dozen more people, Dr.
Ali Khan, an epidemiologist from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a Federal agency in Atlanta, said in an interview.


Exide Corp.(EX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Illegal Parkers
To the Editor:
Re Joyce Purnick's June 22 column on illegal parking in New York City: Doctors and reporters are limited to parking at specially marked areas during working hours only.
In my neighborhood all the unticketed, illegally parked cars belong to police officers and judges: the people charged with enforcing the law.


Steelers Land Biasucci
The Pittsburgh Steelers yesterday reached a three-year, $1.26 million agreement with the veteran kicker DEAN BIASUCCI.


RJR Nabisco Shuffles Leaders to Help Lift Tobacco Unit
In a signal to Wall Street that it is trying to reverse the disappointing performance of its tobacco business, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation announced high-level executive changes yesterday that were widely interpreted as strengthening the company's corporate succession.
Charles M. Harper, 67, the company's chairman and chief executive, announced that the head of the company's Nabisco food business, H. John Greeniaus, 50, would add to his duties the "oversight" of the company's sagging domestic tobacco operations with the new title of vice chairman.
RJR Nabisco is the nation's second-largest cigarette maker after the Philip Morris Companies.


Simply Participating Means Great Success Is Guaranteed
This is a success story regardless of what happens next.
John Giankouris and his tennis partner, Sara Chamberlain, are two of the 7,200 athletes from 140 nations who begin competing on Saturday at the Special Olympics World Games in New Haven.
Theirs will be a trip of discovery over the following nine days.


Grants Awarded to Police Departments


Diner's Journal
Texas Barbecue
The Manhattan branch of Stick to Your Ribs has opened.
There could hardly be a better way to celebrate our national holiday.
The restaurant's powerfully perfumed meat has been drawing barbecue fans to the smoke pit in Long Island City since 1992.
Before that, smoke worshipers made their way to Stratford, Conn., drawn by the quality of the 'cue.
The glory of this meat is that it spends a long time over hickory and oak.
The smoke permeates the brisket to the core and the ribs (both beef and pork) all the way to the bone.
The chicken is nut brown with smoke, and the barbecued links glisten and gleam.


How Congress Voted On Budget Resolution
In the Senate, the budget resolution was approved on a straight party-line vote.


Vivra Inc.(V,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Burger, Praised as a 'Graceful Patriot,' Is Buried
Former Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, eulogized as an "elegant, graceful patriot" whose dedication to the judiciary and hard work set him apart, was buried today after a funeral service at the National Presbyterian Church here.
Mr.
Burger, the 15th Chief Justice of the United States, died of congestive heart failure on Sunday.
He was 87.


U.S. Craft Docks Flawlessly With Russian Space Station
An American space shuttle docked with a Russian space station for the first time today, doing it so flawlessly that space officials hope it will aid the joint ambitions of the Russian and American space programs.
Ten astronauts greeted one another with hugs, handshakes and kisses on the cheek, chattering away in Russian and English while speeding around the Earth at nearly five miles a second in the biggest craft ever assembled in space.


Mules Are Long Gone, So Are the Busy Barges
Not only are the mules gone on the Erie Canal, but so are the packet boats and most of the barges that connected the Great Lakes to the Atlantic and helped make New York the dominant commercial state it became.
These days, fewer than 100 tugs and barges ply the canal from Albany to Buffalo.
The Erie Canal was conceived in the early 19th century as a commercial opening to the Midwest, which along most of the Eastern Seaboard was blocked off by the Appalachians.
Disparaged as "Clinton's folly" but soon considered an engineering marvel, the canal was built between 1817 and 1825 as a 40-foot ditch with towpaths.
Before the advent of steam power, the towpaths allowed mules to pull passenger-carrying packet boats and barges carrying lumber, pork, whisky, cheese and wheat.


Inside Art
A Touch of Scandal
Wimbledon and Ascot aren't the only reasons people have been flocking to London for the last two weeks.
The 61-year-old Grosvenor House Art and Antiques Fair, which ended on Saturday, is the granddaddy of all fairs, consistently attracting an international crowd of collectors, dealers and museum curators.
As always at shows like this, exhibitors are eager to discuss what they've sold and silent about what they haven't.
This year's fair got off to a rocky start when the vetting committee pronounced a pair of late-17th-century lacquer-painted cabinets, priced at $600,000, to be fakes, probably made in the 1930's.
The cabinets belong to the Chinese Porcelain Company, a New York gallery that was showing for the first time at Grosvenor House.


CHRONICLE
Over Chinese food on the Upper West Side this week, WYNTON MARSALIS discussed the fine points of jazz with musicians from the American Russian Youth Orchestra, who then accompanied him to rehearsals for the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra's "Battle of the Bands."
It's all part of a continuing effort by Mr.
Marsalis, the artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center, to participate in the work of the youth orchestra.
It recruits classically trained musicians from the United States, Russia and, this year, Kazakhstan, a former Soviet republic.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about Japanese economic policy misstated the trend in Japan's economy in the fourth quarter of 1994.
Japan's gross domestic product contracted 1 percent in that quarter (at an annual rate); it did not grow.


The Rhythm And Vocal Hang Gliding
Real jazz came to Rainbow and Stars, the usually staid, pop-oriented cabaret atop Rockefeller Center, on Tuesday evening in the person of Anita O'Day.
The 75-year-old singer, who is appearing at the club (30 Rockefeller Plaza) through July 15, is a far cry from the vocalist she used to be.
But like Peggy Lee, who is the same age and won a standing ovation last week at Carnegie Hall, Ms.
O'Day has the swinging, rhythmic element of her singing largely intact, even though the voice has deteriorated badly.
Ms.
O'Day is backed by a sturdy jazz quartet led by Gordon Brisker on saxophone and flute, with Norman Simmons on piano, Scott Lee on bass and Ronnie Zito on drums.
Throughout Tuesday's opening-night show, she not only sang but aggressively conducted the group.


Democratic Senator to Join Drive on Gangsta Rap
The organizers of a campaign against Time Warner's involvement in gangsta rap music have recruited a vocal new ally: Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut.
Senator Lieberman is expected to attend a news conference today in Washington at which he will call on Time Warner to stop distributing rap music with violent and sexually degrading lyrics.
William J. Bennett, the former Cabinet member who is leading the campaign against the giant media company, said yesterday that at a meeting on June 14 Mr.
Lieberman agreed to join forces with him.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.(IBC,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Jun 3


A Former TV Critic Is Selected As Editor in Chief of TV Guide
News America Publishing Inc. yesterday named Steven Reddicliffe editor in chief of TV Guide.
Mr.
Reddicliffe, a former television editor and writer, is editor in chief of Parenting magazine.
He succeeds Anthea Disney, who on Wednesday was named editor in chief worldwide of Delphi Internet Services.
Delphi is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, also the parent of News America.


Detention Under Study
To the Editor:
Re "The Lessons of Esmor" (editorial, June 21): You believe that the Attorney General should appoint a commission to study the Immigration and Naturalization Service's detention policies.
Congress has already done so; addressing detention and removal policies are part of this commission's comprehensive mandate.


The Spoken Word
FELICE PICANO, Barnes &amp; Noble, 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street.
A reading by the author of "Like People in History" and a founder of the Violet Quill Club.
Tonight at 8.
Free.
Information: (212) 721-5282.
"ROOTS OF THE RAINTREE: SALUTE TO SOUTHERN INDIANA-BORN AUTHORS," Jane's Cafe, 254 Greene Street, Greenwich Village.
Readings by Philip Appleman, Ross Lockridge Jr., Norbert Krapf, Larry Lockridge and Kathleen Snow.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Cover: $6; $3 minimum.
Information: (718) 847-1482.


Major Restoration Is Planned for Erie Canal
The Erie Canal, whose mule-drawn barges opened the nation's heartland to the Atlantic 170 years ago, would be turned into a recreational waterway for boaters, hikers, cyclists and tourists under a plan prepared by the New York State Thruway Authority.
The Erie and three linked canals stretch for 524 miles from Buffalo to Albany and up to Lake Champlain, but their commercial clamor has stilled to a whisper.
Last year, the canal system carried less than 68,000 tons of cargo, a tiny fraction of the 5.2 million tons it handled in 1951.


International Briefs; Allied Domecq to Sell Tea and Coffee Interests
The British beverage company Allied Domecq P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its tea and coffee interests to Karand Ltd. for $:190 million ($304 million).
Allied said the disposal did not include its 75 percent stake in the tea company Lyons Irish Holdings P.L.C., for which it has received a separate offer.
The sale had been widely expected as part of Allied's focus on the core wine, spirits and retailing divisions.
Allied Domecq, which was known as Allied Lyons P.L.C. until last September, said the sale price included $:45 million of debt that would be taken on by the buyers.
Karand Ltd. was formed by the buyout specialists Leon Allen and Roger Price to buy the beverage properties.


Mistrial Declared in NASA Contract Bribe Case
Unclear on the definition of entrapment, the jury in the trial of Dale Brown, the only man to plead not guilty in the Government's investigation into corruption involving contracts at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, was unable to reach a verdict today after deliberating for three days.
Judge Ewing Werlein Jr. declared a mistrial after the jury reported that it was deadlocked at 9 to 3 in favor of a conviction.
Mr.
Brown could still be declared not guilty if Judge Werlein chooses.
The Federal district judge said he would make the ruling on Monday.


On My Mind; The P.L.O. Papers
Should the United States continue giving hundreds of millions of dollars to the Palestine Liberation Organization, and under what conditions?
Has Yasir Arafat lived up to the existing conditions of American aid?
For instance, is all international money distributed through the P.L.O. being used for the economic benefit of Palestinians in territory turned over by Israel?
Or has he used foreign help for his own personal and political purposes?


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


World News Briefs; Mexican Opposition Wary of New Official
Mexico's opposition parties said today that they were willing to give President Ernesto Zedillo's new political minister some time -- but not much -- to put the country's deteriorating political situation in order.
The Government announced Wednesday night that Esteban Moctezuma Barragan, Mr.
Zedillo's closest ally in the Cabinet, would be replaced as head of the Interior Ministry by a tough politician from outside Mr.
Zedillo's circle.
The new minister, Emilio Chuayffet Chemor, is governor of Mexico state.


Nashville Denies Payment
The executive in charge of luring a professional sports team to Nashville denied yesterday that the Devils have already been paid $20 million to relocate.
"Absolutely wrong," said Richard Evans, the executive vice president of Gaylord Entertainment.
He said the city's deal to lure a team, which includes a $20 million relocation bonus, is open to any hockey or basketball franchise.
Evans said that the legal battles between the Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority "have made it unpredictable," but declined to discuss the Devils directly.


'Apollo 13,' a Movie for the Fourth of July
THE line of dialogue that will be best remembered from Ron Howard's absolutely thrilling new "Apollo 13" is a slight variation on the truth.
"Houston, we have a problem," says one of this film's three endangered astronauts, although "Houston, we've had a problem" is what Jim Lovell actually said.
It's a small but important change, one more way that "Apollo 13" unfolds with perfect immediacy, drawing viewers into the nail-biting suspense of a spellbinding true story.
You can know every glitch that made this such a dangerous mission, and "Apollo 13" will still have you by the throat.
Better even than Mr.
Howard's sure hand with this fascinating material is his film's unexpected restraint.
"Apollo 13" understands the difference between movie bravado and real courage, and it celebrates the latter in inspiring ways that have almost gone out of style.
With Tom Hanks, wonderful again, as the Everyman in the driver's seat, "Apollo 13" isn't afraid of the stone-cold fear at the heart of this tale or of the intricate group effort needed to see it through.
This film and its brave, believable characters are uplifting in ways that have nothing to do with a voyage to outer space.


INSIDE
Lana Turner Is Dead
The actress, who went from secretary to "sweater girl" to actress, was 75 year old.
Page D17.
Egypt-Sudan Tensions Grow
Egypt's President said the Sudan was behind an attempt on his life and expelled 70 Sudanese.
Page A6.
Welfare Fraud Charges
A hundred current and former New York City employees were charged with welfare fraud.
Page B1.


Yeltsin Solicits Letters of Resignation From Top Ministers
In a significant gesture to appease legislative and popular anger over the botched hostage rescue operation in southern Russia, President Boris N. Yeltsin solicited offers of resignation today from powerful ministers, including those in charge of Defense, Interior and Security.
Mr.
Yeltsin will decide the fate of each minister later, after Parliament's vote, scheduled for Saturday, on a second no-confidence motion in the Government that could mean early elections.
But Parliament appears to be quickly losing its appetite for a fight.


Consumer Protection Laws Undercut in Proposed Bill
The House Banking Committee approved early today a broad bill that would repeal decades of consumer protection laws.
At the same time, the measure appears to have sharply diminished the odds of any banking legislation emerging from Congress this year.
The problem does not lie in the bill's original goals, to roll back requirements that banks have found onerous but that Democrats contend have provided crucial guarantees to depositors and opportunities to borrowers in poor neighborhoods.


Even Before Medicare Cuts, Health Care System Has Changed
To the Editor:
Re your June 26 front-page news analysis on changes in the health care system as a byproduct of budget cutting: The important point you make is that while the proposed slowdown in Medicare and Medicaid spending, which accounts for almost one-third of total health care spending in this country, will probably have a major impact on our health care system, nobody is sure yet just how that impact will play out.


G.W. Withdraws Parker Offer
George Washington University, under increasing pressure from students, parents and alumni, yesterday withdrew a basketball scholarship to the New York City high school star RICHIE PARKER, who pleaded guilty to sexual assault of a teen-age girl.


Deal by Senators Rescues Submarine Industry in Groton
Senators ended their war of words today and struck a deal to build one more Seawolf submarine in Groton, Conn., raising hopes for thousands of military workers in New England but also offering a prize to a Virginia shipyard.
The compromise agreement, approved by voice vote as part of the Senate Armed Services Committee's overall military budget bill for fiscal year 1996, is expected to win full Senate approval next month.


But Is Japan Indeed Protectionist?
When Americans export tulips to Japan, the fragile bulbs are individually inspected for germs and then shipped to a quiet field, where they are grown under the scrutiny of Japanese regulators for a full year before they can be sold on the market.
When Americans want to export pharmaceuticals, even simple products like Tylenol, they must first present years of experimental data to Japanese authorities for approval.
And since the regulators say that Japanese may react differently from Americans, the data must be from Japanese clinical subjects.


Outgoing N.R.C. Head Sees Nuclear Industry Revival
As he prepares to leave as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Ivan Selin has predicted that the nation's 109 commercial nuclear plants, some now threatened by lower-cost electricity producers, will prosper if they can survive the tough economic conditions of the next few years.
And orders for new reactors, unseen in 20 years, could come in 10 years or so when the electricity market is more competitive and air pollution controls are stricter, Dr.
Selin said.
That will happen, he added, only if the Republican majority in Congress does not derail the nuclear waste disposal program first.


Home Video
Times are both slow and busy for foreign films on videocassette.
"We need a blockbuster, something to get attention and enliven the whole scene," says Milos Stehlik of Facets International, a large Chicago mail-order video distributor.
In the foreign film category, blockbuster can mean a film like "Red," by the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski.
Last October it opened to critical acclaim in theaters, where it grossed $4 million and received three Academy Award nominations.
On July 18 it is to be released on video.


Art in Review
Barbara Bloom  'Pictures From the Floating World'
Leo Castelli Gallery  520 West Broadway  SoHo  Through today
For this remarkable installation, a wooden Japanese-style bridge fills the front room of the dimly lighted gallery, arching over a wide patch of red-carpeted floor on which plaster casts of male and female heads seem to float.
A vitrine at the center of the bridge holds grains of rice, each bearing a radically reduced image from an erotic wood block print.


Keenan Staying With the Blues
St. Louis Blues Coach MIKE KEENAN wants it understood: He's not going anywhere.
Keenan, who is also the Blues' general manager, called a news conference yesterday to dispel rumors he might leave the team in the wake of MIKE SHANAHAN's firing June 16 as chairman and chief executive.
Keenan's contract was written with an escape clause that would let him leave if either Shanahan or the then-team president JACK QUINN (who replaced Shanahan) left the organization.


2d Driver Is Reported In Bombing Of Towers
The man charged with engineering the World Trade Center bombing has told the authorities that he and another man not charged in the case drove the van carrying the bomb into the center's underground garage shortly before it exploded, people familiar with the case said yesterday.
The suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, 28, reportedly did not name the other person in the accounts he gave to Federal agents and prosecutors shortly after being arrested in Pakistan last February.


Using Memory to Reorder, Even Transform, a Life
WHITE GLOVES  How We Create Ourselves Through Memory
By John Kotre.
276 pages. The Free Press. $22.
"This is the use of memory," wrote T. S. Eliot in "Four Quartets." "For liberation -- not less of love but expanding/Of love beyond desire and so liberation/From the future as well as the past."


Art in Review
Giorgio Cavallon  'A Signal Luminosity'
Archives of American Art  Smithsonian Institution  1285 Avenue of the Americas (near 53d Street)  Through July 14
Like other exhibitions mounted by the Archives of American Art in its tucked-away midtown space, this one devoted to the American painter Giorgio Cavallon (1904-1989) offers total immersion in an under-known artist's career.


True Story Of Modern Legend
"Bandit Queen" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/ New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 18.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema and the Village East.
Phoolan Devi (Seema Biswas), the real-life heroine of "Bandit Queen," is a modern-day legend who has achieved a status not even Madonna can claim.
Among a significant percentage of India's poor, Miss Devi, who was born to a lower-caste family of fishermen, is regarded as a goddess with a kind of Robin Hood mystique.


A Legal Round to the Mayor
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the City Council have been feuding for nearly nine months over their competing proposals for an agency to monitor police corruption.
This week a trial court judge ruled in the Mayor's favor, arguing that the Council's proposal illegally trespasses on executive authority.
The Council plans to appeal, as well it should.
The decision by a State Supreme Court judge is far from convincing on the matter of executive authority and could well be overturned by higher courts.
Reversal would serve the public interest.
The panel envisioned by the Council would be stronger, more independent and more resistant to political pressure than that proposed by the Mayor.


This Bud's Not for You, Anheuser
Its market saturated at home, Anheuser-Busch, the world's biggest brewer, is peddling its Budweiser beer internationally, trying to make it a global brand.
But a feisty little beer maker here is standing in its way.
Both brewers have used the name Budweiser for more than 100 years.
Long ago they reached an agreement that gave the Czech brewer the right to use the Budweiser name in Europe and the former Soviet Union, and gave Anheuser-Busch the right in the United States and Latin America.


Restaurants
It is possible to walk out of the heat of a summer sidewalk into the cool darkness of Alva and have a perfect meal.
If you choose carefully.
It can begin with an assortment of hors d'oeuvres, a little $6 plate of tidbits that changes regularly but is always welcome.
It can continue with a skinny loaf of French bread and the best butter in New York washed down with a glass of cold rose.
Then a plate of crisp-crusted grilled salmon, vegetables tossed with lemon balm and a small mountain of rich mashed potatoes.
For dessert, the strawberry shortcake of your dreams.
That's my meal, anyway; you might have another.
Alva's menu has many offbeat dishes and while nobody would like everything, it is hard to imagine the person who would find nothing to like.
For Alva might be the perfect one-star restaurant, a friendly haven in a neighborhood overburdened with overheated restaurants.
It gets much (but certainly not everything) right.


People's Bank Talking to Agencies
People's Bank said it had begun talking to agencies about its account, now at TBWA Advertising in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
The billings were estimated at $6 million.
In confirming a report of the talks this week in Adweek, Jane Sharpe, a spokeswoman for People's in Bridgeport, Conn., attributed the decision to look at other shops to the bank's plan to open 45 branches in Stop and Shop supermarkets.
Ms.
Sharpe would not disclose the names of the agencies the bank is talking to, but she said People's had hired Jones-Lundin Associates in Chicago, a consulting company, to help in the process.


Split by Immigration Law, Couple Seeks a Solution
When arrows flew from Cupid's bow, obviously none fell even near the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service headquarters on I Street in Washington.
An immigration law relating to draft dodgers in World War I is forcing a Canadian man and his American wife to live apart.


Mr. Yeltsin's Next Move
Boris Yeltsin's confrontation with Parliament has given the Russian leader an unexpected opportunity to clean out the benighted high command of Moscow's military and internal security forces.
His response will tell a great deal about whether he has the heart to revive his faltering presidency and provide the enlightened leadership Russia so badly needs.
The Kremlin chessboard is well set for Mr.
Yeltsin to make a move.
Last week Parliament approved a motion of no confidence in the Yeltsin Government to protest Moscow's handling of the Chechen attack on the southern Russian city of Budyonnovsk earlier this month.
To win a second motion that Parliament plans to consider tomorrow, Mr.
Yeltsin asked for offers of resignation from Defense Minister Pavel Grachev; Interior Minister Viktor Yerin; the Federal Security Service chairman, Sergei Stepashin, and Vice Premier Nikolai Yegorov.
Whether or not he will accept any of them is another question, and a much more important one.


Love, War And Coming Of Age
"Wild Reeds" was shown in last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 7, 1994.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, in Greenwich Village.
"Wild Reeds" is Andre Techine's delicate, lovingly photographed, strongly acted coming-of-age story in which a smart, sensitive boy named Francois (Gael Morel) falls in love with his classmate, a peasant boy named Serge.
Set in the French countryside in 1962, at the end of the Algerian war, the film is more successful at making Francois an evocative character than it is in its lukewarm attempt to make politics an integral part of the story.


Exxon Expected to Sign Deal For Russian Oilfields Today
The Exxon Corporation is expected to sign an agreement in Moscow today that will take it a step closer to participating in a $15 billion project off Sakhalin Island to develop giant oil and natural gas fields that may contain 2.5 billion barrels of oil.
In a ceremony in Moscow that Vice President Al Gore and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia are expected to attend, the final touches will be put on a production-sharing agreement that will eventually allow Exxon and its Japanese and Russian partners to begin work on the field.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.92
5.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.47
5.37
4.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.29
4.63
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.23
6.08
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.64
6.51
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.46
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.17
6.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Culbro Corp.(CUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Albany Lawmakers Raise Auto Coverage
New York State lawmakers approved the first mandatory increase in minimum automobile insurance limits in nearly 40 years.
The measure would provide greater protection for accident victims but would also drive up premiums for every driver.
Also, after hours of chaotic negotiation and intense lobbying, the Republican-led Senate and the Democratic-controlled Assembly passed a resolution that could start New York down the path toward legalized casino gambling.


Shareholders Seek Control Over Mesa
T.
Boone Pickens faced a campaign today by two major shareholders to wrest away his control of the Mesa Inc. natural gas company.
Marvin Davis, a Beverly Hills billionaire, said that he had bought 3.9 percent of Mesa's stock, and joined forces with Dennis R. Washington, a Montana investor who owns 5.5 percent.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
The Telegraph P.L.C., the newspaper publisher, will raise the price of The Daily Telegraph by 5 pence after the News Corporation announced it was raising the price of The Times of London by 5 pence on Monday.
The Daily Telegraph will now cost 35 pence on weekdays, while The Times will cost 25 pence. (Bloomberg Business News)


It's Time for an Update: Huge Plans Are Just Big
HMM.
The rockets' red glare, cherry bombs bursting in air, dogs quivering under the desk -- is it that time of year already?
This means half of 1995 is gone.
Our Towns have been so busy, we hardly noticed.
Just to catch up:


No Medal Equals No Job
Russia's national hockey coach, BORIS MIKHAILOV, was dismissed yesterday and replaced by VLADIMIR VASILYEV in the wake of the team's failure to win any medals at the world hockey championship in Sweden.
Vasilyev, 55, is veteran of the Soviet national team. (AP)


In the Beginning There Was the Play
HAVE you any idea why Alfred Lunt and Lynne Fontanne were Broadway's most exacting, most stylish acting couple?
Did Hollywood deserve its reputation in the 1930's for ruining great plays and corrupting great playwrights?
Is it possible that theater, at least as it had been known for more than 2,000 years, was doomed the minute the movie close-up was introduced?
Good, serious, funny, often contradictory answers to these questions, and a number of others you may never have thought to ask, are being offered in Screen Plays: From Broadway to Hollywood, 1920-1966.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about a wine tasting on July 10 sponsored by the New York chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food misstated the reservation telephone number.
It is (212) 447-0456.


One Last Fight for Foreman
GEORGE FOREMAN, the oldest heavyweight champion in history, will fight only once more, probably against MICHAEL MOORER either late this year or early next year, the promoter BOB ARUM said.
Arum had faced a July 3 deadline from the International Boxing Federation to get an agreement on a rematch between Foreman and Germany's AXEL SCHULZ, who lost a disputed decision April 22.
Foreman decided to give up the last of his heavyweight titles rather than accept a mandate he fight Schulz, Arum said. (AP)


Talk Radio's Roots
To the Editor:
The Freedom of Speech Award to G. Gordon Liddy at the radio talk show hosts convention should be considered an aberration (Chronicle, June 26).
For every Liddy on the far right and every leftish host, there are hundreds of radio talkers who voice no political bent but who host programs of community service and sage advice.
They are on 500-watt small-town stations as well as boomers, networks and syndicate.


Digesting the Auto Deal
A day after settling their long-running trade dispute over autos, neither the United States nor Japan was all that sure who had won what.
The most important consequence was that Washington and Tokyo narrowly avoided the outbreak of a nasty trade war.
Beyond that, the latest trade dispute is likely to be remembered for yielding only modest changes.
President Clinton settled for an agreement that requires far less change in Japanese business practices than his Administration had vowed to achieve.
Doubts were already arising withing the Japanese Government over whether the "victory" in the trade talks claimed by some officials would prove all that secure.
The economic debate over just how protectionist Japan is continues despite the settlement of the auto trade dispute.
A category-by-category breakdown of the trade flows between Japan and the United States Articles, Page D5


Trade in Financial Services Is Dealt a Setback by U.S.
Dealing a significant setback to the newly created World Trade Organization, an effort to liberalize trade in financial services apparently collapsed tonight after the Clinton Administration said certain other countries were not offering American financial institutions enough access to their markets.
American officials said they would give a binding commitment to the organization that would allow foreign financial service companies already established in the United States to continue operating there under the same regulatory conditions as their American counterparts.
But they said the United States would not accept a new international agreement under which it would undertake to give all foreign financial service companies full access to its market and treat them as if they were American companies.


At the End, U.S. Blunted Its Big Stick
In the long and tortuous history of trade disputes between Japan and the United States, no President has ever talked a tougher game than Bill Clinton.
No Administration threatened so convincingly to use its big stick unless Tokyo agreed to fundamental, precedent-shattering change in the way it did business.
Mickey Kantor, Mr.
Clinton's aggressive trade representative, spoke repeatedly in the months leading up to Wednesday's accord on automotive trade of the need for a "momentous shift" that would "break the back" of the network of collusive relationships that keep outsiders -- foreign and domestic -- at bay.


Impoverished Haitians Race to Search Garbage


G.O.P. Anxiously Awaits Redistricting
After today's Supreme Court decision finding Georgia's 11th Congressional District unconstitutional, some Republicans here fear that the state's Democratically controlled Legislature will redraw district lines with an eye to retaking the seats Democrats lost in the last election.
Last fall, the state elected a Congressional delegation of 7 Republicans and 4 Democrats, gaining an eighth Republican when the only white Democrat switched sides in April.
Previously, the delegation had consisted of 7 Democrats and 4 Republicans.


A Push for Truth in Advertising
The General Assembly, in a burst of character-building before heading home, passed a bill yesterday that would make telling a lie in a political advertisement an offense punishable by six months in jail or a $1,000 fine.
Under the bill, which may sit idle for months before the Senate considers it, the falsehood must be made with "reckless disregard to validity" to be considered a violation.
What about First Amendment rights?
"The courts have determined that certain vicious and deliberately false statements made during a campaign may be subject to punishment," said Assemblyman Monroe Lustbader, a Republican from Essex County, the bill's co-sponsor.
TERRY PRISTIN


Blackhawks Name Hartsburg
The Chicago Blackhawks announced yesterday that the former Minnesota North Stars defenseman CRAIG HARTSBURG has been hired as the team's coach.
"He's a leader, he's well respected and he's well organized," BOB PULFORD, the general manager, said.
"We feel he is the brightest young prospect out there."
Hartsburg, 36, succeeds DARRYL SUTTER, who resigned last week to spend more time with his family. (AP)


A Copland Rarity For Chorus
When Aaron Copland accepted a commission from the Harvard Music Department in 1947 to write an a cappella choral piece, he had never written an extended work for chorus.
And the piece, "In the Beginning," a setting of the creation story from Genesis that runs more than 13 minutes, has often been considered a miscalculation.
Yet the work is striking and effective, as the New Amsterdam Singers, led by the music director Clara Longstreth, made clear in a concert at Broadway Presbyterian Church on Tuesday.
The difficulties are formidable.
The solo mezzo-soprano part is wide ranging; the chorus must negotiate precipitous harmonic shifts.
Yet for all its awkwardness it is vivid music.
When the text proclaims "Let there be light," Copland piles on layers of skittish counterpoint.
The music is almost crazed with wonder.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARELINE INC., Santa Ana, Calif., a provider of ambulance service, announced the acquisition of Advanced Life Care Inc., Clifton Heights, Pa.
Terms were not disclosed.
COMERICA INC., Detroit, a bank holding company, will buy Queststar Bank N.A. of Houston for $25 million in cash, increasing its number of branches in Houston from 24 to 17.


RULING ON RELIGION
A sharply divided Supreme Court opened the door today to greater government financial support for religious organizations, ruling 5 to 4 that the University of Virginia was constitutionally required to subsidize a student religious magazine on the same basis as any other student publication.
The majority rejected the university's argument that it would violate the constitutional separation of church and state to use university funds to help pay the printing costs for the explicitly Christian magazine.


2 Officers Are Said to Seek Payoffs From Rabbis
In the latest embarrassment to rock the Police Department, two Brooklyn officers were arrested yesterday and charged with demanding payoffs -- not from drug dealers or local merchants, but from rabbis who needed police escorts for religious processions.
Sgt.
Timothy Brovakos, 39, and Officer John Quercia, 37, demanded that three rabbis pay them a total of $600 for carrying out their assigned duties of traffic and security enforcement during three separate processions, police officials said.
The two officers, from the 66th Precinct in Borough Park, were on a special detail when they coerced or tried to coerce the rabbis on three separate occasions, the Chief of Internal Affairs, Patrick E. Kelleher, said last night.


Edberg, Courier and Chang Exit Through Humbling Upset Gates
For one, the defeat could be traced to a case of lost magic; he failed to weave his trademark web of surging serves and stinging volleys.
For another, it was a case of lost meanness; like a mower with a blunt blade, he lacked the proper cutting edge to leave his mark on the grass.


CHEVROLET LOWERS ITS SALES FORECAST FOR THE YEAR
The Chevrolet division of the General Motors Corporation has trimmed its sales expectations for the year because of production problems and sluggish sales, the Chevrolet general manager, Jim Perkins, said in an interview.
Chevrolet now expects to sell 2.6 million units in 1995, down from an earlier forecast of 2.7 million.
It sold 2.45 million units in 1994.
Separately, G.M. said it planned to close its casting plant in Danville, Ill., at the end of the year, about six months earlier than initially planned.


Men's Graduation Rate In Basketball Is Down
Although student-athletes in Division I sports continue to graduate at a slightly higher rate than the general student population, the graduation rate for men's basketball players dropped for the first time in four years, according to an annual survey by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
The study, which included 302 Division I schools and tracked athletes who entered college in 1988, found that 58 percent of the athletes on scholarship graduated within six years, compared with 57 percent of the overall student body.
That rate has remained nearly constant since the first group of students came through college after admission standards were toughened when Proposition 48 took effect in 1986.


METRO DIGEST
CAR INSURANCE LIMITS TO INCREASE
New York State lawmakers approved the first mandatory increase in minimum automobile insurance limits in nearly 40 years, a measure that would provide greater protections for accident victims but would drive up premiums for every driver in the state.  [ Page A1. ]


Buenos Aires Journal; A Rustle of Silk, and Argentina's Secret Is Out
Calextina Alfaro came to Buenos Aires from a slum in La Paz, Bolivia, a year ago, drawn by an odd piece of market intelligence: Argentine women were crazy for underwear.
Mrs.
Alfaro was not ill advised, she recalled on a recent afternoon, as well-heeled Argentine women hovered over her sidewalk display of frilly pinks and brilliant whites, neatly arrayed on a blue blanket in the fashionable Recoleta district.


Simpson Judge Disallows Belated Evidence on Fiber
An important witness on hair and fiber evidence began testifying in the O. J. Simpson trial today.
But because of bungling by prosecutors, he was prevented from disclosing a crucial finding: that the fibers found on two exhibits could have come only from a very limited number of Ford Broncos, Mr.
Simpson's among them.
The witness, Douglas Deedrick, unit chief of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's hair and fiber section, has concluded that fibers found on the knit cap near the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman and on a leather glove found behind Mr.
Simpson's house are consistent with the carpeting in Mr.
Simpson's Bronco.
Mr.
Deedrick is expected to testify to that effect in the next few days.


Faded Icon Is Asked What's He Done Lately
The posters of his smiling face are badly worn now, the pennants with his likeness tattered by breezes whipping up dust on Gaza's streets.
But the sand-covered square where he was welcomed back by his people a year ago is now a carefully tended park with a spanking new playground.
Like the posters and pennants, Yasir Arafat is a faded though enduring national symbol to most Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and West Bank.
But a year after returning last July 1 from decades in exile, he is undergoing a transformation in many Palestinian minds.


Most Exciting Part Of Extreme Games Is Extreme Coverage
Are ESPN's Extreme Games bad for America?
The weeklong psycho Olympics that ends tomorrow ain't gangsta rap, and it ain't a Time Warner production.
So it's safe.
To watch.
How else could I have spent six hours scrambling eggs, running over turtles, tidying the bowl, barefooting like Banana George, contracting road rash on my tummy, getting squirrelly in my tumble turn and doing a Judo McTwist?
I urged my cat not to follow my reckless lead.
I don't know if the Extreme Games presage the fall of Western Civilization.
But after the mindless slaughter of trees to produce Extreme Games press kits, I had to get the vicarious buzz caused by 45 hours of extreme TV.
It was like rubbernecking to watch an accident on the Cross Bronx Expressway.


Life Term Is Imposed In Kidnapping Case
A woman convicted of kidnapping for her role as negotiator of a $5 million ransom in the August 1993 abduction of a tuxedo manufacturer, Harvey Weinstein, was sentenced yesterday to the maximum of 25 years to life in prison.
The woman, Aurelina Leonor, 46, received the harshest sentence.
She was the only person accused of the kidnapping to stand trial.
Justice Herbert I. Altman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said he believed the captors had left Mr.
Weinstein to die after entombing him for 12 days in an underground pit.


Checkers Drive-Ins Leaves Martin
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants and the Martin Agency in Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, said that after a year and a half they had mutually decided to end their relationship.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $7 million, was placed in review.
"We mutually agreed that given our current needs we might be better serviced with another agency," said Tony Monzo, vice president for marketing at Checkers in Clearwater, Fla., in confirming a report of the change this week in Adweek.
He said the review, which is in the preliminary stages, would narrow to four finalists, with a decision expected in 60 to 90 days.


Reporter's Notebook; End Is Like Beginning And the Middle: Nasty
It does not happen often here, but a full-fledged, red-faced, arm-twisting, change-your-vote-or-else political fight broke out on the Assembly floor early this morning.
Because it was so nasty, the fight made a perfect exclamation point to end a bitter legislative session.
Usually in Albany, the fate of any bill is decided long before it reaches the floor of either house.
That was not the case Wednesday night when Speaker Sheldon Silver brought for a vote a bill that would ban disabled veterans from peddling in midtown Manhattan.
Under the proposal, the city would create special zones where veterans could sell their wares without competition.
Only 56 of the 94 Democrats supported the bill, but an unknown number of Republicans, wanting to help the Republican Mayor of New York City, were standing by just in case.


Wheelings, Dealings And Smiles From Draft
The league hands baseball caps to the draftees, tissues to the moms and this warning to the teams: Some selections could be flammable.
What looks good on paper may not look so dashing in training camp, but the National Basketball Association draft concluded Wednesday with several coaches and general managers panting.


6 Are Killed and 250 Are Evacuated in Flooding in Rural Virginia
A week of thunderstorms has flooded a rural swath of central and western Virginia, killing six people, turning house trailers into rafts and prompting the Coast Guard to mount rescue efforts well inland.
More than 250 people were evacuated by helicopter in the last two days, state officials said.
Thousands temporarily abandoned their homes.
Madison County, half a continent from its Iowa namesake brought to prominence in a best-selling book and film, lost six bridges.


Exide Corp.(EX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
House and Senate Adopt Budget Plan  The House and Senate adopted a Republican plan that would cut taxes, limit spending for Medicare and other social programs and balance the Federal budget by 2002.
The budget resolution is just a blueprint, setting levels for revenue and spending in categories like health, defense and transportation.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Charles Irwin Schottland, 88, Expert on Social Welfare, Dies
Charles Irwin Schottland, an authority on social welfare who served as Commissioner of Social Security in the Eisenhower Administration and as the third president of Brandeis University, died on Tuesday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 88.
He died in his sleep, said Cathey Moody, a family spokeswoman.
His wife of 61 years, Edna Greenberg Schottland had died on May 24.


Schools Can Handle Sex-Harassment Cases
To the Editor:
Re "Students Use Law on Discrimination in Sex-Abuse Suits" (front page, June 26): Except that Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 provides the opportunity for parents and children to sue school systems, I see no reason that sexually related misbehavior should be treated any differently from other types of misbehavior in schools.


Windows That Chastise
A merchant in Antwerp or Ghent in, say, 1500 might rise of a morning to wondrous sights: a martyrdom in progress, a prodigal son brought low, or the figure of Death, cloaked in gold and sailing through the air.
Mystical visions?
Tricks of the eye?
Neither.
He would be looking at pictures painted on small translucent sheets of glass inserted among the panes of his bedroom windows.
Dozens of these exquisite objects, along with related prints and drawings, are on view in "The Luminous Image: Painted Glass Roundels in the Lowlands, 1480-1560" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Although the production of such roundels had become a minor industry by the 16th century in what is now Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands, the Met's show, organized by Timothy B. Husband of the Cloisters, is the first ever devoted to the subject.


3 Are Charged in Benefits Fraud
Two brothers were arrested yesterday on charges of fraudulently obtaining hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of state unemployment payments for themselves and other people.
Guillermo Marte, 35, and his brother Diego, 29, both of Elizabeth, were accused of filling out fake forms, using bogus Social Security numbers and taking money from undocumented aliens to cheat the state.


Rambling Through Ulster County
LONG before Ulster County, New York, came into being, Indians of the Mingua nation planted maize in the fields around present-day Kingston.
They fished and hunted.
They lived the good life.
They called their domain "the pleasant land."
Well, fair enough.
The no-frills appellation suggests that the Mingua (the Mingos of James Fenimore Cooper's "Leatherstocking Tales") were a judicious people, not inclined to boosterism, ill-adapted to practice the dark arts of public relations and advertising.
In short, reliable.


CRITIC'S CHOICE/Film; French and Funny: Cinematic Treats Uptown, Downtown, Midtown
It's not news that the French make delicious movies about love, but a huge and varied new film series suggests they're awfully funny about murder, too.
"C'est Drole: Classic and Contemporary French Comedies" begins today and runs through Aug. 10 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, and includes everything from mordant wit to all-out farce.
The drollest of the droll comes this weekend with "Bizarre, Bizarre," directed by Marcel Carne in 1937 (eight years before "Children of Paradise").
In this hilarious black comedy, set in London, the great Michel Simon plays an author of murder mysteries who, for complicated reasons, pretends his wife has been killed.
Suspected of the murder himself, he must elude a real killer and Scotland Yard.
The plot is handled effortlessly, but the humor comes from the small touches, such as Simon's completely unconvincing disguise and minor characters that range from a self-righteous minister with a penchant for showgirls to a vegetarian killer (played by Jean-Louis Barrault) who murders only butchers.
"Bizarre, Bizarre" will be shown tomorrow night at 6:15 and 10:15 and on Sunday at 4 and 8:10 P.M.


Morgan Stanley Group To Add Miller Anderson
The Morgan Stanley Group Inc. announced yesterday that it would pay $350 million to buy Miller Anderson &amp; Sherrerd, L.L.P., a Philadephia-based money management firm with $33 billion under its control.
The acquisition is part of Morgan Stanley's continuing efforts to bring stability to its earnings flow by increasing its businesses that guarantee it a recurring stream of fees, like asset management and global custody.


Rise in Auto Insurance Minimums Is Voted
As they sped toward their summer recess, state lawmakers today approved the first mandatory increase in minimum automobile insurance limits in nearly 40 years, a measure that would provide greater protections for accident victims but would drive up premiums for every driver in the state.
Also today, after hours of chaotic negotiation and intense lobbying, the Republican-led Senate and the Democratic-controlled Assembly passed a resolution that could start New York down the path toward legalized casino gambling.  [ Page B6 ] .


The new campaign for Nathan's Famous hot dogs is a paean to New York and its hectic ways.
FOR New Yorkers, Nathan's Famous hot dogs are as celebrated as the Empire State Building and as boisterous as King Kong.
But the size of Nathan's advertising budget, at least among fast-food restaurants, is more along the lines of Fay Wray.
A new ad campaign from Jerry &amp; Ketchum, however, manages to make the most out of little with a commercial that makes boxer shorts, jackhammers, cabdrivers, and Nathan's hot dogs into a paean to New York.


Fragile -- But Democratic
Polling place 006 at the half-built school building in the town of Jacmel could tell the story of the Haitian elections last Sunday.
Events in that small room served as an example of everything that made the elections both successful and disorderly.
Senator Bob Graham of Florida and I were visiting a nearby polling place when we heard shouting from 006.
We ran over and found an election official arguing with the poll watchers from the various political parties.


World News Briefs; France to Keep Passport Controls
France said today that it would not go ahead with the final abolition of passport controls among seven European Union countries, which had been scheduled for Friday.
France had requested an extension until December of a trial period for the agreement, which will abolish internal border controls among 7 of the 15 European Union countries while making it tougher for illegal immigrants or criminals to enter.


ABC Discussion Seen Over Suit By Philip Morris
Lawyers for Capital Cities/ABC Inc. have entered into preliminary discussions with the Philip Morris Companies about settling a huge lawsuit the tobacco company filed against the network, an executive familiar with the legal strategy in the case said last night.
In the suit, Philip Morris is seeking $10 billion, a record for a libel case.
It accuses ABC News of defaming it in reports on Feb. 28 and March 7 on the newsmagazine program "Day One," which said Philip Morris had followed a policy of adding nicotine to cigarettes to help addict smokers.


Grants to Aid Laid-Off Workers
The Department of Labor has awarded New Jersey almost $2 million in grants to provide job-search assistance, counseling and on-the-job training to victims of recent mass layoffs.
A grant of $1.15 million will go to the Hudson County Division of Employment and Training to help people who lost their jobs when Kmart Fashions in North Bergen closed.
Another $800,000 is headed for the Office of Training and Employment Services in Mercer County, to help those put out of work when Hill Phoenix, a manufacturer of refrigeration products, shut its plant in Trenton.


Brake Deterioration Is Tied To Brooklyn Subway Crash
The emergency brakes on thousands of New York City subway cars have deteriorated substantially since the cars were overhauled in the late 1980's, and the deterioration contributed to the fatal crash on the Williamsburg Bridge this month, Transit Authority records and interviews with transit officials show.
In fact, said a former transit official, tests conducted just after the overhaul showed that when they were new, the brakes on the Manhattan-bound J train that crashed June 5 would have been strong enough to stop it before it plowed into the rear of a stopped M train on the bridge.


Supervalu Inc.(SVU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Cigar and Concern Cast Eye on Summer Riches
The summer racing campaign jumps off to a rich start on both the East and West coasts this weekend, highlighted by the $150,000 Bowling Green Handicap at Belmont Park tomorrow, the $150,000 Dwyer on Sunday and the $350,000 Suburban Handicap on Tuesday, the Fourth of July.
But the two top senior horses in the country, Cigar and Concern, will be staging a gold rush of their own when they meet Sunday in the $1 million Hollywood Gold Cup, a race that will cast a long shadow toward the richest race of all, the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic.


Officials' Raid and Detonations Anger Neighbors
The day after the authorities detonated explosives they found in a small garden apartment here, Glendell Robertson was still frightened and angry today.
A 35-year-old mother of seven children under 14 years of age, Ms.
Robertson lives in an apartment next to the one in which the explosives were discovered in this Prince Georges County community, just southeast of Washington.
Today, she showed a visitor how the explosions were so intense that they pushed nails through a bedroom ceiling.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:  TRACEY JONES, Elizabeth Harris Gallery, 524 Broadway, at Spring Street, SoHo, (through today).
Ms.
Jones's best pictures overflow with colored scribbles.
These seem at first glance to be laid down evenly across the canvas, but prolonged looking suggests a kind of hidden architectural framework, as if the pictures were really studies for Baroque stage sets, painted by a demented member of the Bibiena family (Pepe Karmel).


House Approves New Bill to Cut 1995 Spending by $16.5 Billion
The House of Representatives approved a new package of midyear spending cuts tonight to replace the bill that President Clinton vetoed three weeks ago.
The 276-to-151 vote came after the White House and Republican Congressional leaders reached an agreement after weeks of negotiations.
The new plan holds fast to the Republican bottom line of $16.5 billion in cuts to the current 1995 budget, but it shifts $733 million to education, environmental and job training programs, which the Clinton Administration had demanded receive more money.


Market Place; Analysts say optimism has returned to the biotech stocks.
A SURPRISING thing happened on Monday when Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. reported encouraging results from an early trial of its genetically engineered drug for the treatment of Lou Gehrig's disease: its shares moved up.
Back in the glory days of biotechnology, say 1991, favorable results in the first or second of the three phases of clinical trials required of a new drug for regulatory approval would inevitably send a company's shares soaring.
But then a long string of drugs that had looked promising in phases one and two failed in phase three, shares plummeted and biotech stocks entered a long, cold night.
No amount of good news -- even product approvals -- could move them.


Mets' Expectation Exceeds Execution
No one has to tell the Mets they have been a bad team and a disappointing team the first two months of the season.
They know it, and they readily admit it.
"I've made as many logical excuses for ourselves as we can make," Manager Dallas Green said.
"I've tried to analyze what has gone wrong. There's no one thing you can put your finger on. We just have a lot of things happening that have contributed a great deal to where we are. It's been hard on all of us. It's been frustrating. We're ready to pull our hair out because we've tried everything to get the guys going right."


State Finds No Bias in Special Cornell Dormitories
After a three-month review, the State Department of Education has ruled that Cornell University did not violate state laws or regulations by setting up dormitories geared to the cultures of black, Hispanic and American Indian students.
Last year, the Manhattan-based New York Civil Rights Coalition complained that the three dormitories fostered racial segregation and violated Board of Regents regulations prohibiting schools from making student housing assignments based on race.


Art in Review
Arno Rafael Minkkinen
Houk Friedman Gallery  851 Madison Avenue (near 70th Street)  Through July 14
The nude self-portraits that Arno Rafael Minkkinen has produced over the last two decades rely heavily on photography's ability to suggest magical transformations of reality.
In a 1977 work, for example, three fingers seen in close-up become disembodied pods of flesh.
A 1991 image made in Norway shows Mr.
Minkkinen, his legs out of the frame, apparently balancing on his head on the keel of a beached rowboat.
Mr.
Minkkinen seldom shows his face, or even his whole body.
Instead he presents fragments, relying on the frame to cut out the logical explanations for some of the fantastic effects he seems to achieve.
In an exception to this rule, a shot made in Switzerland shows him under water, his body blurred and bent by the fast current.


Excerpts From Supreme Court's Ruling on Religious Magazine
Following is an excerpt from the Supreme Court's 7-to-2 decision today that the Ku Klux Klan had a free-speech right to erect a cross in a state-owned park in Columbus, Ohio, that operated as a public forum, open to varieties of private expression.
The dissenting Justices in the case, Capitol Square Review Board v.
Pinette, were John Paul Stevens and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice Scalia
Respondents' religious display in Capitol Square was private expression.
Our precedent establishes that private religious speech, far from being a First Amendment orphan, is as fully protected under the Free Speech Clause as secular private expression.
Indeed, in Anglo-American history, at least, government suppression of speech has so commonly been directed precisely at religious speech that a free-speech clause without religion would be "Hamlet" without the prince.
Accordingly, we have not excluded from free-speech protections religious proselytizing, or even acts of worship.
Petitioners do not dispute that respondents, in displaying their cross, were engaging in constitutionally protected expression.
They do contend that the constitutional protection does not extend to the length of permitting that expression to be made on Capitol Square.


Sports of The Times; Evert Has Main-Court Memories
SHE never knew the real Wimbledon.
She never knew the pleasure of standing in line to buy rover tickets for the outside courts.
She didn't even know the glory of playing on the farthest courts.
"You think how selfish you are as a player," she was saying yesterday.
"You don't know what it's like to be Mary Smith, playing on Court 42."


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.(GAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


The Supreme Court's Final Day; Gutting the Voting Rights Act
The Supreme Court eviscerated the Voting Rights Act yesterday.
A 5-to-4 majority, determined to find the United States no longer required to help blacks achieve significant numbers in Congress, held that the law cannot be used to justify race-conscious districting.
The Court implied that if the law actually maximized black gains in the national legislature it would be unconstitutional.
Prodded by the Justice Department, Georgia created three districts in which blacks could elect a Representative of their choice in 1992.
For blacks to win in 3 of the state's 11 districts was not out of line, given Georgia's 27 percent minority population and a history of no black members of Congress for a century after the Civil War.
But the Court now finds the line-drawing impermissibly race-based, not excused by the department's invoking the voting law.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  A NEW VIEW OF ARAFAT  In his role as head of the Palestinian Authority, Yasir Arafat is being judged by new standards, leaving many disappointed as he struggles in the transition from national symbol to public servant.ARAFAT A1  LITTLE PROGRESS IN SYRIA TALKS  Little progress was made in peace talks between Israel and Syria, with many issues unresolved.
But there was agreement that a demilitarized zone would be needed around the Golan Heights.
A6


FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP. (FDX,N)
The Federal Express Corporation reported yesterday a lower-than-expected 8 percent increase in earnings for its fiscal fourth quarter, as strong international results only partly offset dwindling profit from domestic operations.
Federal Express, the package delivery service based in Memphis, said net income for the quarter that ended May 31 rose to $87.2 million, or $1.54 a share, from $80.7 million, or $1.43 a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenue gained 9 percent, to $2.47 billion from $2.27 billion.


Officer Is Charged In Sale of Fireworks Tied to Boy's Death
A 10-year-old boy fell to his death Tuesday afternoon while he and some friends were setting off fireworks on the roof of a school.
Today, a township police officer and her husband were charged with selling the fireworks to the boys, the police said.
The boy, Luis Agusto Perez of North Bergen, had climbed to the roof of the Hudson Academy here, and he and his friends were launching bottle rockets over the western slope of the Palisades.


At Israeli-Syrian Talks About Golan, Some Signs of a Thaw
Military commanders from Israel and Syria made only grudging progress toward a peace arrangement in three days of talks that ended here today, but they agreed on the need to establish a demilitarized zone around the Golan Heights.
The talks, which have been painstakingly nurtured by the Clinton Administration, remain far from success, senior Israeli and American officials said, even though Syria and Israel have been negotiating for four years.
Syrian officials would not comment.


Congress Passes G.O.P.'s Budget-Balancing Plan
On basically party-line votes, the House and the Senate today adopted a seven-year Republican plan that is supposed to cut taxes, limit spending for Medicare and other social programs and balance the Federal budget by the year 2002.
The votes showed in stark colors how much the political landscape has changed since Republicans won control of Congress in the election last November.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
"Sleepy surburbia" is not so sleepy after all, Police Chief John P. Salmon has concluded in the aftermath of the largest single drug seizure in this borough's history.
Four and a half pounds of cocaine with a street value of $800,000 were seized earlier this week, Chief Salmon said yesterday.
Two men from New York and three residents of a Madison apartment where the drugs were found have been arrested by the Madison police and the Morris County Prosecutor's Office, acting on a tip from the Customs Service and Postal Service inspectors.


The Harm Infant H.I.V. Testing Can Do
To the Editor:
Re "AIDS Babies Deserve Help, Now" (editorial, June 25): The Ackerman-Coburn plan you endorse would make AIDS funding to states contingent on human immunodeficiency virus testing of all babies whose mothers have not accepted voluntary testing during pregnancy.
This would force states to choose between violating the rights of pregnant and newly delivered women, or losing funds for the majority of individuals with H.I.V.-AIDS who are not directly involved in this controversy.


Culbro Corp.(CUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


49ers Sign Taylor
The San Francisco 49ers yesterday signed wide receiver JOHN TAYLOR to a two-year contract based heavily on incentives.
Taylor had earlier been waived so the 49ers could make room under the salary cap for, among others, the first-round draft pick J. J. STOKES and the restricted free agent DANA STUBBLEFIELD.


Move to Allow Casinos Wins Senate Vote
The State Legislature passed a resolution today that began the long, costly and contentious process of trying to bring casino gambling to New York.
The approval was a stunning reversal of fortune for casino supporters, since a proposed constitutional amendment to allow casinos appeared all but dead in the Republican-controlled Senate just hours before.


100 Accused In Fraud Case Over Benefits
One hundred current and former New York City employees, including 2 police officers and 24 welfare department workers, have been charged with welfare fraud because they illegally collected benefits while on the city payroll, investigators said yesterday.
In the 14-month inquiry by the Department of Investigation, a list of every city employee was matched against welfare rolls to uncover individuals who were illegally collecting benefits.
In contrast to other recent investigations, which have uncovered networks of corrupt employees in the welfare department, the computer match found people who had apparently individually lied to obtain benefits.


Kings Trade an Unhappy Webb
The Sacramento Kings traded their unhappy point guard, SPUD WEBB, to the Atlanta Hawks for forward TYRONE CORBIN yesterday.
The 5-foot-7-inch Webb is one of the National Basketball Association's shortest players, and has been a big contributor to the Kings the past four seasons.
Last season, he averaged 11.6 points and led the N.B.A. in free-throw percentage (.934).
But he had been upset by the Kings' selection of guard BOBBY HURLEY as the No. 1 draft choice in 1993, and lost his starting job to Hurley before an auto accident ended the rookie's first season.


Colombia Ignores Abuses by Military
To the Editor:
Re "Colombia Marvels at Drug Kingpin: A Chain-Saw Killer, Too?" (news article, June 21): You miss a key point when you turn to Henry Loaiza Ceballos's role with the army and police in what has become known as the Trujillo massacre, the murder of 107 people in 1990.


Coors (Adolph) Co.  (ACCOB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 11


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 14


New Laws Limit Damage Claims
Governor Whitman signed five bills into law yesterday that she said would reduce civil lawsuits and make the state friendlier to business.
One of the measures limits the amount juries can award as punitive damages in most cases to five times the cash award for compensatory damages.
Another component of the package will limit the doctrine of "joint and several liability" so that one defendant cannot be forced to pay all the damages in a lawsuit when several defendants are are fault.
Critics say the measures will unfairly deprive ordinary people of their right to get redress.


Yesterday in Washington
BANKING BILL -- The House Banking Committee approved a bill to repeal decades of consumer protection laws, but Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin threatened to recommend a Presidential veto.
Majority Republicans contended that the bill would eliminate red tape, allowing banks to pass efficiency savings on to consumers.
But Democrats and Mr.
Rubin argued that the bill would undermine protections that many depositors have come to take for granted and would allow bank executives to engage in reckless activities that could endanger their solvency.
BUDGET -- On basically party-line votes, the House and Senate adopted a seven-year budget that would cut taxes, limit spending for Medicare and other social programs and eliminate the Federal deficit by 2002.
The plan is just a framework.
The specifics of which taxes will be lowered and how spending will be restrained will not be decided for months, but Republicans rejoiced that they were fulfilling the keystone promise to balance the budget that they made during their election campaign last year.
The House vote was after the 239 to 134 vote, and in the Senate the tally was 54 to 46, with all Republicans in favor and all Democrats opposed.


Executive Changes
ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA INC., Chicago, named Joseph J. Esposito president and chief executive.
GREENPOINT FINANCIAL CORP., New York, named Bharat B. Bhatt, former chief financial officer of Shawmut National Corp., vice chairman.


At Home Abroad; 'A Reformist Right'
The top name on the Italian political right today is Silvio Berlusconi, the industrial and television tycoon.
But the man to watch for the long haul is Gianfranco Fini, leader of the National Alliance.
In the last year Mr.
Fini has done what many thought impossible.
He has taken the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement, changed its name and ideology, made it respectable and nearly tripled its vote.


When the Best Defense Is the Prosecution's Own Tapes
When Benjamin Brafman is developing a defense for a client in a high-profile drug, corruption or other conspiracy case, a favorite strategy is to go to the audio tape.
Often, recordings made secretly of defendants by law-enforcement agencies and Government informers are among the most important and persuasive evidence offered by prosecutors.
But over the years Mr.
Brafman has found instances in which the recordings can have the opposite effect on a jury from what prosecutors intended, helping to acquit clients not so much on technicalities as on alternative explanations for what is on the tapes.


Southwestern Public Service Co. (SPS,N) reports earnings for 12mo to May 31


Will Bouncy Ball Spoil Ivanisevic?
Goran Ivanisevic took it a trifle personally when the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club trotted out softer tennis balls for this year's championships.
"It doesn't matter, they can put water balls or whatever they want to do, that's the way," rumbled the lanky ace machine on Wednesday in his voice-of-doom bass with the thick Croatian accent.
He had just trounced Jonathan Stark, 6-4, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5), in the second round.


A. R. Finberg, 67, Newspaper Counsel And Rights Official
Alan R. Finberg, former vice president, secretary and general counsel of the Washington Post Company and a director of Human Rights Watch, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for the Post said.


Excerpts From High Court Ruling in Racial Districting Case
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court decision in Miller v.
Johnson, holding that the use of race as a "predominant factor" in drawing electoral district lines is presumably unconstitutional.
The vote was 5 to 4.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, which Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas joined.
Justice O'Connor filed a concurring opinion.
Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, John Paul Stevens, Stephen G. Breyer and David H. Souter dissented.
Justices Ginsburg and Stevens filed dissenting opinions.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice Kennedy
The constitutionality of Georgia's Congressional redistricting plan is at issue here.
In Shaw v.
Reno, we held that a plaintiff states a claim under the Equal Protection Clause by alleging that a state redistricting plan, on its face, has no rational explanation save as an effort to separate voters on the basis of race.
The question we now decide is whether Georgia's new 11th District gives rise to a valid equal protection claim under the principles announced in Shaw and, if so, whether it can be sustained nonetheless as narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest. . . .


2 Demure Irish Rebels And Their Rustic Salon
Before Gertrude and Alice, before Vita and Virginia, there were Eleanor and Sarah.
Daughters of the Irish aristocracy of the 18th century, Lady Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby, the focus of Laura Shamas's "Lady-Like" at the Grove Street Playhouse, bolted from their families and the expectations of their class to share a life in rural Wales for half a century.
The Ladies of Llangollen, as they were known, created splendid gardens that became a mecca for such illustrious contemporaries as Lord Byron, the young Charles Darwin and members of the British royal family, with whom they corresponded regularly.
And they were apotheosized in poems by Robert Southey, Anna Seward and William Wordsworth, who described their fashionably rustic abode as "the Vale of Friendship."


Bombing Recalls 1983 Death in Brooklyn
The bewildering case of a booby-trapped package that injured a pregnant Queens teen-ager on Tuesday has refocused attention on the murder of a Brooklyn woman 13 years ago, who died hours after being hit by bullets fired from a package she received just before Mother's Day.
Joan Kipp, 54, a guidance-counselor supervisor from Bay Ridge, was struck in the abdomen by a pair of .22-caliber bullets fired by an elaborate battery-powered device triggered when she opened a cookbook she had received in the mail.


MAIL BOMBER LINKS AN END TO KILLINGS TO HIS MANIFESTO
Unveiling an apparent motive and a possible way out of his murderous ways, a serial mail bomber has delivered to The New York Times and The Washington Post a 35,000-word manifesto calling for revolution against what he says is a corrupt industrial-technological society controlled by a shadowy international elite of government and corporate figures seeking to subvert human freedom.
The self-described anarchist, in a series of accompanying letters, said that if his full manuscript was published by one of the newspapers within three months, and if that paper printed three annual follow-up messages, he would stop trying to kill people.
But the bomber, who threatened to blow up a plane this week, did not pledge to stop property destruction in his 17-year campaign of postal terrorism.


Assembly Passes Bond-Issue Bill
The Assembly passed a bill yesterday that would place a $340 million bond issue on the November ballot -- the latest in a series of similar bond issues known as the Green Acres program.
Most of the money would be used to preserve open space for parks and farmland, but $15 million is earmarked to buy coastline property that is subject to erosion and land along the Passaic River that is prone to flooding.
The measure now goes to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who has not said if she will sign it.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN," Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The musical with book by Terrence McNally, music by John Kander and lyrics by Fred Ebb.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $47.50 to $70.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Schools Can Handle Sex-Harassment Cases; Free Speech Dilemma
To the Editor:
Gwendolyn Gregory, deputy general counsel of the National School Boards Association, rightly warns against sexual harassment policies that "interfere with free speech" (front page, June 26).
Several schools and universities have had such policies overturned by First Amendment lawsuits.


Environmentalists Win a Victory, but Action by Congress May Interrupt the Celebration
The Supreme Court gave environmentalists an important victory today, upholding Federal rules that protect endangered species by barring the destruction of essential habitat on private land.
For the time being, the 6-to-3 ruling has saved one of the Government's most trenchant environmental tools from a legal challenge that would have severely dulled it.
But conservatives in Congress are already moving to rewrite the law in ays that would overrule the court's decision.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF A Palmer Fan Leads Seniors  The only thing better than playing golf with Arnold Palmer is playing better than Arnold Palmer.
Just ask Larry Ringer.
One day after enjoying a practice round with his favorite golfer, Ringer shot a four-under-par 68 to share the lead with J. C. Snead after yesterday's opening round of the United States Senior Open at the Congressional Country Club in Bethesda, Md.
Ringer, the former golf coach at the Naval Academy, did not make a bogey, had 12 one-putt greens and twice drained putts of more than 30 feet.
"Yesterday I played with the king, and today I played like a king," he said.
Palmer, meanwhile, had a 72 despite a double bogey after three-putting on the 14th hole.
Snead sank a 25-foot birdie putt on No. 17 to move into a tie for the lead.
Third place was shared by Bob Murphy, Tom Weiskopf and four others at 69.
Jack Nicklaus had a 71. (AP) CAREER BESTS GOOD FOR LEAD: Glen Day and Mike Standly each turned in the best score of his career yesterday, a nine-under-par 62, and were tied for the first-round lead at the FedEx-St.
Jude Classic in Memphis.
Day had an eagle, eight birdies and a bogey, and Standly had five of his nine birdies in a row.
Dennis Paulson was third at 64, and seven golfers, including Scott Simpson and John Cook, were at 66.
Day joined the PGA Tour last year and Standly has been on it since 1991.
Day, who had a 63 in the opening round of the GTE Byron Nelson Classic last month, has never been better than a tie for second on the tour.
Standly, who previous best round was also a 63, won once in 1993. (AP) ROWING U.S.
Crews Star at Henley  American crews continued to make waves amid the sizzling heat yesterday as this year's Henley Royal Regatta completed its second round at Henley-On-Thames, England.
In a much anticipated matchup between Brown University's freshman heavyweight eight and the University of Washington's junior varsity in the Thames Challenge Cup, Washington grabbed the lead in the first quarter mile of the one-and-five-sixteenths-mile course, faltered after a steering warning from the umpire then regained the lead to win by three-quarters of a boat length in 6 minutes 26 seconds.
That ended Brown's hopes of having this year's freshmen repeat as Thames Cup winners.
Syracuse continued to be victorious, defeating Durham University to advance to a third-round match against Harvard University's varsity lightweight crew, an easy winner over the Tideway Scullers' School of England.
In an all-American fours with coxswain race, Syracuse withstood a continual onslaught by the Florida Institute of Technology after gaining a half-boat-length lead at the start.
BASEBALL A Fast Triple Play  It took shortstop Gabe Alvarez only a couple of weeks as a professional to perform one of the rarest achievements in baseball -- an unassisted triple play.
Alvarez, a second-round selection of the San Diego Padres in this month's draft, accomplished the feat Wednesday night for the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes of the Class A California League, in the bottom of the seventh inning of the Quakes' 13-11 loss to the High Desert Mavericks in Adelanto, Calif. (AP)


Voting Rights Experts Say Challenges to Political Maps Could Cause Turmoil
The Supreme Court decision today limiting the use of race in redrawing the lines of Congressional districts will throw the combustible process of political map making into turmoil, voting rights experts and civil rights advocates said.
And they said it could lead to scores of legal challenges to black- or Hispanic-majority districts.
The Court, in a 5-to-4 decision, struck down a Georgia Congressional district, saying that it is unconstitutional to use race as a "predominant" factor in drawing election districts.
The district had been created after the 1990 census as a black-majority district in an effort to increase the likelihood that a black would be elected to Congress.


Schools Can Handle Sex-Harassment Cases; Before Texas Courts
To the Editor:
Twice now you have published articles on student-on-student sexual harassment in public schools; and twice you have ignored three major Federal cases in Texas, including one before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.


Knicks File Tampering Charges Over Riley
Calling it "the most blatant example of tampering I have seen in 12 years in the N.B.A.," Dave Checketts said yesterday that the Knicks had filed tampering charges against the Miami Heat, which has been courting the recently departed Pat Riley for its vacant head-coaching job.
"We have formally filed tampering charges with Commissioner David Stern today against the Miami Heat organization," said Checketts, the president of Madison Square Garden.
"We believe that they have tortiously interfered with our contractual relationship with Pat Riley."


Clinton Defies Congress in Aid For Europeans' Bosnia Force
President Clinton circumvented Congressional opposition today and authorized $15 million in aid for a European rapid reaction force for Bosnia, an amount that the Administration said would rise to about $95 million.
The Administration insisted that providing the aid was an important way to stand by America's European allies, but in a letter to the President today, Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, and Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the House, denounced the move as flouting the will of Congress.


Cyber-Savvy Democrats See an Edge
Rebounding from their Slough of Despond, Congressional Democrats are claiming an early victory over the Republicans in the netherworld of on-line Internet politicking.
"We intend to surf the web and stay ahead of the Republicans," vowed Representative Peter A. DeFazio of Oregon, one of the Democrats bragging of their lead -- 22 senators to 6 and a comparable ratio in the House -- in the legislators' burgeoning electronic race to secure home pages on the World Wide Web.





TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Sandy Alomar, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Ariel Prieto, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contract of Eric Fox, outfielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Loaned Reid Ryan, pitcher, from Charleston, S.C. of the South Atlantic League to Visalia of the California League.
Reassigned Joe Perez, outfielder, from Charleston to Port Charlotte of the Florida State League.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Claimed Scooter Tucker, catcher, off waivers from Cleveland.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Designated Kevin Roberson, outfielder, for assignment.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Signed Brett Tomko, pitcher, and assigned him to Charleston, W.Va., of the South Atlantic League.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Matt Nokes, catcher, and assigned him to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Chris Sabo, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 26.
Basketball National Basketball Association  SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Traded Spud Webb, guard, to the Atlanta Hawks for Tyrone Corbin, forward.
Football National Football League  N.F.L. -- Named Dorothy Mitchell labor relations counsel for the NFL Management Council.
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Brent Alexander, safety, to a three-year contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Claimed Darren Krein, defensive end, off waivers from the San Diego Chargers.
Signed Robert Jackson, wide receiver.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Greg Jefferson, defensive end, to a series of three one-year contracts.
SAN FRANCISO 49ERS -- Signed John Taylor, wide receiver, to a two-year contract, and Herb Coleman, defensive end.


