U.S. and Japan to Discuss Base Reductions
American and Japanese defense officials agreed today to establish a committee to consider ways to scale back further the large United States bases on Okinawa  to quell an anti-military outcry there.
The decision was announced by Defense Secretary William J. Perry after morning meetings with Japanese Cabinet ministers.
Mr.
Perry said no specific new changes for the bases at Okinawa were discussed.


RJR Nabisco Refuses to Spin Off Food Unit Immediately
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation firmly rebuffed yesterday demands by the financiers Bennett S. LeBow and Carl C. Icahn for an immediate spinoff of its food business from its tobacco operations, calling their proposal "imprudent" and "irresponsible."
"The board will accomplish a spinoff just as soon as it is able to determine  that the spinoff is in the best interests of all the shareholders and consistent with the corporation's commitments," Charles M. Harper, chairman and  chief executive of RJR Nabisco, wrote in a letter addressed to Mr.
LeBow.


New-Home Sales Up 3.3% Aided by Lower Loan Rates
Lower mortgage rates helped generate a recovery in sales of new homes in September, the Commerce Department said yesterday, providing more evidence of steady, moderate growth.
Sales rose 3.3 percent, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 727,000 units, after a revised 11.1 percent plunge in August to 704,000.


Showalter Might Have Saved Job With Call
In the fleeting hours before Buck Showalter's contract as the manager of the  Yankees officially expired at midnight last night, George Steinbrenner claimed that he would have been receptive to speaking with him about a new contract if Showalter had phoned him.
But the owner was not waiting by the phone yesterday because Showalter had vowed that Steinbrenner would have to contact him to reconvene negotiations.
In  this tangled and bungled process of miscommunication and misinterpretation over  the manager's job, neither party is agreeing with the other's story.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12


QUEBEC'S PREMIER QUITS AFTER LOSS ON INDEPENDENCE
A day after a referendum for an independent Quebec failed by a tiny margin, the province's Premier, Jacques Parizeau, leader of the Parti Quebecois, resigned today, raising questions about the direction of the separatist movement.
His surprise announcement in Quebec City -- coming after an outcry about his  bitter comments Monday night that blamed "money and the ethnic vote" for the loss -- only underscored the divisive legacy of the vote.


Investors Win Ruling On Lloyd's Auditors
A major group of investors in the Lloyd's of London insurance market won a legal ruling yesterday that the auditors of one money-losing insurance syndicate had been negligent.
The victory in a London court could lead to compensation of  up to L300 million ($472 million) for the "names" -- individual Lloyd's members  who invest in the market -- whose money was channeled into the Merrett insurance Syndicate 418.
The 2,000 or so members of the association are seeking compensation for around L300 million of their Lloyd's losses from Merrett underwriters and the auditing firm of Ernst &amp; Whinney, now Ernst &amp; Young.
The firm said it would appeal the ruling.
The bulk of Merrett 418 losses stemmed from pollution and asbestos claims.
(Reuters)


Better Late Than Never
Among the gum wrappers, keys and broken-bristled brush was a crumpled three-week-old Lotto ticket that Beatrice Esquivel had not checked.
Now the woman and her husband, Antonio, are $8 million richer.
They were the  only winners in the Oct. 7 drawing.
They bought the ticket at an Alameda, Calif., cookie store, which will receive $40,000.


U.S. Won't Bring Change to Cuba by Coercion;Prisoner Rights
To the Editor:
I read with concern Amnesty International's Oct. 30 letter about its visits to Cuba.
Though Amnesty observers were allowed into Cuba on three occasions, they have been denied permission to visit with prisoners -- a minimum standard for any human rights investigation.
More important, Fidel Castro has never permitted the principal Latin American human rights organization, Americas Watch, to enter Cuba.


George C. Vournas; Lawyer, 98
George C. Vournas, a Washington lawyer active in the Greek-American community, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 98.
Born in Greece, he came to the United States at the age 17 and earned his law degree in Washington.
He was in private practice until about 10 years ago, often representing business interests before Government agencies.


American in Germany Tried in Spy Case
An American scientist who says he worked as a double agent for the Central Intelligence Agency has gone on trial in Germany on charges of spying during the cold war for the former East Germany.
The 54-year-old American, Jeffrey Schevitz, whose trial opened in Stuttgart on Monday, was accused of passing secrets to East Germany's Ministry of State Security from 1977 to 1990.
The maximum sentence for the charge is 10 years in jail.
His wife, Beatrice Altman, was charged as an accomplice.


2 Big Banks In Merger Set Aid for Poor
In an effort to smooth the way toward the biggest bank merger in history, the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Chase Manhattan Corporation are expected to announce today a multiyear package of loans and grants worth billions of dollars to low-income communities nationwide.
The banks are trying take the initiative away from community groups that are  likely to oppose the merger in what has become a banking industry ritual.
The 1977 Community Reinvestment Act allows the Government to block mergers by banks  that do not have good records of lending money where they do business.
Thus, a protest filing is perhaps the best way an activist on a street corner can get attention of the bankers high in the executive suite.


Accounts
Orbcomm Global L.P., Dulles, Va., a partnership of Orbital Sciences Corp., Dullas, and Teleglobe Inc., Montreal, to McCabe &amp; Co., New York, as the first agency to handle domestic marketing communications for the company's satellite-based two-way messaging system.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at more than $10 million.


It Takes a Scramble To Top Lowly Sharks
Most teams, even the Rangers, prefer a cautious, slow game on the road, to quiet the home fans and frustrate the home team.
But not tonight.
In a loose and exciting exhibition of free skating, they squandered a two-goal lead and were tied with the Sharks midway through the third period.
That changed quickly when Luc Robitaille and Niklas Sundstrom scored their second goals of the game just 24 seconds apart, on rebounds, to secure a wild 5-3 victory.


South Africa's Mighty Ask the Humble for Votes
The white candidates from the newly formed Greater Swartruggens Action Group  arrived at the black squatter camp on the edge of town here, parking their Mercedes-Benz sedans on a patch of dust and garbage between the shacks.
The Action Group -- many of them members of the former Town Council -- had never had to come looking for votes here before.
With the maid of one of the members in the lead, they carried flyers to hand out and moved awkwardly between the rusting barrels of water and clotheslines and chickens.


Rambis Waived by Lakers
The Los Angeles Lakers yesterday waived the 37-year-old KURT RAMBIS, who will continue as a special assistant coach with the team.
Rambis, a 14-year veteran who played on four championship teams with the Lakers during the 1980's, rejoined the active roster on Oct. 6.
(AP)


CIGNA CORP. (CI,N)
The Cigna Corporation said yesterday that third-quarter operating earnings rose 81 percent on improved profit in its property and casualty unit, though the company reported a net loss of $566 million after a $849 million after-tax adjustment, mainly for asbestos claims and an environmental reserve.
The Philadelphia-based insurer said operating earnings rose to $270 million,  or $3.70 a share, from $149 million, or $2.06 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The figures did not including special charges for restructuring and investment sales, as well as for pollution cleanup claims.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:


Leslie Fay Files Chapter 11 Plan
The Leslie Fay Companies filed a Chapter 11 reorganization plan yesterday in  which the company, a women's apparel maker, said it had concluded negotiations with the probable buyer of its Sassco unit.
Leslie Fay has said it plans to split into two parts.
One will consist of the company's so-called core businesses.
The other, Sassco, its most profitable division, will probably be sold to a management group led by the unit's head, Arthur Levine.


City Agency Sues H &amp; R Block Over Ads
The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs has sued H &amp; R Block, the nation's largest tax preparation company, charging that it deceived the public with advertising for its electronic filing and rapid-refund services.
It is seeking as much as $5 million in fines and penalties.
The Commissioner of Consumer Affairs, Alfred C. Cerullo 3d, said yesterday that the company, which has 115 offices in the city, had misled customers about its fees and had repeatedly ignored agreements with the city agency to amend such practices.


Seles Withdraws in Oakland
MONICA SELES, citing the same knee problems that plagued her return to the WTA Tour two months ago, announced her withdrawal yesterday from this week's Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif.
The condition could jeopardize Seles's participation in the WTA Tour Championships, beginning at Madison Square Garden on Nov. 13.
Tendinitis flared up in Seles's left knee during her initial comeback this summer from a two-year absence from competition, and she took three weeks off after the United States Open in September to rest.
The problem flared up again while she was preparing on the indoor courts for the Oakland event.
Seles also said she would not be able to play in the WTA Tour event in Philadelphia next week.


Arab-Israeli Conference Agrees on Mideast Development Bank
A three-day conference of business and Government leaders intended to broaden economic bonds between Israel and the Arab world ended today with the announcement that an American-backed proposal for a Middle East Development Bank would move forward.
The conference passed a resolution calling for establishment of the bank, to  be capitalized at $5 billion with paid-in working fund of $1.25 billion.
Officials said they will negotiate in the coming months to determine who the shareholders will be and how much each will contribute.


Yes' for New York Debt Reform
It took many years of profligate borrowing, shaky budgets and fiscal gimmickry for New York to sink to one of the lowest state credit ratings in the  country.
The state's poor standing is not simply an embarrassment.
It costs taxpayers millions of dollars a year in extra debt service payments.
The best hope for improving the state's shoddy borrowing habits is an important, if little discussed, proposal to amend the State Constitution on the  ballot Nov. 7.
We strongly urge a "yes" vote on Ballot Proposal No. 3.


Health Club Promises
To The Living Section:
As president of Apex Fitness Inc., I must address some of the negative comments about our program in the article "At Health Clubs, a Range of Choices for Better Nutrition," (Oct. 11).


Boeing Order Increased
The Boeing Company said today that Scandinavian Airlines System of Stockholm  had ordered six more Boeing 737-600 twin jets worth $210 million.
The airline's  initial order for the 737-600, placed earlier this year, was for 35 planes.
The  first deliveries are scheduled for the second half of 1998.
The new 737 includes a redesigned passenger cabin and improvements in operating performance.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Suspect in a Killing Is Released
On Sunday, Joann Faherty's family went to Trenton for a march in memory of her and other victims of domestic violence.
On Monday, they said they were outraged to learn that the man accused in her Sept. 6 shooting, her husband, Kevin Faherty, had been released from jail on $100,000 bail.
"He's entitled to bail," James Lynch, the first assistant Gloucester County prosecutor, told the A.P. yesterday.
"That's the way the system works."


Living a Split-Level Life In a Former Missile Silo
At the end of a 120-foot steel-ribbed tunnel, two suburban lanterns and a "Home Sweet Home" mat greet visitors to the home of Ed and Dianna Peyden, a split-level fashioned out of a decommissioned Atlas-E missile silo.
Yellow marigolds brighten the underground kitchen, built over the former occupants' "ready room." A wood stove adds coziness to the living room, converted from a launch control room where Air Force technicians raised and fueled a nuclear-tipped rocket during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.


U.S. Wages Up 2.7% in Year, A Record Low
The expanding economy that has propelled stock prices to record levels has not spilled over to the paychecks of American workers, whose earnings rose by 2.7 percent in the last 12 months, the smallest amount on record, the Labor Department reported today.
In the year that ended in September, wages and salaries rose by 2.8 percent and benefits rose by 2.2 percent, resulting in the calculation of a 2.7 percent  overall rise in earnings.
Inflation for the same period was 2.5 percent, while economic growth was 3.5 percent.


Better to Tell Patients Of Alzheimer's Risk
To the Editor:
An Oct. 24 front-page article raises the question whether or not people should be informed they carry a gene that predicts the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Some highly relevant evidence comes from a study of people at risk for  Huntington's disease, a rare, untreatable midlife dementia caused by a single dominant gene that can now be identified.


AMERICAN ONCOLOGY STOCK DROPS ON EARNINGS REPORT
The stock of American Oncology Resources Inc. lost 28 percent of its value yesterday after the concern, a physician management company based in Houston, reported earnings that were below analysts' expectations.
The shares plunged $13.375, to $35, in Nasdaq trading of almost 4.9 million shares.
American Oncology reported late on Monday that its profits in the third quarter climbed to $4.7 million, or 20 cents a share, from $507,000, or 3 cents a share, a year earlier.
I/B/E/S, a company that tracks Wall Street earnings estimates, said American Oncology earned 13 cents a share on an operating basis, which was  less than analysts' expectations of 16 cents a share.


Turning Rockers Into High Rollers
With his baseball cap turned backward and a silver earring bobbing as he strummed a few chords on an air guitar, 29-year-old Philip Weck was not your typical casino customer.
But then again, this was not your typical Vegas hot spot: music by Pearl Jam pumped through the sound system and an electronic board above a bank of slot machines counted the diminishing number of acres of rain forest left on mother earth.
"It's more like a party than a casino," Mr.
Weck observed, taking a break from a post-midnight romp at the roulette table in the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino here.
"It's more familiar to people like me than the Strip."


Salvadoran Refugees Get Help Amid Ironies
To the Editor:
As a member of an organization that has adopted a poor, rural community in a  war-torn department in El Salvador, I was pleased to see "Salvador Helps Own Refugees Filing for Asylum in U.S." (front page, Oct. 27), on Salvadorans who sought refuge in the United States from the 12-year civil war in their country.


MORE THAN 800 JOBS TO BE CUT WORLDWIDE AT W. R. GRACE
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that it planned to eliminate more than 800 jobs as part of a plan to cut costs.
The company, based in Boca Raton, Fla., said more than 50 percent of the cuts would come from the corporate staff worldwide.
The plan comes after a four-month study of the company's general and  administrative costs, its factory costs and its research and development operations.
The company, which makes chemicals, plastic packaging and other products, has about 20,000 employees worldwide.


In Perfomance: CABARET
Songs as 'Little Movies' With Anecdotes of Texas Amanda McBroom Rainbow and Stars


Risk of Death Found in Use Of Heart Drug
Elderly people with high blood pressure who took one kind of calcium channel  blocker drug were nearly twice as likely to die within five years as those treated with other drugs, Federal scientists say.
The drug is the short-acting form of nifedipine, which is marketed as Procardia by Pfizer Inc., and as Adalat by the Bayer Corporation.


Diet Makeover
To The Living Section:
Regarding the article "At Health Clubs, a Range of Choices for Better Nutrition," in which I, as the nutritionist at Sparta Strength and Conditioning  Center, was included: Not only was I misquoted, but the nutritional services offered at Sparta were misrepresented as well.


VIACOM INC. (VIA,A)
Viacom Inc. reported yesterday that its net income fell 71.4 percent in the third quarter, but that its operating results rose because of better performance at its MTV cable networks, Blockbuster video stores and Simon &amp; Schuster books.


Rights Leader In Lagos Gets Death Penalty
A prominent minority rights campaigner was sentenced to death today for the murders of four leaders of his ethnic group last year in a dispute stemming from claims to the country's oil revenues.
Ken Saro-Wiwa, 54, who leads the Movement for the Survival of Ogoni People, was sentenced to death by hanging by the Civil Disturbances Special Tribunal in  the southern city of Port Harcourt.
Eight other men received death sentences and five were acquitted in a trial that has underscored the social and political problems oil has brought to Africa's most populous nation.


ResultsPlus
HORSE SHOW


Foreign Affairs;A Peace of the Action
This new Middle East has got me confused.


No Headline
You don't have to worry about whose family you're having dinner with or which night to open presents." -- LAURA MATTHEWS at a Halloween celebration in Riverside Park. [B8:6.]


Tribute to a Man Of the Crucible
One of Edward Albee's fondest memories of Arthur Miller was not inspired by a play, but by a protest.
"It was a time on 67th Street, between Third and Lexington, when Arthur and I were both carrying placards, protesting outside the Soviet Mission to the United Nations," Mr.
Albee told a crowd of 1,500 at Town Hall in Manhattan on Monday night.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER HAMPTON, the playwright and screenwriter whose new film from the  Bloomsbury era, "Carrington," opens Nov. 10, says he developed a fascination with Dora Carrington 18 years ago when he read a biography of her.
Carrington, a painter and the companion of the writer Lytton Strachey, who was homosexual, committed suicide after Strachey's death.
"I was obsessed by her story and I wrote the film, but no one would make it so finally I did it myself," Mr.
Hampton told an audience Monday evening at a screening of "Carrington."


Halloween: Not Just a Day but a Season;A Fringe Holiday for Children Gets a Higher Profile, With Adults
When Jo Falcone started dumping dead bodies on her front lawn in White Plains, N.Y., it was a novelty, and people drove from dozens of miles away to gawk at the chilling tableaux.
More than a decade later, Mrs.
Falcone's makeshift cemetery is more elaborate -- she now hangs a corpse or two from the trees -- but less peculiar.
About a dozen nearby homeowners have followed her example, turning their own yards into  fields of screams, complete with cardboard tombstones, bedsheet ghosts and burlap cadavers.


Mike Figgis Reconsiders His Divorce From Hollywood
Mike Figgis has no illusions about the limited appeal of his new film, "Leaving Las Vegas." After all, it has no car chases and no explosions.
It doesn't even have a serial killer, the trend of the moment in Hollywood.


Reviews/Fashion;Jacobs and Tyler Seize the Moment
THERE are designers who roll with the hype, run with the pack, follow the trends and -- in their frenzied pace to produce, produce, produce for the next season -- never hold a mirror up to society, or more important, to themselves.
In highly personal collections, both Marc Jacobs and Richard Tyler chose the  other course this week, getting closer than in many seasons to their own intriguing esthetics and tuning out the white noise that has been dulling many designers' sensibilities.


Bosnian Serbs Free 300 Muslim Civilians in Prisoner Exchange
Under pressure from Washington and eager to make a good impression at the start of peace talks in Ohio, the Bosnian Serb authorities hastily handed over 300 male Muslim civilians on Monday in exchange for 150 Serbian prisoners of war, American officials and international relief agencies said today.
The Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, John Shattuck, who said he had won commitments from the Bosnian Serb leadership for information about and access to Muslim detainees, said the release should be seen as "just a beginning."


31 Members of 3 Bronx Gangs Indicted on Murder Charges
Thirty-one members of three Bronx street gangs who the authorities say turned a sliver of Hunts Point into a war zone were indicted yesterday on Federal charges of racketeering, drug-dealing and murder.
In the last five years, the gangs have waged sporadic turf wars in the neighborhood, murdering both rival gang members and their own associates, Federal agents said.


A new campaign for Digital Equipment depicts it as a central player in the future of computing
UNTIL recently, if the words Digital Equipment Corporation and future appeared in the same sentence, the words bleak, doubtful or grim were sure to be lurking nearby.
But now, as the company's prospects begin brightening to some degree, executives feel confident enough to introduce a worldwide brand campaign with an audacious premise: describing the central role Digital will play in a future that some skeptics believed it would not survive to see.
The aggressive campaign, building on assertive advertising that Digital ran in the spring, is scheduled to start on Sunday.
The brash, high-energy television commercials and print advertisements include a new theme: "Digital. Whatever it takes." They are being created by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York, which in August 1994 was named the worldwide lead strategic and creative agency  on the Digital advertising account.


CAT Scan for 3,000-Year-Old Mummy
However full her life in Egypt may have been 3,000 years ago, she could not have imagined the adventure that awaited her on Long Island the night before Halloween -- riding in an ambulance to a hospital for X-rays and a CAT scan.
In a journey scientific and surreal, a mummy was transported from the Suffolk County Vanderbilt Museum in Centerport to Huntington Hospital on Monday for tests meant to find as much as can be found about a person who lived and died 1,000 years before Christ.


Body Shop Stock Up On Reports of Buyback
Shares in Body Shop International P.L.C. jumped 13 percent yesterday on reports that the company's founders, Anita and Gordon Roddick, might try to buy  back all of the cosmetics chain.
The Roddicks own 24 percent of the Body Shop, and The Daily Telegraph reported yesterday that they were in advanced talks about buying the rest of the company in a deal worth more than L300 million ($480 million).
The Body Shop would say only that there had been preliminary discussions with the Roddicks, but the couple have "advised the board that no such proposal  by them is expected to be made in the near future, if at all." Nonetheless, Body Shop's stock was up 23 pence at 157 pence ($2.46) on the London Stock Exchange.
(AP)


Ambulance Plan Replaces Street Patrols With Stations
The Giuliani administration's plan for merging the Fire Department and the Emergency Medical Service calls for the creation of roughly 60 neighborhood ambulance stations across New York City, complete with kitchens and classrooms for E.M.S. workers.
The stations -- part of the detailed plan the administration is to present to the City Council today -- would each have four or five ambulances and would replace E.M.S.'s current system of having ambulances answer emergency calls as they patrol the city's streets.


Parking Rules
Because of All Saints' Day, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Wine Talk
THE only thing missing was a bearded Charlton Heston changing water into wine.
Not that there was any shortage; there never is at the annual Wine Experience, a three-day extravaganza of tasting, eating and meeting.
This year's event was held last weekend at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan.
In size and numbers, the Wine Experience resembles a Hollywood production: some 1,700 guests and exhibitors attended; more than 200 wineries took part; 20,000 bottles of wine were consumed, some of them priceless rarities, and about 30,000 glasses were used.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Food Notes
Let Them Eat Cheese


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct 27
Oct 20
Oct 28
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.3 Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.2 Gasoline stocks
196.7
198.4
198.0 Distillate stocks
129.8
130.6
143.7 Crude imports, daily
7.5
7.4
7.0 Product imports, daily
1.3
1.5
1.6 Crude stocks
301.8
301.0
338.5 Crude production, daily
6.4
6.4
6.6 Refinery utilization (%)
90.3
89.4
87.3


Silver Forwards Police Bill To Pataki at the 11th Hour
In a day marked by robust political gamesmanship, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver today sought the signature of Gov.
George E. Pataki on legislation that would effectively unravel the merger of New York City's three police departments.
Mr.
Silver sent the bill to the Governor at about 4 P.M., knowing that if it  were not signed by midnight, its effective date would be put off a year, until Nov. 1, 1996.
The bill passed in the Legislature almost three weeks ago.


A Relieved Sheffield
GARY SHEFFIELD, the Florida Marlins slugger, who escaped serious injury when  he was shot during what he and the police described as a botched carjacking on Monday night, was thankful for his life.


White House Plays Down Opposition In Congress
As the United States prepared to open crucial negotiations on Wednesday to end the Bosnian war, President Clinton urged the warring parties to make peace.
But he and his aides were still struggling to play down the damage from Congressional opposition to sending troops to enforce a settlement.
On Monday, the House overwhelmingly passed a resolution stating that the United States should not even pledge to send American peacekeepers without permission of Congress, and Mr.
Clinton's aides charged that the resolution would damage America's national security interests.
Today, Mr.
Clinton shifted course, telling reporters that he did not believe the vote would affect the peace talks.


Chinese Player for Clippers?
The Los Angeles Clippers waived the free agents SHAWN JAMISON and TONY MARONEY yesterday, possibly paving the way for the N.B.A.'s first Chinese player.
The Clippers' roster stands at 14, including MA JIAN, a free agent from  the University of Utah.
Ma, who is from Tianjin, China, is a 6-foot-7-inch guard who specializes in 3-point shooting.
Opening-day rosters of 12 must be set by tomorrow.
(AP)


Islanders Stumble, But Win
Conservative play late in the third period got the Islanders in trouble tonight, but they finally figured out a way to create a happy ending against the Florida Panthers.
The Islanders were outshot by 11-1 in the third period and saw a 4-2 lead evaporate, but got a goal from center Bob Sweeney with 1 minute 4 seconds left in overtime for a 5-4 victory before 10,896 at Miami Arena.
It was Sweeney's second goal of the game and of the season.


CHRONICLE
Same man, another woman: CLAUDE LELOUCH, the French film director who became  famous for "A Man and a Woman," was married on Monday to ALESSANDRA MARTINES, an Italian actress and former ballerina, Agence France-Presse reported yesterday.
He has been married twice before and has six children.
NADINE BROZAN


Canada United, Quebec Divided
Quebec has sensibly rejected secession, but by the narrowest of margins -- some 50,000 votes out of nearly five million cast.
Emotions still run high in the streets of Montreal and in the oratory of the losing separatist leaders.
Quebec's Premier, Jacques Parizeau, announced his resignation yesterday after coming under heavy criticism for his remarks blaming "money and the ethnic vote" for the referendum results.
Lucien Bouchard, leader of the separatist campaign,  promised a new referendum "quicker than you think."
Neither remark shows much respect for a democratic verdict.
Had the separatists won by an equally narrow margin they surely would have expected their opponents to accept the result as final.
Nor do the separatists, who always insisted they spoke for all Quebecers, do themselves credit by now suggesting that the votes of the province's non-French-speaking citizens should  count for less than those of French-speakers.
Mr.
Parizeau finally apologized for his offensive remarks.


Study Finds Anew a Benefit in Eating Fish
The latest study to explore whether eating fish reduces the risk of heart disease has found that it does -- that is, eating modest quantities and reducing the risk of a certain type of the illness.
The study found that people who ate the equivalent of three ounces of salmon  a week were only half as likely to be stricken with cardiac arrest as those who  ate no fish.
The results are being published on Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Whoopi Goldberg To Be Oscars Host
Whoopi Goldberg will be the host of next year's Oscar ceremony, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announced today.
The show, on March 25, is to be produced by Quincy Jones.
David Letterman was the host of this year's Academy Awards.
Ms.
Goldberg was the host in 1994.


Defying Skeptics, Apple Raises Its Market Share
Defying predictions of its impending demise, Apple Computer Inc. regained worldwide personal computer market share in the third quarter and reclaimed second place behind Compaq Computer, according to figures released today by Dataquest, the market research firm.
Despite widely publicized problems with its supply of parts for its desktop computers and an embarrassing battery fire that stalled the introduction of a new portable, Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., raised its market share of worldwide computer shipments to 9 percent from 7.4 percent for the previous quarter.
Compaq had 10 percent of the personal computer market, shipping 1.485 million machines, a gain of 21.6 percent over the 1994 period.


Handwriting Expert Testifies
A handwriting expert testified yesterday that a boxer's signature on two copies of a contract with the promoter Don King were identical, supporting a Government theory that King faked a contract to collect insurance.
The testimony came as prosecutors in Federal court in Manhattan considered whether to rest after a month of testimony meant to prove King collected $350,000 illegally from Lloyd's of London.
The trial will resume tomorrow.


J. L. Czarnecki, 84, Noted Restaurateur
Joseph L. Czarnecki, who transformed Joe's, a workingman's tavern in the industrial town of Reading, Pa., into a world mecca of mushroom cookery, died on Saturday at Reading Hospital.
He was 84.
The cause was complications from prostate cancer, his family said.


4 Writers in Series
Anna Quindlen, author and former columnist with The New York Times, is to be  the first speaker in a lecture series that begins on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village.
Others scheduled to take part are the political consultant and author Mary Matalin (Dec. 5); the New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd (Feb. 13), and the humorist and author Dave Barry (April 23).
Admission is $30 per lecture or $85 for all four; proceeds benefit the school.
To charge a series ticket: (212) 279-4200; tickets to a single lecture: (212) 924-5960.


When Kanell Throws, Records Seem to Fall
Danny Kanell does not tiptoe around the obvious.
The senior fully understands how fortunate he is to be Florida State's quarterback.
"With the way we like to pass the ball and with the receivers we have, I think it's a quarterback's dream to be in our offense," Kanell said.
"I mean, if you do your job as a quarterback and make smart decisions, you should be able to put up big numbers."


Crew Asks 54 Top Aides for Undated Resignation Letters
Beginning his campaign to fundamentally restructure and scale back the central bureaucracy of the New York City schools, Chancellor Rudy Crew today will ask 54 top administrators at the Board of Education to submit letters of resignation while he re-examines their jobs over the next two weeks, board officials said.
Dr.
Crew will decide who will keep a job only after he determines which administrative responsibilities must remain centralized, and which, as is his preference, could be delegated to individual schools or local districts.


Daiwa Files Report on Losses And Says It Plans a Revamping
Daiwa Bank Ltd., which lost $1.1 billion from unauthorized bond trades in its New York office, submitted its first written report to the authorities today on  how the trader involved was able to hide the losses for 11 years.
In submitting the report, a Daiwa vice president, Toshiro Kawakami, also told officials of the Japanese Finance Ministry that the bank planned to reorganize after its huge loss, closing branches and reducing its staff size.


INSIDE
Rebuke Over Busing


Balkan Leaders Face an Hour for Painful Choices
The Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, once remarked that choosing between President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia was like chosing between "leukemia and a brain tumor."
For all three Presidents, however, the hour of painful choices has now come.
After four years of war, the loss of quarter of a million lives, the dispersal of three million refugees and the destruction of their once-shared Yugoslav state, they have been summoned to a bleak American air base near Dayton to confront each other and their responsibilities in talks that start on Wednesday.


Northwest Air And KLM Spar Over Poison Pill
The six-year-old relationship between Northwest Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch  Airlines, which has long been considered a model of cooperation, erupted into a  rare public spat yesterday.
The dispute revolves around a plan that Northwest management will recommend at the airline's next board meeting, on Nov. 16, to set limits on the percentage of the company that any one investor can hold.
KLM, which has a 19 percent stake, plus an option to buy more shares in 1998 that would raise its stake to close to 25 percent, sees the initiative as an attempt to limit its influence at Northwest.
The current governance structure enables any of the original investors who, alone or collectively, own more than  20 percent of the company, to veto decisions on broad transactions like mergers  and major asset sales.
The proposed modification would effectively simplify the  decision-making power of shareholders by requiring a simple majority for such decisions.


Devils' Lease All but Signed
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority said last night that they had resolved all major issues concerning their lease talks and would finalize their deal next week to keep the team at Byrne Meadowlands Arena for 11 more seasons.
The two sides will not meet today's deadline to sign the lease and will have  to ask Superior Court Judge Peter Ciolino for a short extension.
No details of the deal were released.


Stock Prices Ease in Profit Taking, With Dow Off by 1.09
Stock prices dipped slightly yesterday, pushed lower in the last 90 minutes of trading when profit takers stepped in to take advantage of a healthy run-up earlier in the session.
By the close, the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 1.09 points, to 4,755.48.
But broader market averages also fell, as declining issues narrowly led advances.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index fell 1.75, to 581.50, and the New York Stock Exchange's composite index fell 0.53, to 309.61.
Volume on the Big Board was a moderately heavy 377.5 million shares.


Democrats Try to Tar Foes With Pataki
Taking aim at what they consider the state Republican Party's Achilles' heel, Gov.
George E. Pataki, the state Democratic Party announced today an advertising campaign intended to portray the Governor as unpopular, unethical and untrustworthy.
The 30-second television spot will be broadcast beginning Wednesday in selected communities with important local races next Tuesday, including Westchester County, Albany, Long Island and Buffalo.


Big British Glass Maker Posts 35% Gain in Net
Pilkington P.L.C. said yesterday that its first-half profit rose 35 percent,  and it announced a rights offer intended to raise L303 million ($475 million) to finance acquisitions and investment.
Pilkington, the world's largest supplier of automotive glass, said its profit in the six months that ended on Sept. 30 rose  to L104 million ($163 million), from L77 million a year ago, aided by a 3 percent net increase in prices.
The figure from the 1994 period includes a one-time gain of L16 million.
The company said shareholders could buy one new share for every four they own, at a price of 155 pence ($2.43) each.
The company said the rights issue was necessary to continue to expand while reducing debt.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Eating Well
DEADLY but delicious" was one woman's description of cheesecakes at a sampling of foods earlier this year for my annual mail-order survey. Little did  she or other tasters know that those cakes were low-fat.
Almost everyone who tried the sausages made by Penn Valley Farms in Chicago also raved, unaware that they were substantially lower in fat.
The bacon from New Skete Farms was admired, too, even though it contained no nitrites.


Developments in U.S. Neighbors Cause Dollar to Rise, Then Dip
The dollar ended little changed against most leading currencies yesterday.
It initially rose to a five-week high against the yen as traders assessed the United States impact of the vote in Quebec that narrowly rejected secession from Canada, but the dollar then slipped back after the Mexican peso weakened.
"Canada helped the dollar, and Mexico held it back," said Jay Westheimer, senior currency trader with Banco di Sicilia in New York.


New York City's Spending Grew Under Giuliani's First 2 Budgets
In his 22 months in office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has often said that New York City's budget has shrunk two years in a row.
Now it can be told: Under Mr.
Giuliani's first budget, according to a City Comptroller's report, New York spent $238 million more than under Mayor David N. Dinkins's last budget -- an increase of nearly 1 percent.
And while Mr.
Giuliani's second budget -- for the 1996 fiscal year that began on July 1 -- reduces total spending to nearly $31.1 billion from $31.6 billion,  the amount of spending controlled by the city, excluding state and Federal grants, actually increases.


Reviews/Fashion;Powerbroker Suits and Cool Characters
THE television-scape is filled with prime-time characters who must be dressed and anchorwomen who cry out to be clothed.
They and the not-insignificant number of women who take their fashion cues from the tube are indebted to Linda Allard, the designer for Ellen Tracy.
On Ms.
Allard's runway were a dozen suits for Barbara Walters, a couple for Sally Jessy Raphael and three more for Mariel Hemingway's character in "Central  Park West" -- women who must wear classic suits with enough elan to identify them as powerbrokers of a sort.


Officer Accused of Rape
A Bronx police officer was charged yesterday with having a sexual relationship with a 14-year-old Staten Island girl who had been reported missing by her parents, the police said.
The officer, Carlos Castillo, 28, was living with the girl, a ninth grader at Curtis High School on Staten Island, in his Bronx apartment, the police said.
The girl, whose name was not released, ran away from home on Oct. 8, they said.
The officer, who worked at the 42d Precinct in the South Bronx, was charged with statutory rape and endangering the welfare of a child.
Officer Castillo, who was appointed in February 1994, was suspended.
The girl was placed in the custody of her grandmother, who lives in Manhattan.


WAL-MART TO BEGIN TAKING THE AMERICAN EXPRESS CARD
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the last of the nation's major retailers that did not accept the American Express card, said yesterday that it would begin taking the  card today at its 2,300 stores in the United States.
In recent years, the American Express Company has reached agreements with Kmart, Sears, Roebuck and other specialty retailers.


Ex-Worker Held in Record Store Shooting
A former Tower Records worker, dismissed for stealing two weeks ago, tried to rob the store early yesterday and was arrested for wounding a security guard and pistol-whipping the manager, the police said.


QUAKER STATE IN TALKS ON SALE OF SAFETY LIGHTING UNIT
The Quaker State Corporation said yesterday that it was in talks on selling the Truck-Lite Company, in a move to refocus its operations around its core business of producing automotive oil and lubricants.
Quaker State's chairman, Herbert Baum, said in a meeting with analysts and shareholders that Quaker State had been approached by bidders and continued to field inquiries for Truck-Lite,  which makes safety lighting equipment for cars and trucks.
Mr.
Baum declined to name the possible buyers, but he said Quaker State expected a sale of the unit to bring in as much as $100 million.


Two Top Portuguese Entries
Two Portuguese runners with impressive credentials have entered the New York  City Marathon, which will be run on Nov. 12.
One is 33-year-old MANUEL MATIAS, who has been timed under 2 hours 10 minutes four times in a career that has never seem him compete in the United States.
The other is MANUELA MACHADO, the women's marathon world champion, whose career best was 2:27:42, good for fourth  place at the 1992 Boston Marathon.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Mischief Night Is Snuffed Out
In 1991, Halloween Eve vandals started 133 fires in Camden.
In 1995, for the  fourth straight year, volunteers kept things under control.
"Our program worked," Fire Chief Kenneth Penn said yesterday, the A.P. reported.
The 1995 tally for Mischief Night: seven building fires and three people facing charges.


In Perfomance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Visitor Gives Mozart Some Breathing Room 'The Magic Flute' Metropolitan Opera


Journal;The Big Chill
Extremism may be in the eye of the beholder in American politics, but when the Girl Scouts of America, the American Cancer Society, the National Council of Churches and the March of Dimes are among the 500 groups opposing a piece of legislation, it is hardly loose talk to call that bill extreme.
The bill is the already infamous Istook Amendment.
It is significant not only in its noxious self but as an exceptionally revealing paradigm of how far right  the so-called Republican "revolution" can tilt.
Some 60 House Republicans are now tenaciously clinging to Istook as a fall-on-the-sword issue, threatening to  hold the entire budget process hostage to its passage.
To see why this one bill  is their do-or-die cause is to see just how much vindictiveness, hypocrisy and big-business lucre lurk behind the revolution's ostensibly egalitarian aims.


Paint Sandblasting Returns Along Williamsburg Bridge
For the first time since halting work in 1992, the city has resumed sandblasting lead-laced paint from the Williamsburg Bridge, again causing people who live near the bridge to worry about their children's health.
Work on the Manhattan side of the bridge resumed Monday afternoon, three weeks after a State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan ordered the city to stop  removing lead paint from the Williamsburg Bridge and its 837 other bridges.


Farewell to the Steam Table
AT Bertelsmann, employees can nibble fresh sushi in a sleek dining room overlooking the Great White Way.
At Pfizer, they can pre-order their children's  birthday cakes and pick them up on the way home.
On request (not before), the server at Mount Sinai's Kosher Corner will prepare a serious pastrami sandwich garnished with the sort of sour pickle seldom experienced north of Delancey Street.
Hungry lawyers at Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler can choose between Chilean sea bass with peppers, mango and pineapple or a soft-shell crab  sandwich with curry mayonnaise.
New York's company cafeterias are not what they used to be.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Boaters Are Safe After Search
An exhausted Somerset County couple is back on land after a weekend sailing trip that went awry.
Elwood and Nancy Kahley set out from Longport Saturday in their 33-foot sailboat, the Indulgent Wife.
When they did not reach South Amboy as expected Sunday night, the Coast Guard was notified.
After a search over more than 7,000 square miles of ocean, the Kahleys were found yesterday about 30 miles east of Atlantic City.
SUSAN JO KELLER


CODA ENERGY IN AGREEMENT TO BE BOUGHT BY ENRON UNIT
A subsidiary of the Enron Corporation agreed yesterday to buy Coda Energy Inc. for $8 a share, or $196 million.
The deal is contingent on the sale by Coda of its gas gathering and processing subsidiary, the Taurus Energy Corporation, on terms acceptable to Enron.
Coda, based in Dallas, is involved in the gathering and processing of oil and natural gas.
Its shares rose 18.75 cents, to $7.50, in Nasdaq trading.
Enron is a natural gas concern based in Houston.
Its stock fell 50 cents a share, to $34.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


In Perfomance: POP
Excerpts From Ballads That Can Last for Hours Folk Music of Persia Symphony Space


Supreme Court Awards Island to Mississippi
The Supreme Court settled one of the country's longer-running boundary disputes today by ruling unanimously that a seven-mile stretch of river frontage on the Mississippi River's Louisiana bank actually belongs to Mississippi.
In awarding the uninhabited property known as Stack Island, near Lake Providence, La., to the state across the river, the Court acted within its "original jurisdiction," its authority under the Constitution to sit as a trial  court and resolve disputes between states.
The Court applied principles of boundary adjudication it has developed over years of hearing such cases.


Unicef Has Proud Social Development Record
To the Editor:
Your assertion in "More Than a U.N. Birthday Bash" (editorial, Oct. 23) that  the United Nations is an underachiever in social development is not based on the record of accomplishments.
One of its most respected agencies, the United Nations Children's Fund, has been a leader in longterm development for decades.


An Intricate Senate Procedure Lends a Hand to Welfare Recipients
With one clean swipe just before midnight Friday, the Democratic minority in  the Senate knocked out of the big budget bill many of the harshest policies involving welfare.
No longer would the bill force families off welfare after they had been on relief for five years.


The Search for a Redheaded Gene Stumbles Over One for Sunburn
JUST as Sherlock Holmes used his powers of detection to solve the mystery of  "The Redheaded League," clever reasoning helped British researchers uncover a genetic link between ultraviolet radiation and increased risk of sunburn and skin cancer in light-skinned people.
But unlike the fictional detective, Dr.
Anthony J. Thody and colleagues at the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, England, backed into their discovery while searching for the roots of redheadedness, an effort that has also provided a partial explanation for flame-colored hair.


For Fare Increase, M.T.A. Owes Us a Giveback
To the Editor:


Book Notes


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about two magicians at the grave of Harry Houdini in Queens reversed their identities.
The man on the left, with an open book, was John Bohannon; the man on the right was James R. Colligan.


Odds Are Good, 99-1, That Messier Will Stay With the Rangers
Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the Rangers, said today that the chances are "99 to 1" in favor of extending Mark Messier's contract for next season.
Smith said he and Madison Square Garden executives have until Jan. 20, the date of the All-Star Game, to decide if they want Messier for the 1996-97 season, the option year on his three-year contract.
If they decide to buy him out, they can do so for $1 million and let him become a free agent after this season.
If they decide to keep him, they must pay him another $6 million next season.


C.I.A. TELLS PANELS IT FAILED TO SIFT TAINTED SPY DATA
The Central Intelligence Agency admitted today that it knowingly, and without warning, gave the White House and the Pentagon inside information on the Soviet  Union from foreign agents it knew or strongly suspected were controlled by Moscow.
The information was crucial to Washington's perceptions of Moscow in the last seven years of the cold war, said members of the Senate and House intelligence committees, and may have affected decisions to spend billions of dollars on military hardware.


Paris Journal;At Night in Gay Paree, Some Perils Are Underfoot
New Yorkers do it, Londoners do it, but all too many Parisians just will not  clean up after their dogs.
Despite appeals to civic duty and experiments with devices like canine toilets and public plastic-bag dispensers to help people overcome the natural aversion to picking up what their pets produce, the city authorities are resigned to having to do much of it themselves.


New Rock Hall of Famers
The next inductees into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame will be David Bowie, Gladys Knight and the Pips, Jefferson Airplane, Little Willie John, Pink Floyd,  the Shirelles and the Velvet Underground, the hall announced this week.
Each of  the future inductees has met the Hall of Fame's eligibility requirement: to have released their first recording at least 25 years ago.
The inductees, announced on Monday, were chosen from a ballot of 15 nominees  by 800 music producers, record-label executives, journalists and other rock-and-roll experts.
Pete Seeger was also chosen, as an early influence; Tom Donahue, a San Francisco disk jockey of the 1960's, was chosen in the non-performer category.


In Seattle, Ex-General Gets Schools to Snap to Attention
When John Henry Stanford, a retired Army general who is Seattle's new school  superintendent, took the podium for his introductory meeting with administrators, there was considerable anxiety among the school brass.
Some were expecting an exhortation to drop to the floor and pound out 25 pushups.
Others wondered whether, as a non-educator, Mr.
Stanford would have the slightest idea how to run a big-city school system.


F.A.A. Sets Newark Air Routes, Rejecting Proposed Ocean Paths
The Federal Aviation Administration made final its new departure routes from  Newark International Airport today, sticking to the plan announced in July that  rejected the ocean routes sought by New Jersey residents in favor of minor tinkering on flight patterns near affluent communities.
Community organizers said they were outraged, and they accused the F.A.A. of  never seriously considering the ocean routes.
New Jersey members in the House of Representatives announced Congressional hearings on Nov. 9 to criticize the review process.


Corrections
A front-page article on Oct. 24 about a test for a gene, apo E4, that predicts an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease, as well as a higher risk of heart attack, misstated the percentage of the population carrying at least one copy of the gene.
It is 27 percent, not 15.


Dancing The Way We Live
Brian Jucha sets his new experimental piece for the Via Theater company, "I Fell Off the Mountain and Stubbed My Toe on the Thorny Prick of Your Cold Cold Heart (or) Bashing My Head Against a Brick Wall Until I Can Taste Blood," in a ballroom.
But it is really domestic comedy -- the overture is "Going Home," squealed by a bagpipe -- that is being staged in the Washington Square Church on West Fourth Street, where the acoustics are thrillingly exploited by the sound team.


An Intricate Senate Procedure Lends a Hand to Welfare Recipients
With one clean swipe just before midnight Friday, the Democratic minority in  the Senate knocked out of the big budget bill many of the harshest policies involving welfare.
No longer would the bill force families off welfare after they had been on relief for five years.


President and G.O.P. Leaders to Discuss Debt Today
President Clinton and Republican Congressional leaders agreed today to start  talking about extending the debt limit, but the two sides had very different ideas about the scope of their scheduled meeting on Wednesday.
Speaker Newt Gingrich said he expected the talks to go beyond the debt limit  to cover issues like temporary spending bills and "how we are going to balance the budget, how we are going to finish reforming welfare, what we're going to do to save Medicare, what we're going to do in order to get tax cuts to American families."


David Schneider, a Giant of Cultural Anthropology, Is Dead at 76
David Schneider, whose pioneering studies of kinship in Chicago have been credited with altering the course of cultural anthropology and inspiring a generation of feminist scholars, died on Monday at his home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 76 and had been a professor at the University of Chicago and later at the University of California at Santa Cruz.
His son Michael said the cause of death was a heart attack or a stroke.


MERGER OF FLEET FINANCIAL AND SHAWMUT IS APPROVED
The Justice Department approved the merger of the Fleet Financial Group and the Shawmut National Corporation yesterday after Fleet agreed to sell 64 of its  850 bank branches to maintain competition in New England banking.
The 64 branches have about $3 billion in deposits.
The $3.7 billion merger deal was announced in February 1995.
The branches to be sold have more than $300 million  in commercial loans in Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire and Rhode Island.
Twenty-eight of them, with $1.6 billion in deposits, are near Hartford.
Fleet, based in Providence, R.I., has branches in Maine, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, New York, Connecticut and Massachusetts.
Shawmut, based in Hartford,  has 350 branches, in Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Massachusetts and Florida.


Turkey's Chief Seeks to Ease Rein on Kurds
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller today proposed lifting martial-law-style rule in  southeastern Turkey, where the military has fought separatist Kurdish rebels for 11 years.
The proposal came as Mrs.
Ciller won approval today from President Suleyman Demirel to form a new coalition Government, ending a monthlong political crisis.


It's Time Broadcasters Paid Fair Share
To the Editor:
"Don't Let the Broadcasters Off Free" (editorial, Oct. 25) overlooks a crucial point and also make an assumption that misleads readers.


Dining in 'Siberia'
To The Living Section:
Monte Williams's column about Lawrence Otis Graham ("Trials of a Member of a  Special Club," Oct. 4) should have been titled "Whining and Dining." Mr.
Graham's angst was laughable, especially since he takes it to the bank.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;'Terrorized' Family May Sue
A state appeals court ruled yesterday that an East Orange family could sue because 10 police officers smashed their door with a sledgehammer and rushed in  on a drug raid.
The officers had the wrong address.
The court opinion said members of the McKinney family were "manhandled, threatened, abused and terrorized" during the 1986 raid, The Associated Press said.
When the family first sued, one judge said the detective who obtained the  search warrant was protected by immunity; another ruled that the family could not present an expert on police procedure.
Yesterday's decision reversed those rulings.


X-Rated Computers
To The Living Section:
Since when has pornography been worthy of review ("Virtual Porn: Ultimate Tease," Oct. 4)?
You wouldn't review pulp erotic novels, for instance, or preview the newest XXX pornographic movie; the fact that pornography is now available for viewing on the computer screen doesn't make it newsworthy.
Neither is it a notable exception that CD-ROM producers of pornography have seen their businesses expand with little or no advertising.


Target: Pataki's Plane
PRODUCER The New York State Democratic Committee


Minna Lederman Daniel, 99, Longtime Modern Music Editor
Minna Lederman Daniel, who edited the influential magazine Modern Music for more than 20 years, died on Sunday at the Kateri Residence nursing home in Manhattan.
She was 99.


Treasury Prices End Day Mixed
Treasury prices were mixed yesterday.
The market, traders and analysts said yesterday, is being pulled in two directions: by market participants hoping that a budget deal will be reached in  Washington and by those looking at economic reports for signs of inflationary growth.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Jury Out on High-Dose Patch
Two new studies of high-dose nicotine patches, which deliver up to 44 milligrams of nicotine to smokers trying to quit, differ on their effectiveness.
The studies are published in Wednesday's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Jeffrey Schaire, 41, Art Magazine Editor
Jeffrey Schaire, a former editor in chief of Art and Antiques magazine, died  on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 41.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Paula.


U.S. Won't Bring Change to Cuba by Coercion
To the Editor:


Joseph Lindmayer; Physicist, 66
Joseph Lindmayer, a physicist who specialized in the harnessing of energy from sunlight and focused laser beams, died on Friday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 66.
The apparent cause was a heart attack, said a longtime friend, Emeric Podraczky.


ALBERTO-CULVER AGREES TO BUY ST. IVES LABORATORIES
The Alberto-Culver Company said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire St.
Ives Laboratories Inc. for $15 a share, or about $120 million.
Alberto-Culver, which makes beauty products and personal-care items, is based in Melrose Park, Ill., while St.
Ives, which makes products for hair and skin care under the St.
Ives Swiss Formula brand name, is based in Chatsworth, Calif.
The stock of St.
Ives jumped $1.875, to $14.375, in Nasdaq trading.
Alberto-Culver's stock was up 75 cents at $31.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Real Estate;Manhattan tally: Charles Jourdan returns and a currency trader stays, as do Tiffany's offices.
CHARLES JOURDAN is returning to Manhattan retailing.
The company, which closed its Madison Avenue and Trump Tower stores more than two years ago, has signed a lease for 1,700 square feet of selling space at 655  Madison, at 60th Street.
The upscale shoe store is to open Nov. 20.


Jacobs and Tyler: strong, esthetic visions.


Apartment Life
Bickering in co-ops is, of course, a time-honored tradition.
Here are some examples, past and present.


Canadian Dollar Buoyed by Quebec Vote
Relief at the rejection of separatism by a paper-thin majority of Quebecers rippled through Canada's economy today, driving up the depressed Canadian dollar and the Toronto stock market and offering investors a respite after weeks of uncertainty about the country's future.
"It's not just positive, it's exuberant," Warren Jestin, the chief economist  at the Bank of Nova Scotia, said of the market's reaction to Quebec voters' decision to remain a part of Canada.


Officer Resigns Over False Testimony, but Says His Superiors Made Him Lie
A police officer who was praised for his role in reporting corruption resigned yesterday after acknowledging that he had lied in several trials to protect his identity as an informer, including a trial in which, he claimed yesterday, a senior officer in his precinct forced him to give false testimony about the legality of a drug arrest.
But Police Commissioner William J. Bratton responded that investigators were  unable to confirm the allegations made by the officer, Barry Brown, and that no  action was likely to be taken against the other officers.
Officials in the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, concurred.


MIDCOM COMMUNICATIONS PLANS A MERGER
Midcom Communications Inc. said yesterday that it planned to merge with Telco Communications Group Inc. and an affiliate of Telco, Tel Labs Inc.
Midcom, which is based in Seattle, leases telephone lines from national carriers and sells long-distance service to businesses.
It signed letters of intent to buy the stock of Telco Communications and Tel Labs, which are privately held, for about  16 million Midcom shares, worth about $240 million at the close of trading yesterday.
The stock transfer will give shareholders of Telco and Tel Labs 51 percent ownership of the combined company.
Telco provides long-distance services to 1.6 million residential customers in 15 states and the District of Columbia.
The company, based in Chantilly, Va., markets its services under the name Dial &amp; Save.
Midcom stock was up $1.25, at $15, in Nasdaq trading.


The Courtship of a Wayward Star: Sabonis
His car is American, his career has been Bohemian and his thirst is from another world.
Arvydas Sabonis -- recruited to the National Basketball Association by congressmen, senators, secretaries of state and the Portland Trail Blazers -- finished his first two-a-day practice this month, perspired in Niagara Falls proportions and was asked if he required water.
"Beer," he said.


Danger on the Tracks
One morning last week a school bus carrying 35 teen-agers crossed the Union Pacific railroad tracks at Fox River Grove, Ill., and stopped at a traffic light.
But there was not enough room between the tracks and the light, so the bus's rear end hung over the tracks.
A commuter train, bearing down at high speed and unable to stop, slammed into the bus, ripping its body from its frame  and killing seven passengers.
Was this a freak accident, peculiar to this grade crossing 40 miles from Chicago?
Or are there other grade-crossing tragedies just waiting to happen?
Federal rail, highway and safety officials need to find out.
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena fittingly has created a grade-crossing task force to learn not only how well the signals and safety equipment are working but also, since electronics alone will not guarantee safety, how well the intersections are designed.


CHRONICLE
O.
J.
SIMPSON has agreed to a deal to sign photographs and sports memorabilia in Atlantic City on Feb. 24, his agent of six years, Mike Gilbert, confirmed yesterday.
The occasion will be a collectors' show called "Football Spectacular  4" at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
Mr.
Simpson, who was acquitted on Oct. 3 of the murders of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald Goldman, is to receive a flat fee for the four-hour appearance and none of the proceeds from the sale of autographs, Mr.
Gilbert said.
He would not divulge the fee.


Irrepressible Appetites
NO one in New York ever gets full.
"I'll never eat again," they moan, when the absolute last crumb disappears.
But where do you find them the very next morning?
Lining up for lox.
You happen  to know that, of course, because, by the strangest coincidence, you're there, too.
Right behind them.


Mattingly Falls Far In Latest Rankings
Baseball's annual ranking statistics often sprout flaws in comparing players, but the new ratings, released yesterday, accurately reflect the decline of Don Mattingly.
The Yankees' faded star, who before this year was one of only two players to  get a perfect ranking, placed 12th among American League first basemen and 49th in the ranking group of first basemen, outfielders and designated hitters.


Rangers Stay on a Roll


Pacers' Smits Out 3 Weeks
Indiana Pacers center RIK SMITS will have a bone spur removed from his left leg and is expected to be out at least the first three weeks of the National Basketball Association season, which opens on Friday.
The spur was discovered after Smits noticed some painful swelling in his left ankle last week.
The 7-foot-4-inch center, who averaged a career-high 17.9 points a game last  season as the Pacers reached the Eastern Conference finals for the second straight year, said he decided not to wait before undergoing surgery.


Massine: Ubiquitous, Passe, Revived
MASSINE A Biography By Vicente Garcia-Marquez Illustrated. 446 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Ideal Notion of Community Often Marred by Bickering
Michael Sommer, a 70-year-old retired salesman, is enduringly fond of his co-op in Forest Hills, Queens.
He enjoys being board president.
In his eight years in the job, though, his attention has been arrested by a certain amount of aggravation.
There was the uprising five years ago when the board raised the maintenance fee.
There was the child unwilling to cease roller-skating in his apartment until he moved to California.
And who could forget the elderly woman who, for no discernible reason, would steal out of her apartment during the night, jam the front-door lock and pitch cups of coffee at the hallway walls.
She ended up in a nursing home.


Money for Mojave Park Draws Veto Threat
The Interior Secretary, Bruce Babbitt, said today that President Clinton would veto the Interior appropriations bill unless Congress provided more funding for the year-old, 1.5 million-acre Mojave National Preserve.
A Congressional committee today reiterated that it would provide only one dollar for the preserve, Mr.
Babbitt said at a news conference in the desert section of the Huntington Botanical Gardens, in San Marino, which is near Pasadena.


Confusion as a Cruise Line Halts Operations
After Regency Cruises abruptly halted operations over the weekend, a travel agent in Costa Mesa, Calif., received a phone call from a passenger aboard the Regent Sea off Devil's Island.
The client said the 715-passenger ship, which was en route from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Rio de Janeiro, was turning back to Nassau, the Bahamas.
While Regency Cruise's agent at the Port of Nassau confirmed yesterday that the ship was scheduled to arrive at Nassau at 6 A.M. on Friday, the port director in Oranjestad, Aruba, which is three or four sailing days away, said yesterday that the ship was due there on Friday at 2 P.M.
Both men said they had received confirmation of the arrival dates via fax from the Regent Sea.


Ex-Leader of South Korea Questioned on Slush Fund
With head bowed and saying "I'm sorry," former President Roh Tae Woo walked into a meeting with prosecutors today to be questioned about his involvement in  a $654 million slush fund.
Mr.
Roh is the first past or present South Korean head of state to face such  questioning, the opening step in possible criminal proceedings.


Study Induces Asthma Symptoms, Implicating a Flaw in Muscles
Researchers have been able to induce the symptoms of asthma in people who do  not suffer from the disease.
They say the results show that an impairment of smooth muscles in the airways is an underlying cause of asthma.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Paychecks Rise Only 2.7%, The Lowest Rate in Years The economic growth that has propelled stocks to record levels has not done the  same for the paychecks of American workers, whose earnings rose 2.7 percent in the last 12 months, the smallest amount in the 13 years that records have been kept, the Labor Department said.
Inflation was 2.5 percent, and the economy grew 3.5 percent.
The amount business spent on health benefits fell by one-tenth of 1 percent; as recently as 1988, the spending was rising 14 percent a year. [Page A1.] Canadian Markets Rally Investors cheered the vote rejecting sovereignty for Quebec, even though the margin was paper-thin.
The Canadian dollar rose sharply, stocks advanced in Toronto, and the Canadian central bank lowered a lending rate. [A8.]


Officer Dies After Shooting Himself
An off-duty police officer died last night after shooting himself in the head, the police said.
It was not clear whether the shooting was an accident or a suicide, said Robert Samuel, a police spokesman.


Fraud Scheme Reported From Federal Jail
Being locked up in Federal prison did not stop a fraud ringleader from duping about 300 investors into buying more than $1 million of worthless stock, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged yesterday.
The Federal agency said Anthony Sarivola ran the stock-fraud scheme for four  months while imprisoned for an unrelated conviction at Allenwood Federal Prison  in Pennsylvania.
The S.E.C. filed a civil fraud complaint in Federal court in Manhattan.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues  was down 180.15 points, or 1.02 percent, at 17,474.49.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei gained 145.47 points.


At 36, Sandberg Is Hoping To Regain Edge for Cubs
Add another name to the list of Chicago athletes who wear No. 23 and have come out of retirement.
After Michael Jordan's return to the National Basketball Association last season, a rejuvenated Ryne Sandberg confirmed at a news conference today that he will resume a baseball career that stopped 16 months ago when he said he had lost his edge for the game.


Jets Pick Up Momentum, Fueled by Their Defense
No matter how many positives the Jets can find, their 17-10 defeat to the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday was a defeat.
As Bobby Houston, the Jets' strong-side outside linebacker, said: "What can you take out of it? You take a loss out of it. But hopefully, some of the things we did right, we can use next week."


Cornell Increases Payments To Ithaca for City Services
Ending a long dispute with Ithaca, Cornell University agreed today to increase its annual payment to the city nearly sevenfold, to $1 million, by 2007.
"We would have liked to get more," said Mayor Benjamin Nichols, a former Cornell engineering professor who is running for re-election next week.
But Mr.
Nichols said he was pleased with the outcome of a battle that began when he withheld permits for construction at the university unless the payments in lieu  of taxes increased.


Some Tobacco Growers Diversify, a Study Finds
A new study of tobacco farmers in the United States shows a significant generation gap in the farmers' concern for their economic future and the need to diversify their crops.
The research, believed to be the first comprehensive assessment of American tobacco farmers' attitudes, found that farmers have a strong and continuing economic dependence on tobacco as a crop, and showed that many farmers powerfully identify their interests with those of tobacco companies.


At Co-ops, Entrenched Arrogance
When a group of Japanese urban planners visited New York recently as part of  an exchange program, they were struck by any number of the city's singular quirks.
Nothing, however, bemused them more than the discovery that every co-op  building had its own peculiar array of rules, dictating all kinds of things, from who can live there to how fat their dogs can be.
Co-ops don't exist in Tokyo, and all condominiums there are subject to a uniform set of bylaws established by the city government.
"What really boggled their minds was that a bunch of people get together here and set up their own rules," said Michael Kwartler, an urban planner with the New School.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;College Being Sold Off in Parts
Upsala College, forced to close in May because it could not pay its multimillion-dollar debt, is being sold off in stages.
Florida Gulf Coast University in Fort Myers has bought part of the library collection for $450,000, said Walter J. Greenhalgh, a lawyer for the bankruptcy  trustee.
Antiques from the school president's office, laboratory equipment, desks, vans and computers will be auctioned on Nov. 12.
Prospective buyers who visited the 37-acre campus last week must submit bids by Dec. 15, Mr.
Greenhalgh said.


Where Alabama Inmates Fade Into Old Age
Grant Cooper knows he lives in prison, but there are days when he cannot remember why.
His crimes flit in and out of his memory like flies through a hole in a screen door, so that sometimes his mind and conscience are blank and clean.
He used to be a drinker and a drifter who had no control over his rage.
In 1978, in an argument with a man in a bread line at the Forgotten Man Ministry in Birmingham, Ala., his hand automatically slid into his pants pocket for a knife.


JAMESWAY PLANS TO SELL ITS INVENTORY TO 3 COMPANIES
The Jamesway Corporation, which filed for bankruptcy last month, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its inventory to three companies for about  $105.6 million.
Jamesway, a discount retailer, said the contract called for the  concerns -- Jubilee L.P., Alco Capital Group Inc. and the Nassi Bernstein Company -- to make a cash payment equal to 51 percent of the retail value of the company's inventory, which is about $207 million.
Jamesway, which is based in Secaucus, N.J., filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the  United States Bankruptcy Code on Oct. 18.
A hearing on the contract was set for  Friday in Federal Bankruptcy Court.


Politicians Find a Window Into the Heart of the Christian Right
To measure the ascendant power of the Christian right, there are few better indexes than Gary L. Bauer's phone log.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas consulted with him before delivering his much-talked-about tongue-lashing to Hollywood.
Lamar Alexander, the former Governor of Tennessee, sent him the galleys of his book and asked for his appraisal.
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas confers with him regularly on issues including tax cuts and welfare overhaul.


U.S. Officials Say Firearms Agency Has Made Reforms
The Federal firearms agency has been thoroughly revamped since the siege of the Branch Davidian sect's headquarters two years ago, senior officials told senators today.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, criticized by the Senate recently for their conduct in the Ruby Ridge standoff in Idaho in 1992, are being scrutinized anew for their actions against the Davidians near Waco, Tex.


Who Put Ethics on Labor's New Agenda
To the Editor:
"Labor Wakes Up" (editorial, Oct. 26) speaks to the hopes of many workers that a revitalized labor movement can grow again to improve economic and social  conditions for all American workers.
But one error is apparent to any knowledgeable observer of labor's debates over the past four or five months.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Different Paths To a Traditional Goal Camerata Bern Alice Tully Hall


DETAILS PROVIDED ON PLAN FOR GLOBAL SPORTS NETWORK
The News Corporation, headed by Rupert Murdoch, and Tele-Communications Inc.  said yesterday that they had formed an alliance to obtain sports programming and televise it worldwide.
As expected, the News Corporation, which owns the Fox network, and Tele-Communications, which is based in Englewood, Colo., will each  own 50 percent of the venture.
Each company will contribute TV channels and sports-programming rights to the venture.
The partners said the assets were valued at more than $2 billion.
Under the arrangement, the News Corporation has  agreed to pay $300 million in cash to the Liberty Media Corporation, the programming arm of Tele-Communications, said Chase Carey, the chairman and chief executive of Fox Television.
The News Corporation is based in Sydney, Australia.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Flexibility on Medicaid Is Urged
Republican governors including Christine Todd Whitman came to town today to argue for Medicaid changes that let states tailor the program to their own needs.
The governors told prominent lawmakers including Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and House Speaker Newt Gingrich that they preferred the House Medicaid bill over the Senate version.
"The language in the House bill clearly is the kind of flexibility we need," Mrs.
Whitman said.
In Trenton, legislators agreed to lobby Congress to save another program that helps poor families pay fuel bills.
Ten years ago, New Jersey got $82 million for the program; last year, it got $64 million.
One plan before Congress would eliminate all the program's Federal financing.


The Search for Peace in the Balkans: A Primer
After four years of war that followed the disintegration of Communist Yugoslavia - and added "ethnic cleansing" to the world's vocabulary of shame - the leaders of Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia are meeting at an Air Force base in Ohio today to begin hammering out a peace settlement.
If progress is made, the parties will move to Paris for continued negotiations.
NATO has pledged to send  60,000 troops to enforce a peace.
THE PLAYERS Slobodian Milosevic President of Serbia


AT&amp;T School Offer: Free Internet Access
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it would provide $150 million in the next five years to help connect all of the nation's public and private elementary and secondary schools to the Internet and other electronic networks.
The program would also allow AT&amp;T to develop business in schools and display  new products to parents.


Kate Ericson, 39, Installation Artist
Kate Witte Ericson, an artist who collaborated with her husband, Mel Ziegler, on indoor and outdoor installation works noted for their beauty, complexity and  social awareness, died on Sunday at her home in Milanville, Pa.
She was 39 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was brain cancer, her husband said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Meeting on Desegregation Plan
If it has to, the state will take action to desegregate Englewood's Dwight Morrow High School.
But it would rather persuade Bergen County school districts  to solve the problem themselves.
"We definitely want to encourage them to participate, to bring them to the table to work out a solution that all parties could agree to," said Jay Doolan,  an Education Department official who recently presided over five stormy community hearings about regionalization.
Yesterday, he presided over a meeting  with a variety of education officials; it ended with plans for another session next week.


In Perfomance: POP
British Empire Revisited With Pipes and Drums 'Musical and Marching Spectacular' Madison Square Garden


U.S. Won't Bring Change to Cuba by Coercion;A Crumbling Society
To the Editor:
I have just returned from a one-week trip to Cuba for the purpose of studying Havana's Art Deco architecture.
The architecture was divine, although it is returning to its original state -- sand -- from years of neglect.
Tragically, one could say the same about the state of the society.


Detroit Volunteers Do the Trick In Stopping a Devilish Tradition
Thousands of volunteers who hit the streets as the sun set apparently smothered Devil's Night, a Halloween Eve arson tradition that in some years has  ended with hundreds of buildings torched.
"Last year and the years before you could smell the fires in the air," Detroit's Public Safety Director, Emmett Baylor Jr., said today.


Daytime TV Talk: The Issue Of Class
Over many centuries and in many places, the forces of righteousness have decried the pleasures of the lower orders, be it bearbaiting or blaspheming on the Sabbath.
Preachers reprove, officials repress, do-gooders regret, but no sooner is one unfastidious taste or practice brought under control than another  pops up.
And even more distressing to the respectables, today's vice may be tomorrow's common practice.
In the latest episode of this eternal soap opera, America's enforcers of the  moral life have lately been inveighing over the daytime talk shows.
They are dismayed, discouraged, disgusted.
William J. Bennett, the former Secretary of Education who seems to own a copyright on American Values, and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut Democrat, have turned their bipartisan attention from gangsta rap records to the sap rap of a score of programs that are watched regularly by some 10 million Americans.


Campus Newspaper's Excursion Into a Bitter Free-Speech Debate
TWO flights up from a household goods store at Broadway and 112th Street, the editors of The Columbia Daily Spectator were in their newsroom on Monday night,  wrestling with front-page possibilities.
Among the contenders were articles on renovations at Columbia University's main dorm for seniors, the search for a new director of a religious center and a speech marking the end of Latino Heritage Month.
Let's face it, there wasn't a barn burner on the list.


Steps Taken On Welfare In Michigan
In another month or two, most women on welfare in Michigan will probably have to be working within six weeks of having a child or they will lose their benefits.
New welfare recipients there who do not obtain jobs, paid or unpaid, are likely to become ineligible for benefits in two months.
Michigan fathers would lose their driver's and professional licenses for not supporting their children.
And welfare recipients would be docked 10 percent of their payments to reimburse their landlords for damage to housing.


Woman Says Mastectomy Was Done in Error
Two months after her supposedly cancerous right breast was removed at a hospital in Queens, a 50-year-old woman said yesterday that she was told that the surgery had been, in essence, a mistake.
The doctor who performed the modified radical mastectomy faulted the pathologists who analyzed a sample of tissue taken from a tumor in the breast and said he did nothing wrong by operating to treat cancer.


Laconic Portrait of a Laconic Hero
On TNN (The Nashville Network) tonight, "The Life and Times of Gary Cooper" turns out, puzzlingly, to be only part of the life and times of that quintessential American movie actor.
The bare biographical facts are ticked off effectively enough.
Frank James Cooper was born in Helena, Mont., in 1901 (in the 1920's, an agent born in Gary, Ind., would persuade him to change his name).
His parents, British immigrants, owned a large ranch, and Cooper went to school with Indian children.
When he was only 8, his mother moved the family back to England, where Cooper spent three years feeling very much a hick outsider.
He returned to the United States with the beginning of that tall, lean look that would soon get him into silent Westerns.
As one biographer notes, he was "always pure, indomitable in a  quiet way." But it's also noted that he always had a taste for high society.


Market Place;Softkey investors worry that two acquisitions will dilute the stock.
SHARES of Softkey International, a computer software publisher, slid yesterday for the second consecutive day after the company's announcement on Monday that it would acquire a majority stake in the Minnesota Educational Computing Corporation, and would make an unsolicited tender offer for the Learning Company.
Softkey closed yesterday at $31.50, down 62.5 cents, in heavy Nasdaq trading, after falling $6, or 16 percent, on Monday.
The stock is now down nearly 40 percent from its 52-week high Sept. 9 of $51.50.


Tribe Threatens to Withhold Its Payment
One month after saying that a proposed casino in Bridgeport would not jeopardize $160 million the state is to receive from a new Mohegan Indian casino in eastern Connecticut, Gov.
John G. Rowland received a rude awakening.
At a hearing this morning, representatives of the tribe said they would not make the payment if the Bridgeport casino was approved by the Legislature, asserting that the plan would violate their agreement with the state limiting the expansion of casino gaming.


Aqueduct Settles In for a Long Run
New York racing will transform itself from the glow of the rousing Breeders'  Cup to the chill of the fall and winter today when it switches from Belmont Park to Aqueduct for the next six months.


Corrections
A chart on Monday with an article about the co-op apartment market in New York City misstated the number of co-ops in the city in 1984.
There were 247,000, not 211,000.


U.S. Defends Its Indictments In Bomb Case
Prosecutors in the Federal Building bombing case here maintain that a dismissed grand juror has a history of embracing conspiracy theories, but they say his conduct does not warrant throwing out indictments against Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, who have been charged in the bombing.
The juror, Hoppy Heidelberg, was dismissed last week from the Federal grand jury that is investigating the April 19 bombing, which killed 169 people, because he violated secrecy rules by giving an interview to Media Bypass, a magazine with ties to paramilitary groups.


Strong Demand Propels Copper, And Corn Hits a 7-Month High
Copper prices rallied yesterday on the Commodity Exchange of New York on signs of surprisingly strong industrial demand.
On other commodity markets, corn prices rose to a seven-month high.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities rose 0.24 point, to 242.22.


Case of Mantle's Long-Missing Bust: Going, Going, but No Longer Gone
Within 10 days of Mickey Mantle's death last August, a bronze bust of the slugger that long ago disappeared from Yankee Stadium resurfaced for sale in cyberspace: a former Stadium security guard was hawking it on the Internet.
"I'm not about to let it go for peanuts," the former guard, Robert Pagani, vowed in his Aug. 23 Internet message.
Indeed, he was seeking a big payday for the 8-by-10-inch bust, saying in his Internet message that he purchased it in Adamstown, Pa.


Oakley Fined and Suspended for Opener
With the judicial arm of the National Basketball Association directing him, Charles Oakley was sent to the bench for the Knicks' 1995-96 regular-season opener on Friday night.
Oakley was fined $6,000 yesterday and suspended without pay for one game by Rod Thorn, the league's senior vice president of basketball operations, for a punch he threw at Philadelphia's Scott Williams during Sunday's preseason game between the Knicks and the 76ers at Nassau Coliseum.


Hermann Langbein, 83, Aided Holocaust Victims
Hermann Langbein, who saw the horrors of Auschwitz from inside a camp doctor's office and later lectured and wrote about it, died Oct. 25 in Vienna.
He was 83.
A native of Vienna, Mr.
Langbein started out as an actor, then became politically involved in efforts to stem rising Austrian fascism.


Dow Chemical in the Center of a Storm
Earlier this year, executives of the Dow Chemical Company regarded the legal  storm over silicone breast implants with a certain level of calm.
But suddenly the company is finding itself heading down the treacherous road already traveled by several implant makers.
Just a few months ago, the giant chemical company figured that its liability  would be, at worst, the $330 million value of its 50 percent stake in the Dow Corning Corporation.
Dow Corning was the largest producer of breast implants in  the country, but a much smaller company than Dow Chemical, which last year had $20 billion in revenues.


New Science + Old Statues = Puzzle Solved
The great cathedrals and monasteries of France went up slowly and in some cases came down quickly, defaced or dismantled during the religious wars of the  17th century and the Revolution of 1789.
Columns, capitals and sculptures scattered in every direction, leaving art historians a giant jigsaw puzzle to solve.
Now nuclear science is on their side.


N.A.A.C.P. Suspends Yonkers Head
The president of the Yonkers branch of the N.A.A.C.P. has been suspended by the national organization's leadership for declaring that court-ordered busing for the city's 23,000 children had "outlived its usefulness."
The statement by the president, Kenneth Jenkins, came in an appearance two weeks ago with Mayor Terence M. Zaleski, who is involved in a tough race for re-election.
It appeared to be a stunning reversal for the National Association  for the Advancement of Colored People, which filed the lawsuit in 1981 that led  to a series of desegregation orders that bitterly divided the city.


Bomb Sent to Judge Is Found at U.S. Courthouse
A package containing a bomb and addressed to a Federal judge was intercepted  today at the Federal courthouse here and detonated by a bomb squad, the authorities said.
The package was intended for Judge Blanche M. Manning, and the police said they believed it was sent by a man seeking revenge for a ruling that Mrs.
Manning made against him when she was an State Appellate Court judge.
A Justice  Department spokesman, Joseph G. DiLeonardi, said at a news conference that Judge Manning received a threatening letter from the suspect on Saturday, saying that  he intended to pay her back.
He would not discuss details of the case in which the ruling was made.


Better to Tell Patients Of Alzheimer's Risk;Causes of Diabetes
To the Editor:
Anne Fennell (letter, Oct. 30) strays from her comment on smoking to enlarge  on the causes of diabetes in the United States.
True, certain foods and lack of  exercise are to be considered, but they are not the prime contributors.
Among the causes are obesity, gender (female), genetics, race, age.
Among Arizona's Pima Indians, diabetes is present in 50 percent of females older than 34, almost all obese.
HAROLD S. COLE, M.D.
Bronx, Oct. 30, 1995


Giants' Prescription: A Weak Seattle Offense
If quarterback Dave Brown is feeling up to it, this is the week the Giants' offense, particularly their anemic passing game, can get healthy.
The Giants travel to Seattle this weekend, home of the Space Needle, the Mariners and the Seahawks, who have one of the worst defenses in the league.
The Seahawks' pass defense is ranked No. 29 in the 30-team league, giving up  249.1 yards a game.
The Giants' passing attack is ranked No. 27, gaining 166 yards a game.
Clash of the titans it is not.
But with Oakland, Philadelphia and  Chicago looming for the Giants, this opportunity won't come again soon.
If they  don't return from the Great Northwest with padded passing numbers and greater confidence in their passing attack, there may be no hope for them.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Massachusetts Rivals May Unite on Education
Gov.
William F. Weld is set to announce plans on Wednesday to consolidate the state's education agencies into one powerful board as part of an effort to shrink state government.
And he wants a former political rival, John R. Silber,  the president of Boston University, to run it.
"You need a lot of energy and aggressiveness to counteract the torpor of education," Mr.
Weld said today in an interview at the Statehouse.


Yeltsin Issues First Order Since Chest Pains
President Boris N. Yeltsin issued his first official order today since suffering heart-related chest pains last week, demanding to know why a leading reform party and other groups have been barred from Dec. 17 parliamentary elections.
The chief doctor treating Mr.
Yeltsin, who is 64, said today that the President's condition is stable but that he is to spend five weeks recuperating  and will be confined to bed until the end of this week.


The Issues: A Primer
A graphic guide to the key players, the issues at stake and the history behind the Bosnian peace talks that start today in Ohio, page A11.


Seafood And Pasta For a Meal In Minutes
SPICY seafood and pasta seemed a good combination one night when I left work  late and still had to shop for food for dinner.
I wanted whatever would be easiest.
The main dish relied on fresh seafood that could be bought already shucked and cleaned; the salad got by without a dressing because it derived its  flavor from portobello mushrooms and peppers.
The meal was ready in less than 20 minutes.


Sports of The Times;Free Tyson Is Too Good To Be True
FREE Mike Tyson.
It was a wonderful concept: one of the most notorious athletes of the decade on free television.
A national happening, bringing us together in front of the tube.
It would have been free and it would have been safe.
How many human activities can you say that about these days?
It won't happen, at least for a while.
Last night in Las Vegas, they called off the Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight, scheduled for Saturday night, because the main attraction hurt his hand.


Tatham Executive In Chicago Resigns
Ian Miller, the president and chief operating officer of Tatham Euro RSCG in  Chicago, and one of three managing partners, has resigned from the agency after  five years, effective immediately.
"Ian did not see eye to eye with Euro RSCG about his role in the organization," Ralph Rydholm, chairman and chief executive of Tatham, said yesterday, referring to the agency's parent in Paris.


Best Mail-Order Gifts: Choices Galore
AFTER several lean years of mail-order food choices, the bounty of the 1980's is available again.
When I had finished pruning my list for my holiday mail-order gifts column, there were still some 200 items from 65 companies that deserved a preliminary tasting.
At a tasting at my home a few months ago, guests considered, among other foods, 8 varieties of smoked salmon; 15 kinds of sausage; 15 jellies, chutneys and relishes; 11 cakes, and 14 brownies.
After the tasting, there were  37 companies.


Deion Sanders Signs With Pepsi-Cola
The Pepsi-Cola Company has signed Deion Sanders, the football and baseball player, to a multiyear endorsement contract.
The terms of the agreement, announced yesterday, were not disclosed.
Though "Pepsi has had its eye on Mr. Sanders for a while," said Jon Harris, a spokesman for the Pepsi-Cola unit of Pepsico Inc. in Somers, N.Y., his recent trade from the San Francisco 49ers to the Dallas Cowboys made him more appealing.
Pepsi-Cola and Jerry Jones, the owner of the Cowboys, rattled the National Football League by signing a contract although Coca-Cola is the official N.F.L. soft drink; the league is suing Mr.
Jones.


COMPANY BRIEFS
APACHE CORP., Houston, sold interests in certain oil properties, including 67 fields in New Mexico and Texas, for $22.8 million to Central Resources Inc., Denver, which is privately held.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Nobu Is Closed by Fire but May Reopen Soon
A FIRE that the New York Fire Department is calling suspicious broke out Monday night in the basement of the building that houses Nobu, at Hudson and Franklin Streets.
Smoke began seeping up through the sushi bar, and the restaurant was evacuated.
Marilyn Mode, the Deputy Fire Commissioner for public information, said the fire appeared to be suspicious because it had multiple origins.
There were no injuries, she said, and fire marshals were investigating.


Werdann's Chances for a Spot on Nets' Roster Brighten
When training camp started on Oct. 6, Robert Werdann's chances of making the  Nets' opening-day roster were about as likely as Newt Gingrich switching from Republican to Democrat.
But what seemed farfetched a few weeks ago has a chance  of becoming a reality.
Werdann, a Queens native and St.
John's product who has failed to make a National Basketball Association roster the past two seasons, is 1 of 15 players  left on the Nets' roster as the team prepares for its season opener Friday at Toronto.


Times and Dow Jones Expand On-Line Pact
expanded a licensing agreement, signed in March 1994, under which Dow Jones distributes news articles from The New York Times to customers of its on-line services.
Starting in January, the new terms allow Dow Jones to distribute the most recent 90 days of Times articles to its news retrieval, news wire and news clipping customers in North America.
Previously these customers could receive Times material on the day of publication only.
The expanded agreement also licenses Dow Jones to offer customers overseas the full data base of The Times,  dating from 1981.


Devils Get Almost Nothing Past Ranford
It was Appreciation Night at the Edmonton Coliseum, all of it for goaltender  Bill Ranford.
While Ranford made 39 saves tonight in the Oilers' 2-1 victory over the Devils, he was serenaded by a small but lively crowd of 9,791 chanting his name.


Personal Health;Fighting pain with child's play and imagination.
PAIN is always real, and each person experiences it differently.
For children as well as adults, physical, emotional, cultural and social factors influence how pain is experienced and how they respond to different methods of pain control.
Mary K. Kachoyeanos and Margaret Friedhoff, nurses who specialize in the management of pain at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin in Milwaukee, have found  that helping children to cope with pain gives them a sense of mastery and self-control that they can apply to other stressful situations as well as to future health problems involving pain.


What Did Dow Chemical Do?
The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers," goes the hoariest saw in  the book. Recent events in the tortuous legal battle over the safety of silicone breast implants, however, suggest that the time has arrived for a new twist on that old saying. "The first thing we do," it should perhaps now read, "let's kill all the plaintiffs' lawyers."
Plaintiffs' lawyers used to be able to claim, with at least some justification, that they were a corrective force in society, making companies pay for their misdeeds -- and in so doing helping to keep corporate America honest.
Not anymore.
Not after this week's astounding $14.1 million jury judgment against Dow Chemical in a lawsuit in Reno, Nev., involving one woman's  claim that her breast implants made her ill.
That case says a great deal about  the methods of the big-time plaintiffs' bar, none of it flattering.


Tyson Bout Is Canceled Because Of Injury
Mike Tyson broke his right thumb three weeks ago, but didn't reveal the injury until tonight when doctors told him to cancel Saturday's fight against Buster Mathis Jr. because the injury had worsened.
"The pain became too intense," Tyson said at a news conference at the MGM Grand tonight.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-15


In the Indian Southwest, Heritage Takes a Hit
For nearly 20 years, Earl K. Shumway robbed graves and broke into long-sealed Indian homes, all the while boasting that the chances of his ever getting caught were one in a million.
To archeologists of the American Southwest, accustomed to sifting through desert sand for fine distinctions, the very mention of Mr.
Shumway's name prompts sweeping denunciation.
To them he is the worst kind of burglar -- someone who steals from people's heritage.


Mr. Molinari Miscasts Himself
The most important contest in next week's New York City elections is on Staten Island, where Guy Molinari, the area's popular and volatile Republican Borough President, is trying to switch jobs.
Mr.
Molinari is running to become Staten Island's district attorney, a critical law enforcement post for which he  lacks any obvious qualifications and sports some serious disqualifications.
The fiercely partisan Mr.
Molinari has no prosecutorial experience whatsoever and is temperamentally unfit for an office that requires sober judgment in making decisions that can destroy a person's life and reputation.
Why he would choose to run for this particular job remains a mystery.
But voters need not acquiesce to the egregious mismatch.
The incumbent D.A., William Murphy, a Democrat, is an able career prosecutor who offers the experience and professionalism the job requires.
We strongly urge his re-election.


The Pop Life
And He's Producing the Oscars


Jim Lehrer Carries On In the Post-MacNeil Era
The deliverers of television news occupy a significant place in many a family's routine.
The main network news programs signal the end of the workday and lead into tube time; whether it be Peter or Tom or Dan, millions have grown  accustomed to their space.
And that must be even more emphatically the feeling of the fewer but no less loyal viewers who have come to dote on "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour."
Whatever your comfort level with the network anchors, after all, they supply  pretty much the same goods.
If one of them decided to go on to more challenging  work, fans might miss their favorite for a while, but they could switch channels and be assured of finding a reasonable facsimile.
Robert MacNeil, by contrast, has come to represent something special for television, so his recent departure  from the distinctive and distinguished program that was marked by his style as well as his name may give his fans the shakes.


Ottawa Moves Quickly in Effort to Mollify Quebec
Jarred by the narrow defeat of the Quebec independence referendum, Canadian leaders today promised quick action aimed at meeting the restive province's demands for greater autonomy.
But some Canadians said the moves came too late to contain the separatist anger that has taken hold in Quebec.


New U.S. Rules Are Found to Improve Mammogram Reliability
The Food and Drug Administration's new standards for breast cancer X-rays have apparently improved the quality and reliability of mammograms in the United States, according to a study released yesterday by the General Accounting Office.
Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican who heads the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, asked for the report by the agency, an investigative arm of Congress, after some Republicans expressed fear that the new rules would put many clinics out of business and would cost too much.


AMDAHL RAISES OFFER FOR DMR GROUP OF CANADA
The Amdahl Corporation said yesterday that its Canadian unit had raised its offer for the DMR Group to $12.50 (Canadian) a share from $8.25 a share and had  extended the bid to Nov. 15.
Amdahl, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said the increased bid for DMR, a computer services company based in Montreal, was valued at $194 million.
Amdahl said it held 54 percent of DMR's equity after Oppenheimer &amp; Company, Bear, Stearns &amp; Company and Highbridge Capital Management agreed to tender their shares.
The Amdahl offer tops a bid by IBM Canada Ltd., a unit of I.B.M., which offered $11 (Canadian) a share.
Class A shares of DMR rose $1.25 (Canadian), to $12.375, on the Toronto Stock Exchange.


Mysterious Disease Kills 18 in Nicaragua


A Limousine Carries Milosevic, and a Message
Protocol is power.
Deftly used, its political message is unmistakable.
The message here is simple.
The Bosnian Serbs are mere minions.
Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia, is a very important person.
When Mr.
Milosevic arrived here to attend Bosnian peace talks at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, he was whisked off in a limousine, flanked by Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke.


KULICKE &amp; SOFFA SHARES FALL AS OFFERING IS CANCELED
Shares of Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries fell 24 percent yesterday after the discovery of a manufacturing problem in one of its products caused the company to call off a secondary public stock offering.
Kulicke, a maker of semiconductor assembly equipment based in Willow Grove, Pa., said the problem was related to its model 1488 turbo ball bonders.
The company said it was "temporarily delaying" the stock offering until the problem was solved.
Shares of Kulicke fell $8.25, to $26.75, in Nasdaq trading of nearly 3.8 million shares.


Peco Drops $4.3 Billion Bid For PP&amp;L Resources Utility
The Peco Energy Company yesterday abandoned an effort to buy PP&amp;L Resources Inc. after it rejected a sweetened $4.3 billion bid from Peco, its Pennsylvania  rival.
PP&amp;L, based in Allentown, Pa., said it spurned one of the utility industry's  largest hostile offers because the combined company would have increased its exposure to nuclear-plant liabilities that might not be covered by future revenue.
PP&amp;L also said that a deal with Peco, based in Philadelphia, would give its shareholders a dividend payout that was 4 percent lower and would increase rates for PP&amp;L customers.


PRAXAIR TO BEGIN CASH OFFER FOR SHARES OF CBI
Praxair Inc. said yesterday that it planned to begin a $32-a-share cash offer tomorrow for the common shares of CBI Industries as part of its $1.5 billion hostile takeover effort.
The cash offer is scheduled to end Dec. 4.
Praxair said on Monday that it wanted to acquire CBI, a holding company based in Oak Brook, Ill., with interests in industrial gases, specialty construction and engineering firms.
CBI said on Tuesday that it would consider Praxair's offer.
At the same time, Praxair, an industrial gases company based in Danbury, Conn., said it was  seeking to have CBI's anti-takeover defense invalidated.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, shares of CBI gained 87.5 cents, to $32, while those of Praxair rose $1.125, to $28.125.


Sluggishness At Factories Lifts Prices Of Treasuries
The prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday after a report showed unexpected weakness in manufacturing.
But the rally lost some of its steam late in the session as traders locked in profits with an eye toward tomorrow's report on employment in October.
Still, yesterday's data bolstered expectations that the Federal Reserve would reduce short-term interest rates again, although few analysts expect the Fed to do so at its Nov. 15 policy-making meeting.


Without Tyson, Bowe Is Not Happy Being the Only Show in Town
Riddick Bowe might earn a few more million dollars because Mike Tyson has a broken thumb, but he was disappointed today that fans will not be able to compare the two fighters on Saturday night.
"I thought it was unfortunate because I wanted the people to see who was the  better fighter," Bowe said.
The Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight was to be broadcast on the Fox Network from the MGM Grand, just down the road from Caesars Palace where Bowe will do battle against Evander Holyfield on pay-per-view.
But  the Tyson bout was postponed Tuesday night when it was revealed that he had suffered a broken thumb three weeks ago and the injury had worsened.


People
*
Brian Heffernan, senior partner and Midwestern new-business director at J. Walter Thompson Chicago, a unit of the WPP Group, was promoted to new-business development director at J. Walter Thompson North America, succeeding Brian Johnson, now executive vice president and worldwide new-business director at the J. Walter Thompson Co., Paris. *
Harry Kraus was named a partner with management responsibilities for the direct-marketing operations at Earle Palmer Brown, New York, part of the Earle Palmer Brown Cos., succeeding Angela DiBartolo, who was named president at Earle Palmer Brown Direct, Philadelphia.
Mr.
Kraus was previously president at the Diamond Promotion Group, New York. *
Deborah Thomas, vice president for media at Lockhart &amp; Pettus, New York, was named to head the new marketing services department and the new focus group center as marketing services director. *
Michael L. Brownstein, associate publisher and advertising director at The Ladies' Home Journal, New York, a unit of the Meredith Corp., was promoted to publisher, succeeding Donna Kalajian Galotti, who left to join Cosmopolitan magazine, New York, owned by the Hearst Corp., as senior vice president and publisher.
Mary Morgan was named to succeed Mr.
Brownstein; she was previously associate group publisher for Child and Parents magazines at Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, New York, a unit of Bertelsmann A.G. *
Keith Baldwin, Eastern advertising director at TV Guide, New York, a unit of the News Corporation, was promoted to national advertising director, succeeding  Suzanne Grimes, who was recently promoted to senior vice president and publisher.
Shelly Steinberg, the New York region advertising manager, was promoted to succeed Mr.
Baldwin.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


In Bridgeport, Not Only Bettors Eye Hounds With Hope
Years of intense, expensive lobbying to expand gambling here and to create jobs in this ailing industrial city yielded their first results tonight as dogs  began running at a greyhound race track, the Shoreline Star.
Overshadowed by the battle to bring a $500 million casino with 9,000 jobs to  Bridgeport's harbor, just blocks away, the $30 million dog track, employing 600  people, nevertheless is the largest development to be built in the city in years.


Knicks Count On Master Salesman
Long before he was selling his schemes to the Knicks, long before he failed to sell them to Chris Webber, Don Nelson was a rambunctious college kid with a midnight brainstorm on how to get from his alma mater, the University of Iowa, to Chicago by sunrise.
He began persuading a group of friends to hop moving boxcars until they ended up in Chicago, where they could catch a game at Wrigley Field or Comiskey Park and then find their way back via the train tracks.
They would have to hop trains moving at high speeds, hold on to the ladders until it slowed enough where they  could hop into the vacant boxcars.


Whitbread Profit Rises
Whitbread P.L.C. the British brewing and leisure company, posted a near 9 percent rise yesterday in its six-month profits to L155.7 million ($245.3 million).
Whitbread bought David Lloyd Leisure, a health and sports club company, for some L200 million and Marriott Hotels for L180 million in August.
At the time of the acquisitions, Whitbread shares were hurt because of worries about how much the company paid for them.
(Reuters)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;A cigar maker features its manager and spiritual home.
WHEN Ramon Cifuentes fled Cuba in 1960, 22 months after Fidel Castro came to  power, he carried $100 in his pocket, and two photos: a passport snapshot and a  portrait of him with his German short-haired pointer, Sukui.
This seemed hardly enough of a treasure trove to inspire an ambitious advertising campaign, but McCaffery &amp; Ratner, the Manhattan agency for Partagas cigars, managed to make do.
In a series of four magazine ads, the agency has used a minimal supply of mementos to create a maximum amount of ambiance in evoking the pre-Castro era, when Mr.
Cifuentes and his brothers managed the legendary Partagas cigar company.


Sanders Contract Settlement
The National Football League and the players' union settled DEION SANDERS's contract dispute yesterday, allowing the Cowboys cornerback to play for the rest of the season and removing the dispute from the courts.


Pataki Seeks Accord on 2-Pronged New York City Police Bill
Gov.
George E. Pataki said today that he supported a part of the much-debated police bill awaiting his signature -- though he has not decided whether to sign  it or veto it.
The Governor said he favored letting New York City's police union resolve its contract disputes through a state arbitration system -- a change that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani contends will increase the city's labor costs by $200 million or more.


Colombia's Heroin Couriers: Swallowing and Smuggling
For three days, all the 40-year-old Colombian businessman did was swallow pellets of heroin wrapped in condoms, 70 in all, washing down each one with "something green" to numb his throat.
He was then given a plane ticket and the telephone number of a contact to call upon arrival, and set on his way.
"I didn't know it was heroin," says the man, who was arrested at Miami International Airport while en route from Cali, Colombia, to New York.
He is now serving a 25-year sentence for drug trafficking at the Mayo Correctional Institution, a state prison near Gainesville.


Study Links Brain to Transsexuality
A structure deep within the brain, where the tangled roots of sexuality are thought to lie, differs substantially between ordinary men and transsexuals who  have surgically transformed themselves from men into women, scientists have reported.
Researchers in the Netherlands have discovered that a region of the hypothalamus, located at the floor of the brain, is about 50 percent larger in men than in women, and almost 60 percent larger in men than in male-to-female transsexuals.
If smallness of this brain structure is at all correlated with the feeling of being a woman, the results raise tantalizing possibilities that transsexuals may in a sense be more female than females.


Sports of The Times;'Yesterday, Today and Forever'
THE messages on the voice mail last week were brief, clear and laced with disgust.
A sample: "If you guys didn't always react, he wouldn't keep doing what he does."
This was in response to a 760-word lamentation of how George Steinbrenner had nullified the spirit of World Series week in New York, which leaderless baseball let him get away with.


Mafia Issue Is Raised At Bias Trial In Brooklyn
With a theatrical flourish, the issue of organized crime came to the fore yesterday in the trial of two teen-age cousins charged with killing an Ecuadorean man in a bias attack in Brooklyn last year.
A defense lawyer, attacking the notion that the defendants' family is connected to organized crime, suddenly called on 20 of their relatives to rise en masse from the spectator benches in the downtown Brooklyn courtroom and confront a witness, another teen-ager who was giving important testimony for the prosecution.


A Hard-Line Clinton Will Look Good, Aides Say
Just a few months ago, it would have been all but unthinkable for a White House aide to present this possibility: that President Clinton could be comfortably positioned for the 1996 election even if he and the Congress failed  to reach agreement on a balanced budget plan.
Yet that is what some White House officials have said recently as Mr.
Clinton has taken tougher stands, like his reported statement to Republican Congressional leaders in a meeting today that they would have to elect a Republican President if they wanted their plan to balance the budget in seven years to be approved intact.


Jays Don't Exercise Molitor Option
The Toronto Blue Jays took the first step yesterday toward making PAUL MOLITOR a free agent, deciding to pay him a $1 million buyout rather than exercising the option in his contract for a $4 million salary next season.
The Blue Jays could still offer the 39-year-old designated hitter salary arbitration by today's deadline, but are not expected to.
The Baltimore Orioles kept the left-handed reliever JESSE OROSCO by picking  up the $500,000 option in his contract, but they did not exercise the $1.3 million option in the contract of another reliever, the right-hander DOUG JONES.
The Milwaukee Brewers did not exercise the $2.5 million option in DARRYL HAMILTON's contract, and the outfielder was 1 of 26 players who filed for free agency yesterday.
Catcher MIKE STANLEY was another who filed, the second Yankee  to become a free agent.
The Seattle Mariners kept reliever NORM CHARLTON from becoming a free agent by offering him salary arbitration. (AP)


Bridge
It has been known for years that major figures in the Chinese establishment,  from Deng Xiaoping down, are bridge enthusiasts.
What was not known was how well they play, but there was some evidence at the recent world championships in Beijing.
A British team with international reputations had a friendly 32-deal match against a Chinese team headed by Ding Guangen, a senior member of the Politburo.
The home team won by 54 imps.
In the diagramed deal, can South succeed against best defense after the lead  of the diamond king?
Minister Ding was playing with his son, Ding Yucheng, and he did succeed in a highly optimistic contract.
North's bid was an instruction to bid three no-trump with a diamond stopper, and South obeyed orders with considerable misgivings.


Price of Orange Juice Increases On Big Demand and Low Stocks
Orange juice prices jumped to a two-year high on the New York Cotton Exchange yesterday on concerns over low inventories and rising demand.
"Florida is out of juice," said Warren McKnight, vice president with Holly Hill Fruit Products of Davenport, Fla.
Juice demand is "way above last year, and the stocks on hand are below," he said.


Cleaner Tunnel, at a Cost
A freshly scrubbed ceiling and brighter lights are in store for commuters who use the Holland Tunnel.
But the cleanup comes with a price: The New Jersey-bound tube will be closed overnight for several weekends.
Motorists heading to New Jersey will have to choose a different route from 11 P.M.
Friday to 8 A.M.
Saturday and 11 P.M.
Saturday to 8 A.M.
Sunday.
Traffic to New York is not affected.


METRO DIGEST
NEW RULES ARE TO EASE JURY SERVICE The jury box may not be any more comfortable, or long-winded lawyers any more succinct, but under new rules, jury duty in civil courts in New York State stands to become less arduous and perhaps even shorter. [Page A1.]


Enron Officials Miss A Meeting in India
The Enron Corporation of Houston, which is trying to rescue a scrapped $2.8 billion power plant in India's western state of Maharashtra, ran into trouble today after company executives were late for a meeting with the state's chief minister.
The chief minister, Manohar Joshi, canceled a meeting with Enron's chairman,  Kenneth Lay, and Rebecca Mark, chief executive of the Dabhol Power Company, Enron's Indian subsidiary.


A South African Story: The Maid vs. the Madam
The two women did their best to ignore the situation, trying to greet voters  at the polling station here with dignity.
But every once in a while someone would start to tease.
"Have you heard about the maid and the madam?" they would  ask.
Here in this little summer resort on South Africa's southern coast, one more  pillar of apartheid, this one as thin as a mop handle, toppled today.
A maid named Ntombizodwa Nonqayi, known as Ivy, challenged her employer, Pebs Saunders, for a seat on the town council.


Rabbi's Aide Pleads Guilty in Sex Charge
A rabbi's assistant accused of sexually molesting a 15-year-old girl on a flight from Australia pleaded guilty to the charge on Tuesday, a day before his  trial was set to begin, and faces up to two years in prison.
The assistant, Rabbi Yehudah Friedlander, an aide to Rabbi Israel Grunwald of Brooklyn, is to be sentenced on Jan. 18, the United States Attorney's office here said.


Reviews/Fashion;Where Supermodels Still Reign
IT certainly wasn't for charity, but a tribute of sorts for that endangered species the supermodel took place last night on the runways of two designers, Todd Oldham and Tanya Sarne, whose clothes cater to the supermodel life.
If supermodels are to make their last stand, there was probably no better place to do it than at one of Mr.
Oldham's larger-than-life shows, where big-idea clothes fill the runway and B-list celebrities fill the front-row seats.


Managed Care Will Need Family Doctors
To the Editor:
Dr.
Jean-Claude Bystryn (letter, Oct. 27), suggests that managed care will eliminate the need for half of the specialists and "almost" as many general physicians.


Canada Wins Nations' Cup
Paced by clear rounds from Eric Lamaze riding Rio Grande and the team captain Ian Millar aboard Play It Again, the Canadian Equestrian Team won the International Jumping Nations' Cup tonight at the National Horse Show.
The Canadian team had 8.25 faults in the event at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, well ahead of the United States Equestrian Team, which had a 16-fault score despite two clear rounds from Anne Kursinski of Flemington, N.J., aboard Eros.
Switzerland placed third with 20 faults.
The U.S.E.T. leads the team standing with 53 points, 1 ahead of Canada.
Switzerland has 14.


False Alarm on Car Emissions
Nobody's car is going to be confiscated.
State officials want to make that perfectly clear.
By yesterday, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's office had logged more than 500 calls from people afraid they will lose their cars if they flunk a new state emissions test required to comply with the Federal Clean Air Act.


The Israeli Dream Is Like the American Dream
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's Oct. 29 column on Israel's emerging and opulent culture  says a great deal about postmodern Israel, but it ultimately oversimplifies.
Israel is a lot more than a cell phone, and Jewish identity has to do with a lot more than a new shopping mall in Kfar Saba.


Sampras to Regain No. 1 Ranking
PETE SAMPRAS has been No. 2 in the world since April.
But next Monday, no matter what happens in the Paris Indoor tournament, Sampras will pass ANDRE AGASSI and go back on top of the ATP pecking order.


Greyhound Racing Shames Connecticut
To the Editor:
The winner of the fight in the Connecticut Legislature over gambling casinos  will likely determine the fate of parimutuel greyhound racing in the state (news article, Oct. 26).


Watchdog Over Police Loses Its Chief
The executive director of the civilian agency that reviews reports of misconduct by New York City police officers resigned yesterday, saying he was driven out by political pressure.
The resignation of the official, Hector W. Soto, comes as complaints about brutality and other police misconduct are rising, with thousands of cases backlogged at the short-staffed, two-year-old Civilian Complaint Review Board.


Intel Offers Its Pentium Pro For Work Station Market
The Intel Corporation today introduced its new microprocessor, the Pentium Pro.
But although the chip's performance is higher than expected, and its price  lower, analysts said its immediate impact was not likely to match that of its predecessor, the Pentium.
That is because the Pentium Pro requires a 32-bit operating system, like the  Microsoft Corporation's Windows 95 or Windows NT, and 32-bit applications, to perform at its best.
On older software, it may run slower than the popular Pentium, which was introduced in 1993.


Closed-Circuit TV For Sam Goody
The Request Media division of the Musicland Stores Corporation will introduce a closed-circuit television network on Monday in 200 of the company's Sam Goody  stores.
The network, with a music programming format, will carry commercials from advertisers like the AT&amp;T Corporation, the Chrysler Corporation and Levi Strauss &amp; Company.
Request Media said that the network, being called SG-TV, would be expanded to another 400 Sam Goody stores next year.
Request Media, which also publishes Request, a music magazine, is offering advertising packages that include spots on SG-TV, advertisements in Request and display space in stores.


Stocks Post Modest Gains Despite Surge in Bonds and Dollar
Stocks picked up only moderate gains yesterday, even though bonds and the dollar rallied strongly.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 11.20 points, at 4,766.68, after trading in a narrow 26-point range all day.


Blood on the Hill
Speaker Newt Gingrich was nuzzling a baby cougar today when it bit him on the chin.
A minor abrasion, it drew just a spot of blood.


CHRONICLE
A revealing photograph of HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON taken during her visit to Brazil last month has caused a sensation and is the centerpiece of a new lingerie advertisement, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The picture depicts Mrs.
Clinton seated and shows a glimpse of what appears to be her underwear.
It was taken while she was in Latin America on a trip that  culminated in a conference in Paraguay of wives of heads of state.
The Duloren lingerie company acquired the picture.


CORDIS REJECTS OFFERS FROM JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON
The Cordis Corporation rejected Johnson &amp; Johnson's $1.6 billion hostile takeover bid yesterday, calling the $100-a-share cash offer inadequate.
Cordis,  a Miami-based maker of medical devices to treat heart disease, also rejected Johnson &amp; Johnson's offer to negotiate a stock swap valued at $1.7 billion, or $105 a share.
Johnson &amp; Johnson, based in New Brunswick, N.J., said it would press ahead with plans to remove the Cordis board through a consent solicitation and called its $105-a- share offer "full and fair." Johnson &amp; Johnson, the nation's largest maker of health care products and drugs, made the  bids on Oct. 19 after Cordis refused to meet to discuss a merger.
Shares of Cordis rose $1.75 yesterday, to $112.25, a 52-week high on the New York Stock Exchange.


Outlook Raised For Goldman
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that it had raised the outlook for Goldman, Sachs Group L.P.'s credit ratings to "stable" from "negative."
The credit rating company said Wall Street's biggest private partnership recovered this year from a poor 1994 as a result of increased bond trading, a boom market for new underwritings and mergers and acquisitions activity.


Breast Implant Dangers
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 25 news article on the statement by the American College of Rheumatology that there is no evidence silicone breast implants caused rheumatic disease is misleading.
The statement was made by the directors without endorsement by members.
A College of Rheumatology spokesman has said, "There were certainly members that strongly disagreed with the statement."


Far Right Gets Seats in Croatian Parliament
The far-right, stridently nationalist Croatian Party of Rights won the minimum number of votes needed in elections on Sunday to get seats in Parliament, the election commission announced today.
The commission also said voting would take place again at 10 stations where irregularities were alleged in the parliamentary elections.


A Cigarette, a Precious Relic
MY mother smoked for as long as I can recall.
As a child, I never worried about getting lost if I wandered from her in a supermarket.
I could always hear her cough, a byproduct of a pack-a-day habit, and find my way back.
She taught me to read while holding me on her lap, her Lucky Strike in an ashtray, trailing a tiny plume.


Rare Bird


Foley Gets Workout As Brister Rests Knee
Boomer Esiason has post-concussion syndrome, Bubby Brister has struggled and  the untested third-stringer, Glenn Foley, is champing at the bit to play.
So what do you make of the fact that Foley took more than 80 percent of the snaps today in the Jets' first practice for Sunday's home game against the New England Patriots?
Or that Esiason took the rest?
Or that Brister did most of the work in walk-throughs earlier in the day, but spent the offensive practice as a  spectator?


Achieving the Transition For New Coins of a Realm
What for riders is simply a switch from one token to another -- and perhaps a long wait in line -- is for the Transit Authority an enormous undertaking.
There are 35 million tokens in circulation at any one time, or about 5 jangling in the pocket or purse of each New Yorker.
For the transition to go smoothly, the authority must collect most of those and sell millions of the new  ones by Nov. 12, when the 25-cent fare increase takes effect.


Glass Plant Strike May Halt Chrysler Operations
Hourly workers went on strike today at a Chrysler Corporation plant that makes windshields and window glass for most of the auto maker's cars and trucks.
The walkout by about 1,000 members of the United Automobile Workers Local 227 at the McGraw Glass division in Detroit could quickly shut down production at Chrysler assembly plants.


Pronger Suspended and Fined $1,000
St.
Louis defenseman CHRIS PRONGER was suspended for four games and fined $1,000 by the National Hockey League yesterday after slashing Washington center  PAT PEAKE.
The incident happened in the third period of Sunday night's game and  no penalty was assessed on the play.
Peake will be out at least a month with fractured thyroid cartilage. (AP)


What Won't Be in the Next New York Hero Movie
MEET Barry Brown, New York's latest hero. Or is he?
He helped expose police corruption in the infamous 30th Precinct in Harlem.
He testified in disguise before the Mollen Commission police hearings.
He starred in a laudatory "60 Minutes" profile, he was the press darling of the month, and his story is headed for Hollywood.


3 Balkan Presidents Meet In Ohio to Try to End War
Barely suppressing their mutual distaste, three Balkan Presidents came together today at an American military base for ambitious peace talks aimed at ending four years of terror and bloodshed in Bosnia.
It was the first time the three men -- Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia and Franjo Tudjman of Croatia -- have met face to face since they held a series of unsuccessful meetings in Yugoslavia in 1991 on the eve of the country's division and disintegration into war.
Thus just bringing them into the same room represented a considerable achievement.


German Socialists Question The Single-Money Canon
Can Europe's nations fuse so intimately that they become a kind of United States?
No, say Europeans like Chancellor Helmut Kohl, especially if they cling  to their currencies -- as if Texans used dollars and New Yorkers used rubles.
Thus, the notion of creating a common European currency to supersede the national coin and forge monetary union has become something close to dogma in Germany,and the Chancellor preaches it with the same sense of infallibility as theologians ascribe to the Pope.


In the Clouds


Actava Group Seals Stock Swap
Actava Group and three media and telecommunications concerns controlled by the billionaire John W. Kluge today sealed their four-way stock-swap merger creating a new $1 billion company.
Metromedia International Group, the newly formed company, will begin trading  on Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange, after shareholders of all four companies approved the transaction today.


Boeing Jets for Japan Air
Japan Airlines has agreed to buy five 777-300 aircraft, the stretched version of the newest Boeing Company jetliner, in a transaction valued at $800 million,  Boeing said yesterday.
The aircraft maker said Japan Air had now committed to buying 15 of the 777 aircraft, including 10 orders for 777-200 aircraft.
The 777-300 aircraft is not scheduled for its first deliveries until early 1998.
Japan Air may get delivery as early as mid-1998, depending on what engine it orders.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Devils Acquire Tikkanen for a Draft Pick
Esa Tikkanen, the demon checker who helped the Rangers win the Stanley Cup in 1994, is back in the neighborhood.
The Devils acquired him today from the St.
Louis Blues for a third-round pick in the 1997 draft.
Tikkanen will replace Bobby Carpenter, a center who is injured again, possibly seriously.
Carpenter returned home today from Edmonton, Alberta, where  he hurt his left leg in Tuesday night's 2-1 loss to the Oilers.
He was to be examined tonight.


CHRONICLE
RICKI LAKE, the talk show host, pleaded guilty yesterday to disorderly conduct in ransacking the Fifth Avenue offices of the designer Karl Lagerfeld last year in an anti-fur protest.


REPUBLIC TO ACQUIRE GDS AND SCOTT SECURITY SYSTEMS
Republic Industries, a waste management company based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it would acquire GDS Inc. and Scott Security Systems Inc. for about $100 million in stock.
GDS, which provides solid waste collection and recycling services in western North Carolina, is expected to add about $35 million to the annual revenue of Republic.
Scott, an electronic security alarm company serving the Southeast, will add about $25 million to Republic's 1995 revenue.
The acquisitions of both privately held companies will be accounted for as poolings of interests, Republic said.


Muzzling the Nonprofits
This is not lobbying reform," observed Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, rising on the Senate floor the other day to blast legislation being zealously pressed by a group of House Republican freshmen to curb "public advocacy" by nonprofit groups. "It is a rather blatant attempt to silence dissent and to muffle the diversity of opinion in the forum of public policy debate."
Mr.
Levin's criticism is on the mark.
Because of opposition from two Republican Senators, Mark Hatfield of Oregon and Jim Jeffords of Vermont, the proposal is not included in the $23 billion appropriations bill for the White House, Treasury Department and Postal Service that emerged from conference last  week after a 40-day deadlock over the issue.
But the fight is not over.
The deal that freed the appropriations bill from the conference requires a floor vote on  the amendment, and an attempt to attach it to other legislation is likely.


Lawsuit Filed in Bombing Now Includes 384 Plaintiffs
A lawsuit against a Dallas fertilizer company that made the ammonium nitrate  that prosecutors say was used in the bombing of the Federal Building here was expanded today to 384 plaintiffs who were killed or injured in the April 19 bombing, from 83 plaintiffs.
At a news conference here this morning, Johnnie L. Cochran, who joined Oklahoma lawyers in bringing the suit while he was still defending O. J. Simpson, told reporters that the fertilizer company, ICI Explosives USA Inc., a  subsidiary of the London-based Imperial Chemical Industries PLC, "should have known this could fall into the hands of people who may want to make bombs."


On All Saints', the Quick Recall the Dead
Sarajevans honored the city's dead at grave sites across the capital today, remembering their loved ones and praying for peace on All Saints' Day.
"This is a day for all of us, Serb, Croat or Muslim, a day for all of the dead," Vesna Komarica, a 56-year-old Croat, said as she walked along a rocky path to the grave of her husband, a Muslim who was killed in the street by a Serbian sniper this year.


NATIONAL VISION TO CLOSE AND SELL SOME OPERATIONS
National Vision Associates Ltd., an operator of eye care centers in Wal-Mart  stores, said yesterday that it would close or sell its secondary operations in the United States and France by the end of the year.
National Vision also said it would take a third-quarter pretax charge of about $2 million to reduce operations and write down assets of a frame manufacturer that the company received in foreclosure proceedings earlier this year.
National Vision, based in Lawrenceville, Ga., said it would concentrate on its primary businesses in the United States, which include more than 100 Wal-Mart Vision Centers.
Shares of National Vision fell 20.3125 cents, to $3.625, in Nasdaq trading.


U.S. Apologizes to Japan for Rape of 12-Year-Old in Okinawa
Defense Secretary William J. Perry apologized profusely today on behalf of America for the rape of a 12-year-old girl, allegedly by three American servicemen, as he tried to smooth relations with Japan in preparation for a summit meeting this month.
But Mr.
Perry also repeatedly said the United States opposed any reduction of its troop presence in Japan.
He pricked ballooning hopes in Okinawa, in the south of Japan, that the furor over the rape might lead to the closing of a major base.


Currents;Dreaming the City
IMAGINE chess tables and coffee stands along the Williamsburg Bridge, or benches flanked by topiaries on Delancey Street.
Drawings and models of these ideas (at right, the Williamburg proposal) are among the 18 projects on view through Jan. 10 at "In-Sites II: Lower East Side Artists Re-Think Neighborhood Streets" at the Henry Street Settlement, 466 Grand Street (Pitt Street).


Perot Gains in California
Ross Perot's Reform Party has qualified to appear on California's March 26 Presidential primary ballot, state officials said today.
Mr.
Perot's supporters collected the signatures of nearly 108,000 registered voters, about 18,000 more than needed, said Bill Jones, the California Secretary of State.
Also qualifying for the ballot was the Natural Law Party, which espouses transcendental meditation.
Each party needed 89,007 registrations to appear on the ballot.


Ukraine Sells Its Companies, but Buyers Are Few
Almost a year ago, Washington eagerly promoted a Ukrainian plan to sell 8,000 state companies and pledged tens of millions of dollars and squads of Western consultants to help accomplish the task quickly.
The transfer of the enterprises to private hands was to be the centerpiece of an ambitious billion-dollar post-cold-war aid program to bolster a financially ravaged and politically precarious Ukraine into a stable buffer between Russia and Eastern Europe.


Eurotunnel Loses Claim Against 2 Railroads
Eurotunnel, the cash-short operator of the tunnel from Britain to France, lost a financial case late on Tuesday against railway companies.
The International Chamber of Commerce in Paris rejected a L2.3 billion ($3.62 billion) claim against French and British rail companies brought by Eurotunnel.
The ruling is a fresh setback to the troubled tunnel operator, which badly needs cash to help repay L8 billion ($12.60 billion) of commercial bank debt.


Clinton and G.O.P. Leaders Finally Hold Budget Talks
For the first time in seven weeks, President Clinton and the Republican leaders in Congress put aside their public bickering over the budget and went behind closed doors to discuss the matter in private.
They emerged after more than two hours in the Oval Office at the White House  to say that nothing had been resolved -- absolutely nothing.


F.B.I. Director Faults Tactics at Sect Siege
The Director of the F.B.I. said in a letter to Congress made public today that agents had used tactics during the siege of the Branch Davidian compound that lacked a "legitimate basis."


Liberties;Lies And Kisses
Boris and Natasha should sue.
Only in cartoons, it turns out, could Americans (ably represented by moose and squirrel) always outfox Russian spies.
In real life, the American side was too busy bungling to stop Soviet dastardly deeds.


'Tempest' Deepens As It Goes Indoors
Moving indoors has indeed produced a sea change in George C. Wolfe's wild "Tempest."
The superb New York Shakespeare Festival production, first staged in Central  Park last summer, has arrived at the Broadhurst Theater with its power to enchant intact.
Yet while this inventive interpretation of Shakespeare's last completed work remains a rare creature, the bold-stroke fierceness of its outdoor incarnation has been succeeded by a more civilized spirit.


Sterling Forest Pledges to Maintain Open Space
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 23 editorial on a potential acquisition of Sterling Forest in New York State leaves the reader confused about Sterling Forest Corporation's commitment to maintaining open space in the forest and willingness to sell the property to the public.
We have been willing to sell all or part of the forest to the public at a fair market price as long as negotiations are fair and timely.


BUSINESS DIGEST
F.B.I.
Seeks Huge System For National Wiretapping The F.B.I. has proposed a national wiretapping system on a huge scale that would allow law enforcement officials to monitor 1 percent of the phone lines in some  high-crime areas of the country, far exceeding the recent annual average of less than 1 in 174,000 lines.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Tours
Design Shows The Museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street; (212) 760-7760.


IN THE EDITING ROOM WITH: Woody Allen;From Defense To Offense
JIMMY CANNON'S New York is my New York," Woody Allen said recently, sitting in his home-away-from-home, the suite at the Beekman Hotel on Park Avenue where  he edits his movies.
"My whole feeling of New York City as a black-and-white Gershwin town comes from reading the late Jimmy Cannon," Mr.
Allen said.
"I never missed him."


COMPANY BRIEFS
JAMES RIVER CORP., Richmond, a paper and packaging company, said it would pay $24 million to acquire Benmark Corp.'s plastic cutlery and straw operation.


America Online to Split Its Stock, Again
Shares of America Online Inc. rose 8.9 percent yesterday after the company said it planned to split its stock 2-for-1.
The split is the third in 12 months for American Online.
Over the last year,  the company's shares have more than quadrupled in value after being adjusted for the stock splits.
Since the last 2-for-1 split in April, its share price has almost doubled.
Another 2-for-1 split took place last November.


A Victory for Anti-Abortion Hoodlums
In ruling that a landlord could evict an abortion clinic in Garden City, L.I., because anti-abortion protesters posed a danger to the building's other tenants, Supreme Court Justice John DiNoto did more than blame the victim.
He also caved in to criminals, denied any number of women access to a constitutionally protected right and virtually invited anti-abortion zealots to  harass every abortion clinic in rented quarters out of existence.
A week after two receptionists at abortion clinics in Brookline, Mass., were  murdered last year, signs warning that "You risk injury or death if you are caught near these premises" were posted on the walls of Long Island Gynecological Associates, a clinic that had already been the target of bomb threats and demonstrations.
Several days later the landlord, 1103 Stewart Avenue Associates, headed by Ronald J. Morey, promulgated a new rule prohibiting the clinic from performing abortions or related procedures on the premises because,  the landlord said, doing so endangered the building's other tenants.
Mr.
Morey moved to evict the clinic, which had 8 years remaining on its 11-year lease.


Magazine Satire Of Marketers
In an elaborate sendup of commercialism, Might, a small magazine specializing in media satire and cultural criticism, has devoted a "Sellout Issue" to saluting marketers.
Most of the issue "is so blatant people couldn't help but see that it's a spoof," said Paul Tullis, senior editor of Might in San Francisco.
For instance, the table of contents page features editors and writers wearing clothing decorated with logos (Gap, Polo) or accompanied by brand-name products  (Apple, Diet Coke, Evian).


250 Reported Dead in a Massacre in Burundi
More than 250 Hutu in northern Burundi were killed in a raid last weekend that appears to have been the work of soldiers of that country's Government, a senior Burundian official said today.
The attackers were said to have struck on Tangara Hill near the northern town of Ngozi.
Most of the dead were villagers.


Political Memo;Right Tries to Mobilize Against Powell Candidacy
At first glance, conservative leaders appear to be mounting the most sustained effort in modern American politics to scare a potential candidate -- Colin L. Powell -- out of running for President.
"They're trying to make him the political Antichrist," said Patrick H. Caddell, a former Democratic strategist who is finishing a book on American politics.
"If he runs as a Republican, it's the biggest mistake in his life. This party doesn't want him."


Essay;Battling the Purge
Just as an attempted coup by K.G.B. hard-liners led to the elevation of Boris Yeltsin, an attempted purge masterminded by the hospitalized Yeltsin's palace guard may do the same for Grigory Yavlinsky.
The Central Election Commission, dominated by the Filatov-Korzhakov-Satarov Kremlin cabal, began the purge early last week by disqualifying two minor parties from next month's parliamentary elections.
One was led by the reformer  Galina Starovoitova, the other by the anti-Yeltsin rightist Aleksandr Rutskoi.
There was no outcry.


Bridgeport Casino Survives Key Vote In Legislative Panel
A bill that would authorize the Mashantucket Pequot tribe to open a casino in Bridgeport survived predictions of doom today as it won overwhelming support in  a legislative committee.
The 18-to-7 vote in the Public Safety Committee signaled an early victory in  the struggle to legalize casino gambling in the state's largest city.


Managed Care Will Need Family Doctors;Don't Live Too Long?
To the Editor:
At the age of 82, I feel threatened by such groups as the Institute for the Future and the Competitive Enterprise Institute, which claim that access to health care isn't a right.


United's Chief Finds USAir A Hard Sell
What could Gerald Greenwald, the chairman of the UAL Corporation, possibly be thinking?
That is the question of the moment in the airline industry, as UAL, the parent of United Airlines, ponders whether to proceed -- in the face of considerable skepticism from both insiders and outsiders -- with a possible acquisition of USAir.
But Mr.
Greenwald, who promises to announce a decision by  the middle of November, is going about this process in a very different fashion  from the typical chief executive.


Staub to Leave the Mets' Booth
RUSTY STAUB's decade as a Mets announcer is over.
Le Grand Orange's contract  to call the team's games on SportsChannel was not renewed yesterday, leaving RALPH KINER and FRAN HEALY in the booth.
The decision was the Mets' to make, but was initiated by SportsChannel, which wants a more skillful baseball announcer with a journalistic background to replace Staub.


Rethinking Plans for Children's Zoo
Zoo and Parks Department officials have decided to allow considerably more public comment on their plans for a new Children's Zoo in Central Park, delaying its opening for at least a year.
"It's been slowed down," said Allison Power, spokeswoman for the Central Park Zoo, one of four managed by the New York Wildlife Conservation Society.


Generic Drug Maker Settles for $7.5 Million
A company that distributes generic drugs will pay the Government $7.5 million to settle allegations that it overcharged the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Justice Department announced this week.
Eileen Doran, a former employee of Modern Wholesale Drug Midwest Inc., which  does business as Rugby Laboratories, now a unit of Hoechst A.G., will collect $1,050,000 of the settlement as a reward for bringing the overcharge allegations to light.


Managed Care Will Need Family Doctors;The Medicare Question
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 26 front-page article on The New York Times-CBS News Poll on budget choices highlights the question that pitted balancing the budget against preventing Medicare cuts, a question that provided less than zero information.


Athletics And Tigers Courting Showalter
While Yankee executives met in Tampa, Fla., yesterday to discuss who their next manager should be, Buck Showalter, their former manager, started his life without the Yankees feeling very wanted.
Showalter was immediately courted by the Detroit Tigers and the Oakland Athletics about their manager positions and will interview with both teams on the West Coast this weekend.
Even though Showalter is looking forward to the interviews, a part of him still wondered about his negotiations with George Steinbrenner and why he is no  longer the Yankee manager.
Except for the 22 days he spent unemployed after being dismissed as the third-base coach before becoming the manager on Oct. 29,  1991, yesterday marked the first day Showalter was not a Yankee since 1977.


Someone to Call About Noise
Representative Robert Franks accuses the Federal Aviation Administration of "inept handling of intolerable levels of airplane noise." The solution, he thinks, is an independent aircraft noise ombudsman.
A measure sponsored by Mr.
Franks to create such a position passed a House committee yesterday, a day after the F.A.A. issued a widely criticized decision on flight routes.
SUSAN JO KELLER


The New Token: An Icon Gone Generic;Design Lacks the Brass Of Its Predecessors
It costs more, and there is less of it -- thus is the new subway token a true object of the 1990's.
It is smaller, lighter in weight and lighter in color than every token the Transit Authority has used except the very first, the one issued in 1953 for 15 cents.
The new token, of course, costs $1.50, which somehow suggests, even in these inflated times, that it ought to carry a bit more heft.
Not in the mind of the Transit Authority, which seems to feel that Token Lite is the spirit of the day.
The new token is almost as feather-light as a dime, and about the size of a nickel, though it will take 30 nickels to buy one, and don't ask, please, how frequently the trains it will buy you access to run compared with the trains of yore.
Suffice it to say that this new token buys you a lot more platform time.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Murray Sprung Is Dead at 92; 'Pop' to a Generation of Orphans
Murray Sprung, a onetime war crimes prosecutor, Manhattan-based international lawyer and plain Pop to a generation of orphaned boys and girls, died on Monday  at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
A resident of the Upper West Side, he was 92.


Ex-Leader in Seoul Questioned
After a grueling round of questioning, Roh Tae Woo slipped out of the revolving door of the Seoul Prosecutor's Office at 2:22 this morning and faced a lone camera -- an all-news cable television station.
"I am sorry to keep you up so late," said Mr.
Roh (pronounced NO), the first  former South Korean president to face legal action for improper behavior in office.


Japanese Stocks Climb
Stocks surged here today on optimism that the stronger dollar would help Japanese exporters.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 554.31 points, or 3.17 percent, at 18,028.80.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei fell 180.15 points, or 1.02 percent.


When Thieves Fall Out, Guns and Secrets Emerge
So how do you kill time when you're hiding out after a botched drug heist, with blood on your clothes and four kilos of heroin in a briefcase?
If you're a character in "Riff Raff," Laurence Fishburne's tense, expertly acted new drama at the Circle Repertory Theater, you do some of the things fictional criminals under siege have always done: you pace the floor, look out the window a lot and get increasingly testy.


Accounts
*
Sherwin-Williams consumer brands division, Cleveland, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, owned by the Mickelberrycoei Corp., to handle advertising for its Cuprinol brand of stains and wood preservatives, previously handled by Liggett-Stashower, Cleveland.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.
Partners &amp; Shevack already handles the Dutch Boy Paints account for Sherwin-Williams. *
Dennis Publishing, New York, to Altschiller &amp; Co., New York, part of the Omnicom Group, to handle a consumer advertising campaign for Blender, a CD-ROM entertainment magazine.
Altschiller will also create interactive ads to appear in Blender for brands the agency handles like Canadian Mist and Southern Comfort, marketed by the Brown-Forman Corp.
Billings were not disclosed.


Reviews/Fashion;A Ralph Lauren Moment
AMONG the surprises at the VH1 music cable network announcement of its Dec. 3 fashion awards program (does anyone understand why television actors Steven Weber and Julianna Margulies will be the hosts of the show?) was the video it showed to open its news conference yesterday.
It actually made fashion look exciting.


Regulators Said to Be Considering Dropping Inquiry of N.A.S.D.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is considering dropping its investigation of the National Association of Securities Dealers, if the N.A.S.D. agrees to toughen its disciplinary process, said three people familiar with the  matter.
S.E.C. officials began preliminary talks several weeks ago with N.A.S.D. representatives in an effort to resolve a yearlong investigation.
The commission was looking into whether large brokerage firms exercised too much influence over the Nasdaq stock market and over N.A.S.D. programs for resolving customer complaints.


Banja Luka: Not a Target Of Assault, Yet Beaten
This is a city defeated.
Buildings are still intact and no missiles or shells have struck the Bosnian  Serbs' largest stronghold.
But spirits are broken, and the once defiant pride is shattered.


For a Gap Sibling, The Fun Begins
TOMORROW should be quite a day for the Old Navy Clothing Company, as the store chain known for its inexpensive jeans and T-shirts adds three more locations.
One will be in Rockford, Ill., another in Schaumburg, Ill., and the third in Manhattan.
Manhattan?
The store on the corner of 18th Street and Avenue of the Americas will be the first Old Navy branch in the city.
New Yorkers will get their first look at the upbeat, down-home style of this younger, cheaper and more-fun-loving corporate sibling of the 894 Gap, 399 Gap Kids and 200 Banana Republic stores nationwide.
There are now 111 Old Navy branches around the country, most of them either in malls or on the outskirts of big cities.
But are bargain-hunting New Yorkers going to take to shrink-wrapped sweatshirts displayed in grocery freezers, jeans hung on railroad ties and baby clothes piled high on a vintage ice-cream truck?


U.S. Cancels Indonesian Mine's Insurance
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation has canceled $100 million in political risk insurance for a huge gold mining project in Indonesia that is operated by Freeport-McMoran Copper and Gold Inc.
The Federal agency, which provides insurance and financing to American companies doing business overseas, canceled the company's insurance, effective at midnight on Tuesday.
Political-risk insurance is intended to compensate a company if it loses assets because of terrorism, sabotage, a coup or other political volatility.


Storming a Stronghold
In Hudson County, N.J., where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by 5-to-1 ratio, Bill Macchi is an unlikely foot soldier in the Republican revolution.
He is running a fierce and well-financed campaign for county executive.
No Republican has held the position since the office was created in 1975.
But the two national parties are paying close attention to the race, and the Democrats are concerned enough to dispatch Vice President Al Gore for a campaign visit.
Article, page B6.


Currents;Earful for Science
SOUND is not just the pounding of drums, the blare of a horn, a shriek of glee.
Sound is also science, and "Soundsfun," an exhibition at the Children's Museum of Manhattan (212 West 83d Street), proves that principle.
When children climb a 14-foot sculpture in the shape of an ear, for example,  they can make the kind of journey that a sound wave makes traveling from the ear into the brain.
They can bounce on an "ear drum" trampoline and slither down an "inner ear" slide (right).


No New Deal for Banking;Efforts to Drop Depression-Era Barriers Stall, Again
All the big players had lined up behind the deregulation of America's financial markets, but on a cool, damp day in June, House Speaker Newt Gingrich  had second thoughts.
The Clinton Administration, most Congressional Republicans and Democrats, the Federal Reserve, big banks, and many insurers and securities firms all sought to dismantle the Depression-era Glass-Steagall law that established walls between the banking and securities industries.
But numerous House freshmen had been hearing from another faction -- insurance agents who feared such an overhaul would put them out of business.
And the House freshmen had relayed their constituents' concerns to the Speaker.


Ogilvy Awarded 7Up Global Work
The Pepsi-Cola International unit of Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it would move the account of its 7Up brand, which the company markets in 120 countries outside North America, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York from BBDO Worldwide in New York.
The billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.
The 7Up shift, which comes after five years at BBDO, consolidates all "flavor brands" at Ogilvy, said Ken Ross, a spokesman for Pepsi-Cola International in Purchase, N.Y., which is "the most logical way to delineate BBDO's and O.&amp; M.'s  responsibilities." His reference was to noncola products handled by Ogilvy in overseas markets like Mirinda, an orange-flavored soft drink, and the Radical Fruit Company, a new line of juice-based beverages.


World News Briefs;Elizabeth II to Approve Maori Land Settlement
Queen Elizabeth is to approve the settlement of a Maori land grievance on Friday during a visit to New Zealand, but a spokesman said today that she would  not apologize personally.
The Queen, who is New Zealand's Queen and head of state, is scheduled to give formal assent to a parliamentary bill that includes payment of $112 million and  the return of 39,000 acres to the Tainui people and seeks to atone for treaty violations and the invasion of its lands in 1863.


N.B.A. Refs Reject Plan
The union for National Basketball Association officials rejected the league's latest proposal to end the lockout yesterday but planned a counterproposal today.
Nevertheless, the league expects to be without its regular referees when the  season opens tomorrow night.


Conservatives Want the Name
The sample ballots describe William A. Junghans and Bob McFetridge as independents and they don't like that.
In fact, the two are Conservative Party candidates for Assembly seats in the  3rd District, which includes parts of Salem, Gloucester and Cumberland counties.


Let Argentina Take Next Disclosure Step
To the Editor:
"Argentina's Enlightened Chief of Staff" (editorial, Oct. 27) is right to highlight the historic importance of Gen.
Martin Balza's apology for the crimes  of the "dirty war" of the 1970's.
General Balza's leadership is changing the Argentine military mentality in other stunning ways.
But President Carlos Menem  has not responded with gestures of his own.


No Headline
We agreed to meet again and talk about it some more."
SPEAKER NEWT GINGRICH, after a budget meeting with President Clinton. [B10:1.]


Series of Arrests at Hospital
In the last month and a half, four men who work at Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital have been charged with sexually assaulting four female patients.
John McKeegan, a spokesman for the State Department of Human Services, said  yesterday that the incidents were unrelated but that an investigation of hospital procedures is under way.
The latest arrest came Monday.


Budget Talks Move Out of the Spotlight
President Clinton and the Republican leaders in Congress put aside their public bickering over the budget and went behind closed doors to discuss the matter in private.
They emerged from the Oval Office saying that nothing had been resolved, other than, in the words of Speaker Newt Gingrich, that they would "meet again and talk about it some more."


House Republicans May Split Immigration Bill to Keep It From BoggingDown
With a huge immigration bill pending in the House, Republicans are debating whether to split it in two, a move that would allow proposals intended for illegal aliens to go forward while making action on legal immigration far less likely anytime soon.
Ten California Republicans, including some of the most conservative House members, have urged the House leadership to break out the provisions on legal immigration.


Lemieux Has 7-Point Night
Mario Lemieux scored 7 points on a goal and six assists as the Pittsburgh Penguins crushed the Tampa Bay Lighting by 10-0 tonight.
"It was scary," Penguins Coach Eddie Johnston said.


Economic Scene;Welfare time limits raise the specter of more street dwellers.
NEWT GINGRICH and Bill Clinton agree: the time for time limits on welfare has come.
But what happens when the welfare checks stop?
"Not a lot of people have thought about it," says LaDonna Pavetti, a researcher at the Urban Institute.
They will soon have to.
A dozen states have already received Federal waivers  to set time limits.
The others will probably not even have to ask: both the House and Senate welfare bills would drop any requirement to provide monthly stipends.
But researchers who watched the states cope in haphazard fashion with  rising caseloads in the early 1990's are not sanguine about the consequences.


Nets Are Still Looking for Front-Line Help
The Nets were exploring possibilities for a last-minute trade today before deciding on their roster for Friday's season opener at Toronto.
Nobody was giving out any names, but it was clear that the Nets were interested in acquiring a player who could give them some depth along their thin front line.
"Our roster will be finalized tomorrow" was all Coach Butch Beard would say.
"We'll see what happens between now and then."


In Peformance: CLASSICAL MUSIC


Kimberly-Clark Board Approves Spinoff
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation said today that its board had approved the spinoff of Schweitzer-Mauduit International Inc., its tobacco operations, to its shareholders.
Kimberly-Clark shareholders will receive one Schweitzer-Mauduit share for every 10 Kimberly-Clark shares currently held.


Transactions
Baseball


Irwin Bazelon Memorial
A memorial concert for the composer Irwin Bazelon is to be held on Sunday at  8:30 P.M. at Weill Recital Hall.
The concert is to feature four of Mr.
Bazelon's chamber works, performed by Richard Rodney Bennett, Scott Dunn, Jonathan Haas, Dorothy Lawson, James Pugh, David Taylor and the Vanguard Chamber Players.
Mr.
Bazelon died on Aug. 2 at the age of 73.


Market Place;Boston Beer has an unusual public offering gimmick.
AS a rule, companies do not like to have shareholders with very small holdings.
Sure, they are usually loyal and can be depended on to vote with management if a proxy battle erupts.
But it costs just as much to send annual reports and proxies to a holder with 33 shares as it does to send them to a holder with 10,000 shares.
Many companies, looking to save money, have offered to buy back small holdings, called odd-lots in the business.


Bronx School Safety Officer Arrested in Loan-Sharking
Israel Hill was supposed to be protecting students and staff members at DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx.
Instead, the authorities said yesterday, the safety officer was a loan shark who preyed on at least 10 school  employees, including a teacher.
Mr.
Hill, 61, of 1760 Topping Avenue in the Bronx, was arrested on Tuesday on a charge of first-degree usury, a felony that carries a sentence of up to 15 years in prison.
He was released on his own recognizance after arraignment yesterday in Bronx Criminal Court.


F.B.I. Wants Advanced System To Vastly Increase Wiretapping
The F.B.I. has proposed a national wiretapping system of unprecedented size and scope that would give law enforcement officials the capacity to monitor simultaneously as many as one out of every 100 phone lines in some high crime areas of the country.
Such a surveillance ability would vastly exceed the current needs of law enforcement officials around the country, who in recent years have conducted an  annual average of less than 850 court-authorized wiretaps -- or fewer than one in every 174,000 phone lines.


HOUSE ACTS TO BAN ABORTION METHOD, MAKING IT A CRIME
For the first time since the Supreme Court's landmark ruling in 1973 upholding a woman's right to abortion, the House voted today to ban a particular method of abortion and impose criminal penalties on doctors who use it.
The 288-to-139 vote was limited to a highly specialized procedure, known medically as intact dilation and evacuation, which is performed only after 20 weeks of gestation.
Other methods for late-term abortions could still be performed.
Although even the most ardent abortion foes concede that a challenge  to the legality of abortions is years away, the vote put Congress on that path.


Aqueduct Is Opened as Incinerate Returns in Fine Form
A kind of culture shock descended on New York racing yesterday as the scene shifted from beautiful Belmont Park and its memories of an elegant Breeders' Cup to functional Aqueduct and its omens of winter.
Aqueduct opened its doors in rain, fog and horses left behind in a mass exodus south.
Only 6,025 spectators showed up to see the races, continuing the plunge in attendance of recent years.


Guatemala Rebels to Vote
Guatemalan rebels ended a three-decade electoral boycott today with the declaration of a unilateral cease-fire to coincide with general elections to be  held Nov. 12.
Rebels of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unit said the move, first announced in Panama in September, followed progress in peace talks to end a 35-year civil war.


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, a brief review of "Songs for a New World"  on Monday misspelled the name of a performer.
She is Jessica Molaskey.


Dollar Rises Against the Yen As Maturing Debt Leaves Japan
The dollar surged to a six-week high against the yen yesterday, bolstered by  optimism that Japanese investors had sold domestic investments and sent money overseas.
About $4 billion of Japanese debt matured at the end of October, and some analysts estimated that as much as 10 percent of those funds were being reinvested in higher-yielding Australian, German, Swiss and United States bond markets.


Transit Post Favorite Is a Subway Veteran
The chief of the Washington transit system is the first choice for the job of president of the New York City Transit Authority, according to senior Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials.
The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they expected the M.T.A. chairman, E. Virgil Conway, to make the offer to Lawrence G. Reuter within a few days or weeks, but that it was less clear whether Mr.
Reuter would
accept it. "If he wanted it, the M.T.A. would not say no," one official said.


King's Mouth Rests, as Does Prosecution
A Federal fraud trial can hush a man.
Even Don King.
His bluster has been muted as prosecutors in Courtroom D of the United States Courthouse in Manhattan try to prove the flashy promoter bilked Lloyd's of London.
"It's a great country," King responds to inquiries about his state of mind.


Franz Pfyffer von Altishofen, 77, Ex-Commander of Swiss Guards
Franz Pfyffer von Altishofen, who was the commander of the Swiss Guards in 1981 when Pope John Paul II was shot and wounded in St.
Peter's Square, died on  Friday in Lucerne, Switzerland.
He was 77.
Mr.
Pfyffer was a 54-year-old lawyer in Lucerne in 1972 when he was named commander of the storied 100-man force of Swiss mercenaries.


G.M. and Chrysler's October Sales Better Than Expected
The General Motors Corporation and the Chrysler Corporation surprised analysts today with smaller-than-expected declines in October sales.
At General Motors, total sales fell 2.7 percent from October last year, while Chrysler's sales fell 2.8 percent.
Analysts had anticipated a drop of 5 percent for Chrysler, while some analysts saw G.M. sales dropping as much as 6 percent.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about poker games involving lobbyists and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, included a company erroneously among those represented by the lobbyists.
None of the lobbyists identified as players  worked for Citicorp.


Women's Programs Growing in Popularity
Women's soccer is teeing up corner kicks and scoring points at an impressive  rate at colleges across the country.
Highly competitive collegiate programs have gradually been increasing as a result of the enormous growth and popularity of the game among young women and the gender equity requirements of Title IX.
Notre Dame, the University of Portland, Southern Methodist, Connecticut, Santa Clara, North Carolina State, Duke, Virginia and Harvard, all of which have competitive men's programs, have built women's programs that are gradually closing in on North Carolina, the perennial power in women's soccer.


Auto Projects in India
The Indian Government has approved three auto projects with American and Japanese manufacturers.
Mahindra &amp; Mahindra of India has agreed to a 50-50 partnership with the Ford Motor Company for a venture that will cost about $250  million.
Siel Ltd. is forming a joint venture with Honda Motor of Japan that will cost $31 million.
And Hindusthan Motors Ltd. is allying with the Mitsubishi Motor Corporation of Japan in a venture valued at about $174 million.
(AP)


MAXTOR BOARD GROUP ACCEPTS HIGHER BID FROM HYUNDAI
The Maxtor Corporation said yesterday that a special committee of its board had accepted a sweetened takeover bid by the Hyundai Electronics Industries Company to buy the remaining 63 percent of Maxtor for $6.70 a share, or about $354 million.
Maxtor, a computer disk-drive maker based in San Jose, Calif., last week rejected an unsolicited $5.15-a-share offer from Hyundai Electronics,  a unit of the Hyundai Corporation of South Korea and Maxtor's largest shareholder.
Earlier this week Hyundai raised its bid to $6.15 a share, which Maxtor said it would consider.
Shares of Maxtor gained $1.2812 cents yesterday,  to $6.2812, in Nasdaq trading of 6.2 million shares.


Economy Is Slowing, but Fed Isn't Expected to Cut Rates
The American economy has slowed this autumn, several new reports showed today, but Federal Reserve officials said in interviews that the signs so far did not appear likely to lead them to lower short-term interest rates at their next meeting on Nov. 15.


PHARMACIA SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE UPJOHN MERGER
Shareholders of Pharmacia A.B. of Sweden have approved a merger with the Upjohn Company, the last major hurdle before the deal creating the world's ninth-largest drug maker is completed.
Pharmacia said yesterday that shareholders owning 96 percent of the company's voting stock had approved the merger, which was announced on Aug. 20.
The new company, to be called Pharmacia  &amp; Upjohn Inc., will be based in London and will have offices in Stockholm, Kalamazoo, Mich., and Milan, Italy.
Trading in the new shares will begin tomorrow in New York and on Monday in Stockholm.


Battle Ahead: Can Mexico's Social Security Net Be Tightened?
President Ernesto Zedillo today announced a sweeping overhaul of Mexico's 52-year-old social security system with the goal of improving medical services and increasing the sagging rate of domestic savings.
Mr.
Zedillo said the social security system was inefficient and the health system in danger of financial collapse.
He also said that allowing Mexicans to establish individual retirement accounts, a central feature of both the social security plan and the economic recovery program announced on Sunday, would generate millions of dollars in domestic savings to help the country in its current economic crisis.


Forsaking the Specific To Dive Into Dreams
For Kazuo Ishiguro, writing fiction was not his first choice of profession.
"It was," he said, "like an arranged marriage. It starts coldly, but gradually you fall in love. It's almost like an addiction. After a while, you can't do without it." He said one reason he writes is "to tussle with who I am and what I want to do."
Mr.
Ishiguro is, in fact, a man of metaphor.
Whatever he writes is meant to stand for more.
The butler in his novel "The Remains of the Day," portrayed on screen by Anthony Hopkins, is not simply an obedient English servant.
He is a symbol of all those so isolated from experience that they are blind to the world around them.


Marc Sarrazin, 69, Meat Seller and Chefs' Mentor
Marc Sarrazin, a French country butcher who became the owner of a major meat  company in New York City and a benevolent godfather to generations of young American chefs, died early yesterday morning at Bellevue Hospital after he was struck by a car on Park Avenue South.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Sarrazin, a respected and jovial figure on the American food scene, had just left a dinner at C. T. Restaurant, on East 22d Street, honoring the chef Paul Bocuse.
The accident occurred shortly after 11 P.M., and Mr.
Sarrazin died  at the hospital about 1 A.M.


After 80, Americans Live Longer Than Others
White Americans aged 80 and over can expect to keep on living longer than octogenarians in other industrialized countries, a study shows.
The study concentrated on whites, said Dr.
Kenneth G. Manton of Duke University, one of the researchers, because many elderly blacks did not have birth certificates and data on their ages were less reliable.
But, Dr.
Manton said, a number of studies have found that black Americans have a lower death rate than whites once they reach age 81 or 82.
The reason, he said, is that blacks with chronic diseases, like high blood pressure, are likely to die at earlier ages because they often lack good health care.
Before middle age, the black mortality rate is as much as triple the white rate, he said.


Ballet in a Risk-Taking Mode
The marvelous San Francisco Ballet has returned with something to say about the state of contemporary choreography in classical dance troupes.
Unlike its 1993 season at the New York State Theater, which included "Swan Lake," the current engagement at City Center is virtually given over to new works.
The rather gentle opening on Tuesday had Helgi Tomasson, Mark Morris and James Kudelka showing less concern for flashy effect than for the relationship of their choreography to very different pieces of music.
Yet each ballet provided an opportunity to display the dazzling classical style that Mr.
Tomasson, the company's artistic director, has made the San Francisco Ballet's trademark.


Currents;Row House Dos and Don'ts
THE 66 historic districts in New York City have 20,000 buildings, most of them row houses.
When a lintel crumbles or a cornice chips on one of these houses, repairs cannot be done according to whim.
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has rules and regulations on maintaining landmark buildings.


First Post-Apartheid Local Elections in South Africa


Most 12th Graders Know Little American History, Survey Says
More than half of America's high school seniors do not know basic facts about American history, like the intent of the Monroe Doctrine or the chief goal of United States foreign policy after World War II, a national education survey has found.
And students who took the test, which was given last year, did even worse when asked to explain or interpret a historical event, like the civil rights movement or Western expansion and the massacre of Indians, according to the National Assessment of Educational Progress in American history, a testing system established by Congress in the 1980's to measure student performance.


No Cover Boy Now, Lopez Is Still a Player
A year ago at this time, he was the darling of the college basketball world.
A national High School Player of the Year who hailed from New York City -- and who had actually chosen to stay home to lead a once-proud program back to prominence.
Back then, Felipe Lopez was on the cover of publications ranging from Sports  Illustrated to The Village Voice.
That was last year.
Things are a lot quieter at Alumni Hall these days.


In Peformance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Fiery Ruminations With a Sense of Purpose Valery Kuleshov, pianist Carnegie Hall


Nova Information Systems
The First Union Corporation and First Fidelity Bancorporation will turn over  the processing for their merchant bank card operations to Nova Information Systems Inc.


Mourning Misses a Drill As Deal Rumors Grow
Alonzo Mourning failed to attend one of the Charlotte Hornets' practices in Fort Mill, S.C., yesterday, intensifying speculation that he will soon be traded.
Charlotte is considering trading its 25-year-old All-Star center because the  Hornets have decided they will not pay what Mourning wants -- a seven-year contract for about $13 million a year, with an escape clause after four seasons.
A meeting last week left the two sides far apart, with the Hornets reportedly offering a seven-year contract for $10 million a season.


Brian Lenihan, Irish Politician And Former Deputy Premier, 64
Brian Lenihan, a former Deputy Prime Minister who was defeated by Mary Robinson in Ireland's 1990 presidential campaign, died here today.
He was 64.
The cause was a liver ailment, according to Meath Hospital in Dublin.


Pre-Election Blitz Begins
The closer Election Day gets, the more campaigners show up at the State House, trying to win headlines and sway voters.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman appeared yesterday with groups calling for approval of a ballot question that would require the state to pay for programs it forces on local governments.


An Important Handshake, if a Bit Chilly


In Performance: POP
Techno and Funk With Rock Guitar The Chemical Brothers Irving Plaza


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Posthumous Premiere In Homage to a Goddess American Composers Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Pepsico Chief to Undergo Chemotherapy
Wayne Calloway, chairman and chief executive of Pepsico Inc., who underwent surgery for prostate cancer three and a half years ago, said yesterday that he would undergo chemotherapy for the disease.
Mr.
Calloway, 60, said in a statement that he would have one treatment a month for six months and he intended to keep working.


3 Held in Jeep Chase Death
Three Newark men have been arrested in the death of an Elizabeth man whose car was hit last week by a stolen Jeep Cherokee.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, said yesterday that the three would be charged with the felony murder of Duane Greenemeier and the attempted murder of a Bloomfield police officer who was shot at while pursuing the stolen Jeep.


Where the Auto Mechanic Meets Plato
To the Editor:
I read with pleasure Philip Levine's evocative "Keats in Detroit" (Op-Ed, Oct. 29).
And with recognition: I also teach in a program at Wayne State University that serves working adults.


Environmental Protest


World News Briefs;Sri Lankans Advance Toward Tamils at Jaffna
Sri Lankan Government troops advanced to within three miles of the Tamil rebels' stronghold of Jaffna today, pushing an offensive that has sent 500,000 civilians fleeing.
Jaffna, once a city of 125,000, where the Tamils have established a rival Government, has been used as a Tamil base since they began their fight for a homeland 12 years ago.
The authorities said they did not know how many rebel defenders are left in the city since the military began a campaign two weeks ago to capture it.
A relief worker said today that Jaffna was almost empty.


Jim Campbell, 71; Former Tiger Aide Brought Two Titles
Jim Campbell, an old-school general manager who oversaw the Detroit Tigers through two World Series titles and two 100-loss seasons during his 43 years with the organization, died on Tuesday night.
He was 71.
Campbell, who was dismissed in 1992 before the team was sold to the current owner, Mike Ilitch, died of sudden cardiopulmonary arrest at Lakeland Regional Medical Center in Florida, a Tiger spokesman, Dan Ewald, said.
He had been hospitalized in recent days.


The C.I.A.'s False Intelligence
The Central Intelligence Agency's reporting on foreign military capacities is supposed to help the United States spend its defense dollars wisely.
But in the  late 1980's and early 1990's, it may have contributed to billions in misdirected spending.
The C.I.A.'s ongoing assessment of the damage caused by the Aldrich Ames affair reveals that much of the information the agency provided to the White House and Pentagon during these years was fabricated by Soviet double agents who pretended to work for the C.I.A. but remained loyal to Moscow.
These double agents replaced genuine agents who had been executed after Mr.
Ames betrayed them to the Soviets.
They gained their jobs on the basis of inside information about C.I.A. procedures that Mr.
Ames sold to Moscow beginning in 1985.


Disagreeing With an Ambulance Merger


Europe's Union Of Currencies In Anxiety Stage
With little more than three years to go before their scheduled monetary union, the Europeans have been sounding lately as if they will never make it to  the altar.
Germany has been sniping at Italy for its economic policies, and Italy has returned the favor.
Just about everybody has been criticizing France.
And in Britain, the Euro-skeptics were out in force last month at the Conservative Party conference.


City Begins Program To Stem Suicides By Police Officers
Alarmed by the number of suicides among police officers, New York City officials set in motion a new program yesterday to recruit and train officers as peer counselors.
The city is spending $50,000 to set up the early intervention program outside the purview of the department, the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, said.
The counselors will offer confidential advice to troubled officers, referring them to private psychiatrists if necessary.


If Death Is Really Your Cup Of Tea
It's possible that some people might consider an "At Rest" coffin plaque hanging over their bed a trifle morbid, not to speak of a bedroom decorated with a 19th-century child's coffin, tastefully topped with funereal floral baskets.
But then, these are the people who probably wouldn't understand the kick of munching on coffin-shaped fudge or, for that matter, the joys of a picnic in a cemetery.
None of these kill-joys were in attendance at "In Memoriam," the Victorian Society in America's symposium on "Death and Dying, Mourning and Remembrance in  19th-Century America" at the Sumner School in Washington last weekend.
But some  70 men and women turned out for it, a group that included historians, museum curators, homemakers, an interior decorator and a retired real estate executive.
Most refused to recognize the word "morbid."


Chase and Chemical Pledge $18 Billion in Community Loans
The Chemical Banking Corporation and the Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that they would lend $18 billion to small businesses, nonprofit organizations and low- to moderate-income homeowners in the five years after their proposed merger.
That nationwide commitment represents about a 5 percent increase from the current pace of their combined investment in those areas.


Blazing Trails, Disk By Disk
IN a world of milli- and microseconds, mega- and gigabytes, one computer operation remains so unsophisticated as to seem almost quaint -- placing the compact disk in the drive.
More than 40 percent of all home computers and nearly half of those sold this year have a CD drive, according to the International Data Corporation, a research concern in Framingham, Mass.
A CD drive is useful, even essential, for working with the huge hunks of data in encyclopedias, atlases, gazetteers, tax codes and other often-used titles on the computer bookshelf.


Ralph Lauren: now it's his moment. C14


Nongdao Journal;Far From the Mad Whirl, China's Ageless Rhythm
In parts of China, women from a certain generation do not have an identity separate from their husbands.
Thus the only way to introduce the old couple living on the dirt path leading into this village in southwestern China is to say: Meet Man Han, age 77, and Man Han's wife, 70.
While millions of Chinese are frenetically trying to get rich, Mr. and Mrs.
Man live in a house under a banyan tree on the remote and rural sidelines of China's economic transformation.


Currents;New-Old Jet Age Shop
FOR fans of Fifty/50, the former Manhattan gallery devoted to mid-century modern designers, there is cause for rejoicing -- and browsing.
Last week, Mark  McDonald, the surviving partner in the original gallery, opened Gansevoort Gallery at 72 Gansevoort Street (Washington Street).
Mr.
McDonald closed Fifty/50 in 1993 when his partner, Mark Isaacson, died of AIDS; Ralph Cutler, the third owner, died in 1989, also of AIDS.
"After Mark's death, I just didn't feel capable physically, mentally or emotionally of keeping Fifty/50 going," Mr.
McDonald said.


INSIDE
Promises to Placate Quebec


Mother Ends 7-Year Jail Stay, Still Silent About Missing Child
After spending seven years in jail for refusing to disclose her son's whereabouts, Jacqueline Bouknight has been set free, still without disclosing anything about her son's fate.
Ms.
Bouknight's lawyers call her a hero of civil disobedience.
But the judge  who had held her in contempt fears that the child may be dead.
And the court-appointed advocate for the boy, who would be 9 years old now, pleaded with the 29-year-old mother to start talking about her son, whom she is accused of abusing.


Top New York State Judge Issues Rules to Ease Life on Civil Juries
The jury box may not be more comfortable or long-winded lawyers more succinct, but under new rules announced yesterday, jury duty in civil courts in  New York State stands to become less arduous and perhaps even shorter.
Starting Jan. 1, the time-consuming process of choosing a jury will no longer be left entirely in the hands of lawyers, who have been known to interrogate prospective jurors almost as tenaciously as they cross-examine witnesses.
Under new jury-selection rules announced by Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye, judges will begin overseeing jury selection, and will impose limits on how long lawyers can question potential jurors.


Justices Consider Limit on Liquor Ads
A Supreme Court argument today on whether a state may constitutionally ban the advertising of liquor prices presented an interesting mix of free-speech principles and economic theory.
If advertising is a form of constitutionally protected speech -- as the Court has held for 20 years -- can the state restrict truthful advertising about a lawful product to reduce consumer demand?
Lurking on the edges of the argument, never explicitly acknowledged but clearly on the Justices' minds, were the potential consequences of whatever answer they might give for Government regulation of advertising for other products, including cigarettes.


The Biggest Peril to Ships for Most of History
LONGITUDE The True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific Problem of His Time By Dava Sobel 184 pages.
Walker &amp; Company. $19.


PREMARK TO SPIN OFF TUPPERWARE DIVISION
Premark International Inc. said yesterday that it would spin off its Tupperware subsidiary to shareholders.
Tupperware, which makes plastic storage containers, is the company's largest and most profitable business, with earnings of $200 million on sales of $1.3 billion last year.
The spinoff of Tupperware, based in Orlando, Fla., will leave Premark with the PMI Food Equipment Group and Wilsonart International, among other businesses.
The remaining Premark units earned $156 million last year on revenue of $2.1 billion.
The company, based in  Deerfield, Ill., said it decided to spin off the unit because the nature of direct-selling businesses like Tupperware differed from its other businesses.


Hot Rock Deep Beneath Brazil Shakes a Geological Theory
Deep beneath Brazil, a mysterious plume of hot rock extending hundreds of miles into the earth's interior has been discovered and is raising questions about a central tenet of geological theory.
The theory of plate tectonics holds that the earth's surface is made up of a  dozen or so crustal plates that float on a sea of molten rock whose currents have set continents adrift over the ages.
The new finding, however, suggests that the plates and the underground molten sea are not always independent.


From Bad-Girl Choreographer, Nijinksy Lite
Marie Chouinard, Montreal's extroverted bad-girl choreographer and performer, specialized in solo dancing until she founded the Compagnie Marie Chouinard in 1990.
On the evidence of the two pieces Ms.
Chouinard presented on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, through Sunday), her solos remain the heart of her work.
The evening opened with "Prelude a l'Apres-Midi d'un Faune," which Ms.
Chouinard created in 1987 and has now passed along to Pamela Newel.
Performed to the Debussy score, the solo is inspired by Adolphe Meyer's photographs of Vaslav Nijinsky as the Faun in the solo Nijinsky created for himself in 1912.


SHARES OF DST SYSTEMS GAIN IN FIRST DAY OF TRADING
Shares of DST Systems Inc. rose strongly yesterday in their first day of trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock of DST, priced at $21, closed  at $25.50, after almost 9.1 million shares changed hands.
DST's parent, Kansas City Southern Industries, which owned all of DST before the offering, sold a 52  percent stake in DST through a public offering of 22 million shares valued at $462 million.


Federated in S.&amp; P. Index
The shares of Federated Department Stores Inc. rose yesterday after the department store company was added to the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
Federated, which operates Macy's, Bloomingdale's, Bullock's, Rich's and Stern's  chains, replaced the Zenith Electronics Corporation in the index.
Federated shares rose $1.125, to $26.50, in trading of nearly three million shares on the  New York Stock Exchange.
In July, LG Electronics of South Korea, formerly the Goldstar Company, announced plans to increase its stake in Zenith, a maker of televisions, to 58 percent for $350 million.


Northwestern Senior Shares Success Story
While Northwestern's rags-to-riches season has captivated people both here and across the country, senior linebacker Danny Sutter wonders whether the younger players have an appreciation for the school's football renaissance.
"I kid the younger players a little bit," Sutter said today as the Wildcats prepared for their biggest game of the season Saturday against Penn State.
"I really don't think they know what it has taken to get to this point. Obviously,  they know what our past has been, but they haven't been through it as the seniors have."


Swiss Union Bank Predicts Higher Profit
The Union Bank of Switzerland yesterday predicted a higher profit for 1995, pointing the way for an earnings recovery for Switzerland's three largest banks  after a slump last year.
Union Bank, the country's biggest bank, reported that its net income rose slightly in the first nine months of 1995. and it forecast "good year-end results."
As is customary for Swiss banks, profit and loss figures for the nine-month  period were not reported.
But the bank said income improved slightly and assets stood at 255 billion francs ($224 billion) on Sept. 30, up 8.2 percent from the end of 1994.
(Reuters)


Milton P. Siegal, Former Health Official, 84
Milton P. Siegel, a former assistant director-general of the World Health Organization, died on Sunday at his home in Houston.
He was 84.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Giants Can Begin The Future At the Ends
At practice, when players are tired and hurting and storing energy for the next game, there are moments when they sometimes like to, well, take it easy.
Jamal Duff, the Giants' rookie defensive end, has no such moments.
He is either  going hard or not going at all.
Some of the linemen hate going against him because he is so relentless.
He is a future star you have never heard of.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about efforts by Congress to raise $14 billion by selling licenses for the nation's airwaves referred incorrectly to a Senate proposal on awarding channels for services like high-definition television.
The  bill would require the Federal Communications Commission to submit a plan for awarding the channels and then get Congressional approval; it is not like the House version, which would automatically give television broadcasters channels for those services.


Rabbi Simcha Elberg, Rabbinic Law Scholar, 80
Rabbi Simcha Elberg, a scholar of rabbinic law and chairman of the executive  board of the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada for the last 25 years, died on Tuesday at Maimonides Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 80 and lived in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Elberg was born in Poland and ordained in Warsaw.
During World War II,  he escaped to Shanghai, where he studied at the Mir Yeshiva.


Delta's Ticketless Plans
Faced with increased competition from low-fare carriers, Delta Air Lines will test ticketless travel in five United States cities next April, a spokesman said today.
The Delta spokesman said the system would be tried in Tampa, Fla., but he would not identify the other four cities.


Robitaille Is Sizzling On Way To Forum
Do the math.
Luc Robitaille has 5 goals after 11 games and there are 82 games in the National Hockey League's regular season.
When the Rangers obtained him in a trade from Pittsburgh last summer, Coach Colin Campbell and General Manager Neil Smith said they expected him to produce  about 40 goals.


World News Briefs;3 Blasts in Gaza Kill One And Hurt 9, Israelis Say
At least nine people were hurt, most lightly, in three explosions today in the largely Palestinian-controlled Gaza Strip, the Israel Army radio reported.
The radio said it was unclear whether the wounded were Arabs or Jews.
A suicide car bomber was killed in one explosion, the radio said.


Bolts Are Removed From Conrail Track
Vandals apparently removed four bolts from a section of Conrail track in Queens, and inspectors found a note nearby with a profanity in Spanish, a spokesman for the railroad said yesterday.
The discovery was made Tuesday morning on track near 32d Street and Northern Boulevard, said Rudy Husband, a Conrail spokesman.
Conrail inspectors found a note nearby held down by two rocks, he said.


Target of House Legislation: Procedure Doctors Rarely Use
For all its symbolic importance, the method of late-term abortion that the House yesterday voted to ban is used rarely, and by very few doctors.
Of the nation's 1.5 million abortions a year, only about 13,000 are performed after 20 weeks of gestation.
And only two doctors, Martin Haskell of Ohio and James McMahon of California, have said publicly that for the late-term abortions they perform, they prefer the method the legislation would ban.
Dr.
McMahon died on Saturday in California.


Clinton Analyzes His Term, And Finds Himself Wanting
In his first two years in the White House, Bill Clinton behaved "like a prime minister, not a President," was not "pleased with" the welfare overhaul plan he  proposed and "lost the language" of the moderate new Democratic thinking that helped to elect him in 1992.
Who made that trenchant analysis?


A Sensitive Guy From South Central
Growing up in South Central Los Angeles is no joke.
It is no fairy tale.
Beverly Hills it is not.
Curtis Conway will tell you so.


Youth Arrested in Halloween Slashing in Queens
A teen-ager in a Halloween costume was attacked by a group of youths outside  a Queens cemetery and had his hand nearly slashed off on Tuesday night, but doctors were able to reattach the hand fully during five hours of surgery yesterday.
Last night, the police arrested David Ramos, 16, of Middle Village, Queens, charging him with first-degree assault, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.
He was also charged with criminal possession of a weapon -- a razor knife long enough that the victim had told the authorities that he thought it might have been a machete.


What the State Can Seize
More about what the state will and will not confiscate:


Ivy League Steels for Another Post-Season Chill
Tomorrow afternoon, 40,000 fans are expected to show up at Franklin field for a classic showdown between Ivy League powers: Pennsylvania (3-1) is the two-time defending Ivy champion, having gone unbeaten in 1993 and 1994.
Princeton (7-0) is looking for its first undefeated season since 1964.
The winner of tomorrow's game will probably emerge as the Ivy champion.
For traditionalists who believe that football stops after the Harvard-Yale game, the Ivy crown is enough.
But for increasing number of coaches and players, while the Ivy title is special, it is not enough to satisfy the competitive edge.
They want to test their skills against the best in Division I-AA.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Stage Works
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Bartok's three short theater works occupied a good deal of his attention for  a decade beginning around 1910, and they brought him his first public acclaim.
The success of the convoluted fairy-tale ballet "The Wooden Prince" in 1916 made possible the performance of the already composed opera "Bluebeard's Castle."


Redskins' Front Line Loses Another Player
The Washington Redskins' beleaguered offensive line took another blow today when it was learned that right guard Vernice Smith will need surgery for torn cartilage in his knee.
Smith, who was injured in last Sunday's 24-15 loss to the Giants, will undergo arthroscopic surgery today.
He will miss this week's game against the Chiefs.


House Votes For Vouchers For Students In the Capital
In a move closely watched by the nation's educators, the House today approved a spending bill for the District of Columbia that includes a controversial Federally financed voucher system to let impoverished public school students enroll in private or suburban school systems.
With Speaker Newt Gingrich making a rare and fiery plea from the floor and opponents warning that public schools would only be further weakened, the House  adopted the voucher program by a vote of 241 to 177 as an amendment to the district's annual budget appropriation.


Making the Abstract Light, Sunny and Personal
When it comes to the living, it sometimes seems that the Metropolitan Museum  of Art thinks the only good artist is a London painter.
With its 50-work survey  of Howard Hodgkin following fast on retrospectives of Lucian Freud and R. B. Kitaj, the museum's record now stands at 3 for 4. (The exception is the recent survey of Willem de Kooning's paintings.) But never mind.
Compared with Mr.
Freud and Mr.
Kitaj, whose figurative paintings are weighted with portentousness of the painterly or the literary kind, Mr.
Hodgkin, who is now 63, is altogether another species of artist.
Light of touch and rich  of color, the best of his paintings frequently manage to suggest sunny gardens,  comfy interiors and paintings-within-paintings all at once -- and yet remain predominantly abstract.
His exhibition, organized by the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, has an air of freshness and visual ebullience that hasn't been seen  in this part of the Metropolitan for several innings.


Strong Quarter Reported By Dresdner Bank
Dresdner Bank A.G. said yesterday that a strong third quarter had lifted its  operating profit by 13.6 percent, to 1.458 billion marks ($1 billion) in the first nine months of 1995.
Operating profit, which is before taxes and after own-account trading and risk provisions, rose from 1.283 billion marks in the first nine months of 1994.
Net profit rose 8.5 percent.
Dresdner and other German banks are reporting nine-month results for the first time this year.
Dresdner, Germany's second-largest bank, said operating results almost doubled in the third quarter compared with the corresponding period last year and rose at a 16.8 percent rate from the average of the first two quarters.
Operating profit was 5.5 percent at the six-month stage.
(Bloomberg Business News)


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- Subways;Subway Train Frequency Runs Behind Timetable
In September, after a year of declining city and state aid, the Transit Authority reduced subway services citywide for the first time since the 1970's.
But a count of trains running on several lines late last month showed that in many cases they were running even less often than the new timetables called for.
The service cuts, along with reductions in cleaning and maintenance, were first ordered in February in response to the city's withdrawal of $128 million in transit financing.
Though the city later restored some of that money, by then the state had made similar cuts and a loss of Federal money was expected as well.
So the authority proceeded to reduce service.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Chamber Works
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Bartok covered a vast range of styles and textures in his chamber music, but  for most listeners the string quartets, unconventional works for the most conventional of ensembles, are the heart of his chamber output.
Composed between 1908 and 1939, this set of six works begins in the world of post-Wagnerian chromaticism, with hints of Hungarian folk melodies, and moves with increasing harmonic and rhythmic complexity toward an intensely melancholy conclusion.


From Campaigns Past, a Spirit Returns With a Dramatic Lesson
Of all the cautionary signs that the Presidential campaign season is cycling  back upon the capital, none is more timely than the resurrection of Lee Atwater, the late political strategist who turned spin doctoring into a performance art that outlives him.
A one-man theatrical show has opened here displaying the extraordinary stratagems, cynicism and passion brought to politics by Mr.
Atwater, the Republican national chairman who died of brain cancer in 1991 at the height of his considerable powers.


Board Is Armed With Words In Fight Against Kerkorian
The Chrysler Corporation today disclosed its strategy for undermining Kirk Kerkorian: talk, talk and more talk.
After meeting today, Chrysler's board said it would consult with shareholders and ponder for three more months before deciding on most of the proposals made last week by Mr.
Kerkorian, Chrysler's largest private shareholder.
But it hinted that as of now, it frowned on them.


Argentina to Send Ex-Nazi to Italy for Trial in 1944 Massacre
The Supreme Court today approved the extradition of a former Nazi SS captain, Erich Priebke, to Italy to face charges that he committed war crimes in the killing of 335 Italian civilians at the Ardeatine Caves outside Rome in 1944.
The decision, by a vote of 6 to 3, was not announced publicly, but officials  of the Justice Ministry confirmed that the Supreme Court had overturned a lower  court's ruling in August that had barred Mr.
Priebke's extradition.


COMPANY BRIEFS


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Orchestral Works
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
Bartok leaped impetuously into orchestral composition at the age of 22.
With  sumptuous Straussian harmonies and sprawling Lisztian themes, his tone poem "Kossuth" seemed to promise a prolific output.
But his next large work for full  orchestra, the great Concerto for Orchestra, came only at the end of his life.
Bartok spent most of his career experimenting with novel instrumentations and smaller forms: the darkly Impressionist Four Pieces, the vibrant Dance Suite and, most significant, the visionary Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta.


Queens Is Still Being Raided by the Bronx
Before the last game of the American League Championship Series in Seattle, the Kingdome's scoreboard treated fans to World Series highlights from recent years.
Suddenly, running around on the screen high above the stadium's artificial surface were Darryl and HoJo and Doc and Davey and Mex and Kid and Wally and Mookie and Maz.
"Hey, look," a viewer shouted, "the 1996 Yankees."


A Violent Goal: Hindustan for Hindus
Not far from a clearing beside the Arabian Sea that older residents remember  as the site of some of Mohandas K. Gandhi's largest rallies, angry youths gathered recently for the kind of political activity that Gandhi condemned.
They belonged to the Hindu nationalist group Shiv Sena, which rejects Gandhi's vision of harmony and equality among India's religious groups: They have a concept of India in which non-Hindus, especially the 110 million Muslims, must accept the primacy of the 700 million Hindus in virtually every sphere of life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13


Review/Fashion;All Aboard: This Way to Sunshine
In the long list of Los Angeles woes, the endless-summer golden land that the Beach Boys sang about isn't reachable by any map.
The go-go girls of "Laugh In"  have been politicized away, beach bums are now homeless people, and celebrities  have run amok and are losing their standing as style icons.
Designers, fortunately, don't have to live by today's realities.
And there has been more escapism on New York runways this season than in many years.
The days of trying to reflect dismal reality are over, for now, and Anna Sui, Michael Kors, Jennifer George and Tracy Feith offered versions of a more carefree time to come, while Miuccia Prada at Miu Miu continued her reinvention  of sexy dressing.


Credit Agency Says Hospitals Face Hazards From Proposed Cuts
Anticipating deep Congressional cutbacks in the growth of Medicare and Medicaid spending, a Wall Street credit-rating firm said yesterday that it might have to downgrade its ratings of many major hospitals and that some of them might not survive the financial ordeals ahead.
The firm, Moody's Investors Service Inc., studied 450 hospitals throughout the country to determine the amount of money they got from Medicare and Medicaid payments; it listed the 20 with the highest percentages of such income.


Nun of a Thousand Causes Takes On Even the Pope
SISTER GRACE (Ellen Burstyn) is one dynamite nun, which is fine with her superiors in the Roman Catholic Church as long as she sticks to her duties as the head of the Houston Street Crisis Center in SoHo.
Drug pushers, would-be muggers, petty thieves and lapsed Catholics never have the last word when she's  around.
She has an answer for everything, including a lot of questions the church would prefer that nobody asked.
Ever since her association with the Rev.
Daniel Berrigan's protests against the Vietnam War, Sister Grace has been speaking out on matters the church considers controversial.
Most recently: sex education in parochial schools and the distribution of condoms -- not just any condoms, but inexpensive condoms that have, according to her, thicker latex than the pricier brands.


Seeking Gold And Finding Friendship
Any movie that encourages young girls to be wilderness adventurers rather than boy-crazed babes-in-waiting certainly has its heart in the right place.
That's why it's sad to report that "Gold Diggers: The Secret of Bear Mountain,"  a movie about two friends who impulsively trek through the Washington State rain forest in search of a mythical cache of gold, is a pallid, halfhearted affair.
No sooner has Beth Easton (Christina Ricci) moved with her recently widowed mother (Polly Draper) from Los Angeles to a picturesque small town in the Pacific Northwest than she strikes up a bosom-buddy friendship with Jody Salerno (Anna Chlumsky), a rebellious tomboy.
Jody tells Beth about the legend of Molly  Morgan, a fearless explorer who discovered a lode of precious ore in a remote sea-coast mountainside.
Secretly, the two girls embark on a perilous journey that takes them up a river by motorboat and into the caves of Bear Mountain, where the treasure is rumored to be buried.
On the trip, Beth nearly drowns but  is saved by Jody's plucky rescue efforts.


John D. Stevenson, 81, Leader For the Air Force in Cold War
John D. Stevenson, a retired Air Force major general who fought in World War  II, helped to shape the United States' air defenses during the cold war and directed space missions, died yesterday at his home in Augusta, Ga.
He was 81.
In the 1950's and 1960's, General Stevenson held several high positions in the United States' air-defense network in Europe.
In the early 1950's in England, he commanded the first all-jet bomber force capable of carrying out a nuclear strike.


The Spoken Word
FAYE DUNAWAY, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
A screening of the 1976 film "Network" and a discussion with the actress and Dr.
Annette Insdorf, chairwoman  of the film division at Columbia University.
Sunday at 7:15 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"POETRY AND THE CITY," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue and 103d  Street, Manhattan.
Edward Hirsch, Sapphire, Grace Schulman and Charles Simic will read from poems about New York.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.; free.
Sponsored by the  Poetry Society of America.
Information: (212) 534-1672.


Officials Look Into Charges On Missing E.M.S. Drugs
Emergency Medical Service officials are investigating whether city ambulance  workers tampered with or stole drugs from one of the agency's Brooklyn ambulance stations in recent weeks.
The officials said they were looking into reports that at least two emergency patients in Brooklyn received inadequate dosages of the vital drugs.
The E.M.S. officials said the investigation involved the agency's supplies of morphine and Valium at its station at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center.
They said emergency medical workers had made allegations that vials of the powerful narcotics were either taken outright or drained of all or parts of their contents.


On My Mind;The 'Dialoguing' Trap
The heart of the Farrakhan matter now is not that he preaches and spreads racism, separatism and that deadly technique of anti-Semitism known as dehumanization.
We have known that for years.
The only Farrakhan issue worth talking about after his triumph of the black men's march is what Americans intend to do about him.


Tokyo Tries to Calm Any 'Financial Anxiety'
The Japanese Government moved immediately today to prevent possible panic over sanctions against Daiwa Bank Ltd. from spreading to the rest of Japan's banking system.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Archival Material
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
"Do as I say, not as I do" is a professorial motto that may apply to composers as well.
Writing great music and performing it do not necessarily go hand in hand.
For through either lack of playing skill or closeness to their creations, composers can visit false testimony on themselves.
Some composer-players dwell on the problematic detail, not because it is crucial to the listener but because it gave them so much trouble in the first place.
Then there is the tendency of the creative musical mind, unimpeded by the physical limitations of performance, to hear music faster than it can be articulately played or clearly perceived.


On Sending Troops Without an Enemy
To the Editor:
How will the Clinton Administration sell military intervention in Bosnia to the American people?


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News yesterday about Metromedia International Group, a company created from a four-way stock swap involving the  Actava Group and three companies controlled by John W. Kluge, misidentified the  exchange where the new stock has begun trading.
It is the American Stock Exchange, not the New York Stock Exchange.


Dow Chemical to Face Texas Implant Trials
The Dow Chemical Company must stand trial as a defendant in thousands of silicone-breast-implant lawsuits in Texas, the state's Supreme Court decided today.
In a blow to Dow Chemical's efforts to halt the litigation, the Texas high court refused to reverse a lower-court ruling separating it as a defendant from  the Dow Corning Corporation.


Panel Seeks U.S. Pledge on Bosnia War Criminals
The international tribunal on war crimes in Bosnia has formally asked the United States to make the surrender of indicted suspects a condition for any peace accord, a tribunal official said today.
It also plans to indict 30 more people by the end of the year.
The commission is investigating whether Slobodan Milosevic, the President of  Serbia, or any other Serbian officials are implicated in war crimes, the official said.


Supreme Court Doesn't Slight AIDS Cases
To the Editor:
Re "The High Court's Fear of AIDS" (Op-Ed, Oct. 26): Prof.
Michael L. Closen  cites the Supreme Court's failure to review certain AIDS-related cases, concluding that this Court doesn't seem to have noticed the 40,000 people who die each year of AIDS, and warning "the Justices to get their heads out of the sand and confront AIDS."


Devils' Mettle Measured During Tie With Sharks
The Stanley Cup champion Devils snapped a three-game losing streak tonight by barely tying the worst team in the National Hockey League.
They squandered a two-goal lead and a one-goal lead and took an unforgivable penalty in settling for a 3-3 tie with the winless San Jose Sharks.
The Sharks put up a furious effort in ending a four-game losing streak as their record fell to 0-7-4.


Indictment of Daiwa Produces Spurt in Already Rising Dollar
The dollar surged past 104 Japanese yen yesterday after Daiwa Bank of Japan was indicted on charges of conspiring to deceive American regulators.
The dollar, which had been steadily rising all day, jumped in afternoon trading in New York after the first reports that Federal and state banking regulators had ordered Daiwa to cease all operations in the United States.


Curfew Penalty: No TV
Young people caught breaking curfew could soon get the maximum penalty -- no  television.
A citizen group concerned about youth violence plans to ask the City Council  here to set up a detention center for anyone under 18 years old breaking Gilroy's 11 P.M. curfew.


A Police Officer Complains Of Routine Sex Harassment
A police officer filed a Federal discrimination complaint yesterday charging  that she and other female officers in a Bronx precinct are routinely sexually harassed by their male colleagues, and that senior officers have done nothing to stop it.
In one instance, according to the complaint, male officers in the 46th Precinct heated an interior dome light in a squad car and shaped it into a woman's breast, then wrote the names of several female officers on it.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a proposal by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a vastly expanded national wiretapping system misstated the number of telephone lines that the system would enable the F.B.I. to monitor simultaneously in high crime areas of the country.
The new approach would allow  monitoring of one of every 1,000 phone lines, not one of every 100; the system would let the F.B.I. monitor as many as one of every 100 phone calls. (In recent years the nation's law enforcement officials have conducted an annual average of fewer than 850 court-authorized wiretaps -- fewer than one for every 174,000 phone lines.)
A letter from the F.B.I. about its policy appears today on page A28.


Acquisition by Golf Digest
Golf Digest/Tennis Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of The New York Times Company, has acquired PAR Golf Systems Inc., a company based in Portland, Ore.
PAR provides computerized tee time reservation networks and automated pro shop business systems, which provide pro shops with point of sale, inventory, purchasing and member billing information.
The terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
The business will be operated by Golf Digest Information Systems Inc., a new subsidiary of Golf Digest/Tennis Inc.


Grand-Bassam Journal;In One Unbridled Week, a Town's Moment of Truth
Most of the year this abandoned colonial capital, with its fading but still fine buildings and sandy streets, resembles nothing so much as a ghost town.
Even today, residents speak of the wandering spirits left behind by the 1899  yellow fever epidemic that killed off the French administrators who had settled  here, and set this seaside town irrevocably down its path toward slow, sleepy decay.


Retail Sales Growth Is the Lowest in More Than 4 Years
Big retailers reported the lowest monthly sales growth in more than four years yesterday, a sign that the economy is slowing and that buyers might have reached the limits on their credit cards just before the holiday buying season has begun.
The Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company retail composite index, which measures big retailers' sales at stores open at least one year, was up just nine-tenths of 1 percent in October, compared with October 1994, when the index rose 3.99 percent.
Because inflation has been running at about 2.6 percent on an annual basis, the October results mean that overall sales did not keep pace with inflation.


Holyfield Has Warning About Rules for Bowe
Three fights, three trainers, same heart.
Evander Holyfield survived an uppercut that Riddick Bowe threw from the sidewalks of Brooklyn in their first fight.
He grew stronger after a paraglider sailed into the ropes to interrupt their second fight in the sixth round.
And now he is fortified by his hometown Atlanta Braves' World Series victory to help motivate him for Bowe-Holyfield III on Saturday night.


Chief for WNYC Group
With New York City's radio stations, WNYC-AM and -FM, about to be sold to the nonprofit foundation that has been raising their funds, the foundation has named a new president and chief executive officer, Laura Walker, officials said last night.
Ms.
Walker, 37, is a vice president at the Children's Television Workshop and served as a producer for National Public Radio and Carnegie Hall.
She is to take over at the WNYC Foundation in December, several months before the city turns over the stations.
They are being sold to the foundation for $20 million, spread over six years.


FOUR M ACQUIRING ST. JOE'S PAPER MILL, BOX PLANTS
The St.
Joe Paper Company of Jacksonville, Fla., announced a deal yesterday to sell 16 box plants and its pulp and paper mill for $390 million, taking a big step to divest its noncore assets.
Box USA, owned by the Four M Corporation of Valhalla, N.Y., the largest privately held corrugated box maker in the nation, is acquiring the East Coast box plants.
It is also buying the pulp and paper mill in Port St.
Joe, Fla., in a joint venture with the Stone Container Corporation of Chicago.
After the sales, St.
Joe Paper will be left with one million acres of forest land and property in Florida, among other assets.
St.
Joe Paper shares fell $1.125, to $59.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Defense Lawyer Admits Failure to Pay Taxes
Stephen G. Murphy, the combative lawyer for defendants in some of New York City's most closely watched cases, pleaded guilty yesterday to nonpayment of state and city taxes.
Under a plea agreement, Mr.
Murphy, 52, admitted a single misdemeanor count of failing to file a return on income generated by his law practice.
Judge John  Cataldo of Manhattan Criminal Court fined Mr.
Murphy $5,000 and ordered him to perform 50 hours of community service.


I.B.M. PLANNING $1.4 BILLION INVESTMENT AT CHIP PLANTS
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it planned to invest $1.4 billion at its existing chip plants in France and Vermont, beginning next year.
The move brings I.B.M.'s total investment for expanding chip production to $3.6 billion over several years.
I.B.M. plans to spend about $1 billion to make 64-megabit memory chips at its plant in Essonnes, France.
The plant now makes 4- and 16-megabit chips.
The company also intends to spend $400 million to expand production of logic chips, like microprocessors, embedded controllers and multimedia chips, at its plant in Burlington, Vt.


3 Beautiful Roommates, and They're All Doctors
Is Sidney Sheldon a feminist?
That's debatable.
What's certain is that the best-selling novelist keeps his eye on young women viewers, who make up most of  the prime-time audience and are especially treasured by advertisers.
His latest  mini-series, "Sidney Sheldon's 'Nothing Lasts Forever,' " on CBS Sunday and Tuesday, revolves around three beautiful and struggling women doctors who leave  most of their male colleagues looking like either jackasses or monsters.
"Nothing Lasts Forever" is relatively modest Sheldon.
There are no dizzying jet tours of international locations.
Jaclyn Smith does not pop up as America's  Ambassador to Romania (that was "Windmills of the Gods").
This time around, perhaps exhausted, Mr.
Sheldon limits himself to San Francisco, specifically the Embarcadero City Hospital and its motley staff of brilliant women and resentful  men.
One problem: With hospital series once again breathing heavily on prime time, Mr.
Sheldon's bedside manner seems rather stodgy.
Where "E.R." zips, "Nothing Lasts Forever" plods.


Donald F. Othmer Dies at 91; Acclaimed Chemical Engineer
Donald F. Othmer, an innovative chemical engineer who combined an inquisitive mind, a practical nature and gift for manual dexterity into an acclaimed career  as an educator, inventor, entrepreneur and philanthropist, died on Wednesday at  Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Othmer, who had been a professor at Polytechnic University for more than 60 years, was 91.
Although Polytechnic was his base from the time he joined the faculty of the  university's fledgling chemical engineering department in 1932, Dr.
Othmer, who  served for many years as department chairman and helped transform the obscure college in Brooklyn into one of the nation's leading technological centers, had  a wide-ranging career.


Dersch, City Star, Headed to Virginia
WILLIE DERSCH, one of the most highly touted schoolboy basketball players in  the city, yesterday announced that he made an oral commitment to the University  of Virginia.
The 6-foot-5-inch guard from Holy Cross High School in Flushing, Queens, chose Virginia over North Carolina and Duke.
Last season, Dersch averaged 21.4 points, 7.3 rebounds and 4.3 assists.


INSIDE
Car Bombs Hit Gaza Strip


Excerpts From the Ruling Broadening Adoption Law
Following are excerpts from the New York State Court of Appeals decision today holding that a couple, homosexual or heterosexual, does not have to be married to adopt a child together.
The vote was 4 to 3.
Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye wrote the majority opinion, and Associate Judge Joseph W. Bellacosa wrote the dissent.


Velarde Joins Yankees' Free-Agent List
RANDY VELARDE, a valuable member of the team this year, and RICK HONEYCUTT, a late-season pickup, joined JACK McDOWELL and MIKE STANLEY as Yankee free agents  yesterday.
DON MATTINGLY, WADE BOGGS and DAVID CONE are among the Yankees who remain eligible.
Velarde, a .278 hitter who played the infield and the outfield, and Honeycutt were among 17 players who filed yesterday.
Others included ALVARO  ESPINOZA and TONY PENA of Cleveland, LUIS POLONIA of Atlanta, HAL MORRIS of Cincinnati and CHARLIE HAYES of Philadelphia.
Oakland offered pitcher TODD STOTTLEMYRE salary arbitration, meaning he won't be able to be a free agent.
The Texas Rangers bought out the option in outfielder OTIS NIXON's contract for $350,000 instead of paying him a $2.6 million salary for next season.
Reliever PAUL ASSENMACHER reached agreement with the Indians on a two-year deal for $825,000 a year and an option for a third year at the same salary or a $50,000 buyout.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Penn-Princeton


CHRONICLE
GEORGE M. WHITE, the Architect of the Capitol, accomplished something few others have done, Associate Justice SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR of the Supreme Court said at a dinner in his honor on Wednesday.
"He managed to move the left wing and the right wing of the Court closer together," she remarked, adding, "I refer, of course, to his decision some years ago to enable the Court to put two angles in its bench so that the Justices sitting at either end could see each other."


In America;Strength in Numbers
On Tuesday Secretary of Labor Robert Reich said, "There is something wrong with rising profits, rising productivity and a soaring stock market, but employee compensation heading nowhere."
The Labor Department had just reported that an expanding economy had driven stock prices to record levels in the past year but the earnings of American workers had risen by only 2.7 percent, the smallest annual increase on record.


No Headline
I'm extremely nervous what Christmas will bring.
There really isn't anything out there so awe inspiring fashion-wise or trend-wise that people think they just have to buy it.
Just walk through your local mall and everywhere it's jeans, jeans and jeans." -- PHILIP ABBENHAUS, senior retail analyst at Stifel, Nicolaus &amp; Co., a securities brokerage in St. Louis. [D1:3.]


A Premiere and Works By Mozart and Beethoven
The American Symphony Chamber Orchestra's program on Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall would have made more sense to a listener who got some message either from Richard Wilson's playing of Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 16 in D (K.  451) or from the premiere of Mr.
Wilson's own "Pamietam."
Mr.
Wilson is chairman of the music department at Vassar College and composer in residence of the American Symphony Orchestra.
While he probably has deep feeling for and understanding of the Mozart concerto, none of this helped him play it well or interestingly.


Endgame for the International Court
The work of dictators, torturers and death squad assassins depends on impunity.
They know no one in their own countries can touch them, and while they may be aware of international laws against genocide, war crimes and the atrocities known as crimes against humanity, they also know that these laws are  just words.
But that may change.
With the end of the cold war, the United Nations reopened debate on an idea kicking around since the Nuremberg tribunals 50 years ago.
The idea is to set up a permanent international criminal court, as a counterpart to the World Court, which deals with disputes between nations.
The U.N.'s Sixth Committee, which handles legal affairs, is now considering whether  to relegate the court to what is essentially the oblivion of permanent debate or set up a diplomatic conference to write a draft that nations can agree on.


At the Auctions This Fall, The Really Expensive Art
THE stakes for Impressionist, modern and contemporary masterworks keep rising as the number of multimillion-dollar paintings at auction grows.
The reason is more providential than practical: the deaths of several passionate collectors over the past year mean an infusion of fresh art into the market.
Important estate material is crucial to both Sotheby's and Christie's.
It's the bait that  catches the other big fish.
But whether the waters will be rough or smooth over the next two weeks, when  about $350 million worth of art is offered for sale in Manhattan, is anyone's guess.
The fact that anything can (and does) happen in the auction room makes these sales the art world's most popular sport.
Spectators and players alike are affected.
Auction prices give dealers a barometer by which to gauge their own material.
Moreover, the mood in the auction room is contagious.
It affects the buying and selling climate around the world.


Rimbaud: Portrait of the Artist as a Young Boor
Long before there were rock stars, there was rock star attitude, as displayed with spectacular insolence by the teen-age French poet Arthur Rimbaud.
Rimbaud's long shadow reaches not only into academe, where the writing he did before abandoning poetry at 20 is still much admired, but also into popular culture, where Bob Dylan, Jim Morrison or Patti Smith would not have been possible without him.
Furiously hallucinogenic imagery (fueled by hashish and absinthe), bourgeoisie-skewering rudeness, mysticism, proud bisexuality and an adolescent taste for despair have all served to keep Rimbaud's legend alive and kicking.
And now Agnieszka Holland's "Total Eclipse," about the tortured friendship Rimbaud shared with the older poet Paul Verlaine, tries to bring that kick to the screen.


Clinton Seeks to Shore Up Muslim-Croat Federation
On the second day of Balkan peace talks here, the outlines of the Clinton Administration's strategy are already clear: strengthen the Muslim-Croat federation and seek to oust the separatist Bosnian Serb leadership as a means to cement the fragile unity of the single Bosnian state envisaged in any peace agreement.
A statement issued today by the State Department said the Bosnian President,  Alija Izetbegovic, and the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, had agreed on steps to shore up the tenous federation brokered last year by the United States.


A Stunning View Inside an Incubator for Stars
The dramatic new scenes captured by the Hubble Space Telescope might be called Dawn of Creation.
Bathed in a flood of ultraviolet light from nearby young, hot stars, billowing columns of cold gas and dust rise ominously out of a dark molecular cloud like stalagmites from the floor of a cavern.
At the tips of these columns, six trillion miles high, gases are so dense that they collapse under their own weight, giving birth to more new stars.


MCI Pager to Provide Sports Information
The MCI Communications Corporation said today that along with the News Corporation, the owner of the Fox television network, it would introduce a sports pager, the first product from their joint venture, which was announced in May.
The pager will deliver sports news and scores and will double as a standard alphanumeric beeper.
The cost of the service will be the same as for a normal MCI pager.


Lovelorn and Loose In an Uptight Milieu
How dare you waste your life moping over what you don't have?
Jump into the carnival of the moment and get caught up in the swirl!
That unoriginal message,  trumpeted in movies from "Zorba the Greek" to "Harold and Maude," is given a refreshing new spin in Doris Dorrie's "Nobody Loves Me," an anarchic urban comedy that aggressively inveighs against Germanic uptightness.
Its central character, Fanny Fink (Maria Schrader), is a love-starved young woman in Cologne, Germany, with a morbid streak so acute it drives her to take classes in "conscious dying." In one session, Fanny and her fellow
thanatologists rehearse their own suicides by stuffing plastic bags over their heads.
In another, they design and build their own coffins.
Fanny even endures a mock burial in which she is lowered into the ground, staring impassively through her coffin's Plexiglas lid as dirt is shoveled onto her face.


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- Libraries;Doors Remaining Open, But to Fewer New Books
When municipal budget cuts fall, public libraries are often the first to make sacrifices.
So at first glance, it seems remarkable that across all five boroughs, every New York City branch library remains open six days a week, the result of a much-touted commitment made by Mayor David N. Dinkins in late 1993 and continued by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But the restoration of library days, after a period four years ago when many  branches were open only two or three days a week, came at a price.


Gingrich Introduces an Agenda for a Campaign Reform Panel
Five months after he shook hands with President Clinton, agreeing to create a bipartisan commission on campaign reform, Speaker Newt Gingrich today outlined a sweeping agenda that would go far beyond the questions of election spending and  lobbying that the two men discussed last summer.
Proposing an examination into what Mr.
Gingrich described as "power and political reform in an information age," the Speaker told a House committee that the commission should wrestle with such matters as the "rise of the media oligarchies" and that the influence wielded by candidates who are also "millionaires and billionaires."


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
PIET MONDRIAN, Sidney Janis Gallery, 110 West 57th Street (through Dec. 15).
A counterpoint to the current Museum of Modern Art show, this one stresses Mondrian's early years, when he was doing works that can sometimes look almost photographic.
And it includes beautiful landscape sketches from the crucial time around 1908 when he discovered modernism and remade himself from a painter of the 19th century into an artist of the 20th (Michael Kimmelman).


A Front-Runner's Commercial
of the first Presidential primary, begin on Friday.
It will later run in other states, including New Hampshire.
The 30-second commercial, titled "Historic Conservative Reforms," contrasts Mr.
Dole's conservative record with what the advertisement portrays as President Clinton's liberalism.


For Graf, a Bitter Year and an Uncertain Future
She doesn't want to be a witness for the prosecution and she doesn't like these feelings of persecution.
The world's No. 1 tennis player should be busy celebrating the end to a banner year that brought her three Grand Slam titles.
Instead, she is hiring tax-law strategists and criminal-defense lawyers and cringing each time she gets too close to a radio or TV or newspaper in Europe.
Her life has become an open ledger book there and hers is the debacle inquiring minds can't seem to get enough of.


First Operating Profit For Nissan in 4 Years
The Nissan Motor Company, benefiting from years of restructuring efforts, said yesterday that it had swung to an operating profit in its fiscal first half and that its pretax and net losses had narrowed sharply.
The operating profit was the first in four years for Nissan, Japan's second-largest auto manufacturer.
Although the operating result was not large enough to enable the company to post a profit on the pretax level, Nissan said that it expected a pretax profit for the full fiscal year.
The results are for the parent company only.
Earnings for the full Nissan group will be released later.


Restaurants
If you walk into Hudson River Club on a clear afternoon, your eye is instantly drawn to the sun sparkling off the water.
The light seems to gather where the currents come together, right at the tip of the island, and the clouds speed past the Statue of Liberty, casting patterns on the river.
The result is a landscape that changes constantly, shifting in an instant from darkly brooding to light and romantic.
It is always dazzling.
Look away for a second and cast your eyes on another dazzling sight: the prices at Hudson River Club are among the highest in town.
At lunch, appetizers  are $9 to $14, main courses $24 to $27.
Dinner is even more expensive.
This sedate and conservative room is clearly expense-account territory.


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- Schools;In Class, Musical Chairs With Very Little Music
Even a fifth-grade math student could understand the fiscal pressures bearing down on the New York City schools over the last year.
While immigration has helped nudge enrollment up by an estimated 2 percent, or 20,000 students, since  last year, the system's budget has fallen nearly 5 percent, or $400 million.
Something, of course, had to give.
And in almost every case, it has been the  schools themselves, which have herded students into larger classes supervised by fewer teachers, eliminated some music and art classes, canceled junior varsity sports and asked parents to donate supplies as basic as copy paper.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Piano Works
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
During the first 15 years of his professional life, Bartok was known primarily as a virtuoso pianist, an innovative piano pedagogue and a path-breaking ethnomusicologist.
All these activities decisively shaped his large body of compositions for solo piano.


Palestinian Car Bombers Die in 2 Attacks on Israeli Buses
In attacks only minutes apart, Palestinian car bombers blew themselves up near two Israeli buses in the Gaza Strip today, killing themselves and slightly  wounding 11 Israelis.
A combination of luck and the response of security forces put distance between the buses and the cars that were carrying the bombs, preventing more casualties, officials said.


Goldstein Guides Jumping Champion
Margie Goldstein of the United States Equestrian Team piloted La Costa to a score of 1,140 points to win the $10,000 International and Open Jumping Gambler's Choice Stake at the National Horse Show tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Chris Kappler of Pittstown, N.J., closed the session when he took the blue ribbon in the $10,000 International and Open Fault and Out aboard Abracadabra, scoring 20 points in 38.23 seconds.


Unidentified American Team Member Has Failed Drug Test
A United States swimmer has tested positive for banned drugs, creating a delicate situation for American swimming officials preparing to lead the fight for stringent international anti-drug programs.
The United States swimming federation confirmed that the swimmer, whom they would not identify, had failed a drug test at the United States national championships in Pasadena, Calif., in August.


House Rejects Plan To Restrict the Use Of Pollution Laws
The House, seeking a more moderate path on environmental issues, voted by a solid margin today against Republican leaders' proposals to restrict how the Environmental Protection Agency enforces pollution laws.
It was the third time this year that the House voted on 17 hotly debated restrictions attached to the agency's spending bill.
This summer it voted to remove them, and later voted to restore them.
As in the earlier, see-saw voting,
moderate Republicans led the effort, providing the crucial margin against party  leaders.


4 Indicted in School Betting
Students at Nutley High School were placing up to $7,500 a week in sports bets, prosecutors say.
Yesterday an Essex County grand jury indicted four men accused of running the gambling ring.
Two juveniles have already pleaded guilty and are cooperating in the case against the men, who were arrested in March.


Giants' Defense Told Not to Let Good Reviews Go to Its Head
The Giants' defense has played well recently and the defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, wants to make sure it stays that way.
So Nolan called a meeting this morning and told the players to keep their heads on straight and not get cocky.
In other words, don't believe the hype.
A lot has been said and written recently about how well the Giants have played defensively, especially some of their younger players like linebacker Jessie Armstead, linemen Jamal Duff and Michael Strahan and defensive backs like Thomas Randolph, Phillippi Sparks and Tito Wooten.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


CHRONICLE
A tale of two babies, three parents and two press agents.
ROBERT De NIRO and his former companion TOUKIE SMITH are the parents of twin  boys born on Oct. 20 to a surrogate mother.


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sector by sector;How New Yorkers Feel Budget Squeeze
At Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, one physician is now responsible for the care of all 60 patients in two of the hospital's general medical wards each  night from 8 P.M. to 6 A.M.
Doctors consider that a nearly impossible task; until recently, five doctors, including several residents, covered the shift.
At Joseph Pulitzer Intermediate School in Jackson Heights, Queens, some classes were so overcrowded this week that in one class, nine students had to stand all through class, using windowsills or the tops of radiators as desks.


Now Playing in the N.B.A., the Raptors and the Grizzlies
No matter what happens Friday night at the Skydome, it is guaranteed to make  history.
Opening night in the National Basketball Association has arrived, featuring the debut of two Canadian expansion teams -- the Toronto Raptors and the Vancouver Grizzlies.
While the Grizzlies are opening on the road against the Portland Trail Blazers, the Raptors will make a festive debut against the Nets,  before a crowd that is expected to surpass 30,000.


Guard-Rich Pacers Release Damon Bailey
DAMON BAILEY, Indiana basketball's favorite son since the eighth grade but buried by an abundance of point guards on the Indiana Pacers, was released by the team yesterday.
"In all fairness to him, he needs to play a new position, and that's something I'm hopeful will happen to him by playing somewhere else," Coach LARRY BROWN said of the 6-foot-3-inch Bailey, who became a schoolboy legend in Indiana as a shooter.


Sports of The Times;Joe Torre As Manager? 'So Be It'
THE real question is not whether Joe Torre is the best manager for the Yankees.
If that question were relevant, why, then, Buck Showalter would still be managing the Yankees, and loyal fans would not be wondering if they really want to support George's habit any longer.
Showalter did a terrific job.
Knows the organization.
Has the respect of the  players.
But the owner aced him out.
The owner gets everybody, sooner or later.
The real question is, what's a nice fellow like Torre doing in a place like this?
The theory here is that he is saving some more tender heart from the greasy agony of working for George Steinbrenner.


For Children
'Painting With My Granddaughter' Ceres Gallery 584 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo (212) 226-4725 Recommended ages: 3 and up Through tomorrow


AT&amp;T AGREES TO PAY $90 MILLION TO SETTLE CELLULAR CLAIM
The Charisma Communications Corporation said yesterday that the AT&amp;T Corporation had agreed to pay $90 million to former Charisma shareholders to settle claims arising from the sale of its cellular properties to AT&amp;T's McCaw Cellular unit.
AT&amp;T confirmed the settlement, which it said would cost $118 million, including legal fees.
A provision for the sum had already been made, an AT&amp;T spokesman said.
As part of the deal, a settlement was reached between Charisma and Maxcell Telecom Plus Inc., a unit of TPI Enterprises Inc. of West Palm Beach, Fla., Charisma said.
The disputed sale took place in 1986, before AT&amp;T's 1994 purchase of McCaw.


Setback for Gay Rights
In a defeat for gay rights advocates, the House has voted to repeal a District of Columbia law that allows city workers to register domestic partners  for health benefits.
Lawmakers voted 249 to 172 for the repeal on Wednesday.


Art in Review


Astronauts Ignite Fuel in Space Experiment
Astronauts on the space shuttle Columbia ignited drops of fuel today in an experiment intended to improve safety in space and reduce pollution on Earth.
The fuel burned longer than it would on Earth -- more than 40 seconds in some cases -- and produced more soot than expected.
Most of the flames were round, rather than teardrop-shaped, because of the absence of gravity.


Rates to Rise 2% at Most Under Plan to Protect City Reservoirs
Water rates will rise 1 to 2 percent, or less than $7 a year for the average  residential customer, under a $1.2 billion plan bringing upstate and urban interests together to protect New York City's drinking water.
The plan, released yesterday, is intended to avert the need to build a multibillion-dollar filtration plant and promote nonpolluting economic development around the city's 19 upstate reservoirs.


Robin Hardy, Writer, 43
Robin Hardy, a writer who founded the Publishing Triangle, an association of  lesbians and gay men in publishing, died on Saturday in Arizona.
He was 43 and lived in Tucson.
He died in a mountaineering accident in Tonto National Forest, according to Houghton Mifflin, for which he was working on his latest book, "The Landscape of Death: Gay Men, AIDS and the Crisis of Desire."


IMMUNEX OFFER FROM AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS
The American Home Products Corporation has offered to pay $14.50 a share, or  about $263 million, for all shares of the Immunex Corporation that it does not already own, Immunex said yesterday.
Shares of Immunex, based in Seattle, rose $3.6875, or nearly 31 percent, to $15.6875, in Nasdaq trading.
The biopharmaceutical company said it is reviewing the unsolicited offer.
American Home Products, a drug and health care products company based in Madison, N.J., owns 54.6 percent of Immunex's stock.
Its shares were unchanged, at $88.75, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Commemorating Bartok's Death
Special events to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the death of Bela Bartok take place this weekend and next week.
"Bartok and His World," a series of concerts and lectures presented by the Bard Music Festival in New York, will  be held at Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center.
Admission is $15 for afternoon programs and $25 for evening events; there is also a $60 ticket good for all events.
Information: (212) 875-5050; tickets can be purchased through Centercharge, (212) 721-6500.
Other Bartok concerts include performances by the  Budapest Festival Orchestra at Carnegie Hall and the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at Alice Tully Hall.
Here is a schedule.
Unless otherwise noted,  concerts are at Alice Tully Hall.


Malls Hope Make-Overs Will Attract the Affluent
Not so long ago, most shopping malls seemed to be principally the domain of teen-agers, who cruised through them regularly in search of cheap shirts, Orange Julius and each other.
But here at the King of Prussia mall, which opened its doors today as one of  the biggest and glitziest examples of mall renovations in the country, Judy George envisions a rather different customer.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's recent discussion with the writer Ben Wattenberg about his missteps in office included an incomplete quotation from Mr.
Wattenberg in some editions.
His comment should have read, "For someone like myself who's literally been writing for 20 years that the Democrats are not going to make headway until they acknowledge they've made some mistakes, it was a joy to hear that."


Ads for women are put on a pedestal, showing how times change.
YOU'VE come a long way, baby.
Don't hate me because I'm beautiful.
Always a bridesmaid but never a bride.
Fly me!
I dreamed I barged down the Nile in my Maidenform bra.
Does she . . . or doesn't she?
For more than 100 years, Madison Avenue has been placing women in the center  ring of the cacophonous circus known as the American consumerist society.
The development of mass-produced products in the late 19th century required that women, as the primary shoppers, be tutored in the purported problems of urbanized life, from halitosis to B. O., and the benefits that name brands claimed in solving those supposed woes.


Gaffney Holds Lead in Suffolk Race
In his four years as Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney has often faded into the background, overshadowed by an aggressive County Legislature and  a combative, colorful District Attorney.
But when brush fires swept across the heart of eastern Long Island two months ago, Mr.
Gaffney took center stage, marshaling firefighters and appearing hourly on live news reports from the front lines.


Factory Orders Kept Rising In September, but Rate Slowed
The Commerce Department said today that strong demand for commercial aircraft pushed factory orders higher in September, though the orders grew at only half the rate recorded in August.
The report added to signs that the manufacturing economy is slowing under the weight of bulging supplies of goods, with caution evident ahead of the holiday shopping season.


Challenge to a Fare Rise Draws on Civil Rights
A last-ditch legal challenge to New York City's looming transit-fare increase went before a Federal judge yesterday, with a hearing that featured the arcana of budgets and sharply differing notions of what the law requires.
During the six-hour hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. repeatedly showed signs of sympathy for the claim that the fare increase, scheduled to take effect on Nov. 12, would violate civil rights law because it would fall heavily on the city's minority population.


Crude Prices Hit 6-Week High As Concerns Grow About Supply
Crude oil prices jumped on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday as concerns continued about a tight supply.
In other commodities trading, wheat prices tumbled on signs of waning export  demand.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities rose 0.87 point, to 243.83.


Art in Review
Tim Hawkinson Ace Gallery 275 Hudson Street, near Spring Street South Village Through Nov. 11


Fish Poisoning Has an Ancient History
To the Editor:
"A Food Fad's Ripple Effect on Reefs of Pacific: Cyanide" (front page, Oct. 31), reporting that many coral reefs are being damaged by the poison some fishermen use to stun and catch fish for the Hong Kong restaurant trade, describes a new variation on an ancient theme.


Home Video
Objection Sustained


Shaw Revised Shaw
To the Editor:
In response to the Oct. 26 letter discussing the "mawkish revision" of "Pygmalion" by the creators of "My Fair Lady," it's wrong to characterize George Bernard Shaw as a victim.
Long before the musical was conceived, Shaw himself returned Eliza to Henry Higgins in the screenplay for the film version starring  Wendy Hiller and Leslie Howard.
Whether or not he was the sole author of the film version, he was given on-screen credit for the adaptation.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a survey of large institutional shareholders misstated the surname of the chief executive of Russell Reynolds Associates in some references.
He is Hobson Brown Jr.
In addition, because of a production error, part of the final paragraph of the article was omitted in some editions.
It should have read: "Investors were most inclined to have a board dismiss a chief executive if he committed a personal impropriety unrelated to the company. In such cases, 19 percent would demand dismissal, while 48 percent said directors should ask for a formal explanation and 24 percent would seek a performance review."


THOMAS &amp; BETTS BUYING AMERACE FOR $220 MILLION
The Thomas &amp; Betts Corporation, a producer of electrical and electronic components, said yesterday that it would acquire Amerace, a subsidiary of the Eagle Industrial Products Corporation, for $220 million in cash.
Amerace supplies electrical products to utility and industrial markets.
Shares of Thomas &amp; Betts, which is based in Memphis, rose $1.375, to $66.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


A First Lady's Protest
Thousands marched up Broadway -- health care workers, hospital executives, union officials and Democratic politicians -- to protest the proposed Republican cuts in spending for Medicare and Medicaid.
Hillary Rodham Clinton joined them as they massed in Times Square at the height of rush hour.
She promised the crowd -- who shouted and waved banners -- that her husband would veto any budget that cut too deeply into the two vast Federal health care programs.
Article, page B3.


Art in Review
Winston Roeth Stark Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Nov. 11


Wanted in Levittown: Just One Little Box With Ticky Tacky Intact
SOMEDAY, Anne Martin and Lynn Matarrese hope to find the perfect house: two bdrms, 1 bth, asbstos shngls.
If the house should happen to boast an unpaved driveway, an unflowered lawn -- well, that might be asking too much.
But they can dream.
"Gosh," Ms.
Martin said.
"That would be great."


CHRONICLE
The AGA KHAN has gone to court in Geneva to try to stop his former wife, Princess SALIMA AGA KHAN, from selling about $11 million in jewelry, The Daily Telegraph of London reported yesterday.
The Aga Khan, the spiritual leader of the world's Ismaili Muslims, told the court that the settlement reached when the couple divorced in March, which granted his wife of 26 years about $80 million, specified that most of the jewelry remain with his family.
His lawyers argued that the agreement recognized Princess Salima as the owner of the lavish collection of more than 250 pieces but stipulated that barring extreme financial need, the bulk of it remain in the
hands of the Aga Khan's family.
It also gave him the right of first refusal should any pieces be put up for sale.


Dell Agrees to Stop Claims Over Patent
The Dell Computer Corporation agreed today to drop patent claims on a widely  used computer component, settling Federal Trade Commission charges that it was unfairly restricting competition.
The commission had charged that Dell, based in Austin, Tex., asserted patent  rights on technology used in a computer's "VL bus" after participating in a group that adopted industrywide design standards for the device.
A VL bus
transfers instructions from a computer's central processing unit to disk drives, video displays and other equipment.


A Tomasson Premiere By the San Franciscans
Splendid is the word for the second program the San Francisco Ballet presented on Wednesday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street).
With a world premiere by Helgi Tomasson, New York premieres by Mark Morris and David Bintley  and a Neo-Classical masterpiece like George Balanchine's 1972 "Stravinsky Violin Concerto," the choreography was first-class and then some.
To say specific ballets are better than others may sound hopelessly subjective.
Yet all art builds a consensus with respect to quality, whatever the taste involved (one might not like Picasso or Balanchine, but everyone agrees they are major artists).
In short, there is a high level of genuine artistic expression that is always recognizable as such, and it was felt throughout an evening leavened with originality.


Research Links Single Gene To Almost All Breast Cancers
A gene whose malfunction was thought to cause only a small proportion of breast cancers now appears to be at the heart of nearly all of them, researchers report.
The finding may lead to new ways to give a prognosis and to treat breast cancer, but there is no immediate action recommended for women who have breast cancer or are concerned about a genetic predisposition to the disease.


Numbers Say Jets' Offense Belongs to Dead-Ball Era
In this frustrating season for the Jets, their offense has struggled to score, even to move the ball.
How big a struggle?
These weekly statistics from the National Football League show how the Jets stand among the 30 teams:


South Korea to Pay More to Maintain G.I.'s
South Korea has agreed to increase its share of the cost of American troops here by 10 percent a year for three years, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today after two days of talks.


Stocks Rally in Japan
Stocks surged here today in a frenzy of buying in the final minutes of trading.
Shares of technology exporters were among the leaders, encouraged by the dollar's strength against the Japanese yen.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 554.31 points, or 3.17 percent, at 18,028.80, slightly less than the day's high of 18,039.86.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange will be closed on Friday because of a national holiday, Culture Day.


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- Parking;A Bureau's New Focus: Towing and Collecting
Like most other areas of city government, the Parking Violations Bureau has been forced to choose which services to reduce and which to preserve.
So the bureau's administrators are devoting more resources to towing away cars and tracking down people who have not paid their tickets.
Meanwhile, they have cut back the number of clerks who answer the phones and staff the windows where tickets are paid and questions from the public are answered.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


AST RESEARCH HIRES A FORMER APPLE EXECUTIVE
AST Research Inc. yesterday named a former No. 2 executive of Apple Computer  Inc. as president and chief executive.
Ian W. Diery, 46, who led Apple's United  States organization and hardware business before resigning in April, will oversee worldwide operations at AST.
AST, based in Irvine, Calif., also announced that it had reached an agreement with the Samsung Electronics Company  of South Korea to increase its 40 percent stake in AST.
Under the deal, Samsung, a unit of the Samsung Group, will extend $100 million in credit to AST, and in return will increase its stake to 49.9 percent.
It will also gain two additional board seats, giving it majority representation.
The companies also agreed to negotiate further support arrangements under which Samsung's interest  could increase to as much as 60 percent.


Mandela Party Leads in Local Vote
Although ballot-counting in local council elections will not be finished until late Friday, President Nelson Mandela's African National Congress party appears to have lost none of its popularity with South African voters.
Rough tallies of initial results indicated this evening that the Congress was doing about as well as it had 18 months ago, when it won 64 percent of the vote.


Nelson Era Starts With Two Big Challenges
His reputation as a game-film junkie aside, Don Nelson has watched more than  his share of monster movies recently.
They all involve an emerging star terrorizing the people who try to guard him.
Grant Hill and the Detroit Pistons and Glen Robinson and the Milwaukee Bucks  stand between Nelson and a successful debut weekend as life after Pat Riley officially begins for the Knicks.


An Apple Computer Executive Resigns, the 4th in a Year
Daniel L. Eilers, Apple Computer Inc.'s head of worldwide marketing, abruptly resigned today, the fourth senior executive to leave the company in the last year.


High-Tech Network Seeks Female Voters
A bipartisan coalition of 110 women's groups announced today that it would try to mobilize women to vote next year through a high-tech network of faxes, e-mail and Internet homepages.
"Seventy-five years after suffragists won women the right to vote, voting is  not yet a habit for American women," said Irene Natividad, chairwoman of the coalition Women's Vote '96.


Tarpley Won't Start Season With Mavs
Roy Tarpley, who has an inflamed pancreas and has not completed a team physical, was placed on the suspended list by the Dallas Mavericks today for the start of the season.
The decision, which reduced the team's roster to the limit  of 12 players, means the Mavericks will pay nothing toward Tarpley's $3.9 million salary.


METRO DIGEST
HOW NEW YORKERS FEEL BUDGET SQUEEZE Over the last 10 months, the city and state governments have made extraordinary  cuts in spending, and additional cuts from Washington seem virtually certain.
The effects are just beginning to reverberate throughout New York City.
An examination by The New York Times shows that shrinking the size and cost of government has produced a significant diminution in services. [Page A1.]


N. W. Ayer Adds P.R. Agency
N.
W.
Ayer &amp; Partners in New York said yesterday that it had acquired the Spencer Communications Group in New York, a public relations agency, and merged  it with Ayer Public Relations.
The terms were not disclosed.
Spencer has seven employees and billings estimated at $600,000 from clients like the Seagram Company and Time Warner Cable of New York.
Ayer Public Relations has eight employees and billings estimated at $1 million from clients  like the General Motors Corporation and the Kitchenaid appliance unit of the Whirlpool Corporation.
Justin Newby, 35, the chairman and chief executive of
Spencer, was named senior vice president and senior partner at Ayer Public Relations, and Eric Ewell, 33, the president of Spencer, was named a vice president and partner.


Market Place;In Bidding for Center, Is Board Too Close to Rockefeller?
As the battle for control of Rockefeller Center grinds on, some combatants are questioning the independence of the directors of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that is scheduled to take ownership of the trophy property when it emerges from bankruptcy protection.
David Rockefeller, whose father built the Art Deco center in the 1930's,


At Last, a Watershed Agreement
Every once in a while something happens to demonstrate the powers of firm political leadership coupled with the good will of ordinary citizens.
A case in  point is the agreement announced yesterday between New York City and upstate communities to clean up the 2,000-square-mile watershed that supplies drinking water to seven million city dwellers and one million suburbanites.
There are weaknesses in the plan, but it represents a huge step forward.
On a purely financial level, it will spare the city and its taxpayers the cost of building an $8 billion filtration plant.
Politically, it represents a rare triumph of good sense over once insurmountable grievances.


Paying Tribute to History in a Personal Way
When Maya Lin, as a 21-year-old college student, envisioned an eloquently simple black wall and won the competition to design the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, her ideas were summarily attacked.
Something similar happened to Freida Lee Mock's documentary, "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision," when it won last year's Academy Award at the expense of "Hoop Dreams," widely regarded as a more suitable and deserving Oscar choice.
As it turns out, there was good reason for the latter uproar.
While Ms.
Mock's film offers an admiring look at a bold, iconoclastic artist, it is not remotely on a par with either "Hoop Dreams" or "Crumb" (also among the documentaries "Maya Lin" eclipsed) when it comes to insight or daring.
Directed  dutifully but unsurprisingly as a portrait of the artist at work, this film offers articulate analysis without generating any particular passion.
There are  lengthy scenes of tearful visitors to monuments that Ms.
Lin has designed, but these supply only secondhand emotion.


His Jog Is Our Jam
To the Editor:
I'm a New Yorker, born and bred, seen it all, as they say.
On my father's shoulders I watched the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev entering the Carlyle  Hotel just after making his shoe-banging speech, viewed motorcades of the great  world leaders.
I have to say I was even proud of the way New York readied itself for the United Nations anniversary.
The Police Department distinguished itself in its management of the comings and goings of our pre-eminent guests.


Flames Dismiss Their General Manager
The Calgary Flames, suffering through their worst start in history, fired General Manager DOUG RISEBROUGH yesterday.
AL COATES, the Flames' executive vice president who made the decision to dismiss his friend, was more concerned about  the future.
"I gave very, very little regard to the current situation," Coates said yesterday about Calgary's 1-8-3 record, second worst in the league.
"This was not a decision made by the current record of the team. I took a long, hard look at where we're going in the future."


Botanical Garden Gets $16.7 Million
As part of a restoration campaign, the New York Botanical Garden announced its biggest gift ever yesterday: $16.7 million from a trust established under the will of LuEsther T. Mertz, who at her death was chairwoman of Publishers Clearing House.
The gift will be used to increase the garden's small endowment, strengthen children's education programs and build a new restaurant, which will also cater  large events.
With contributions from New York City having fallen by 15 percent  to $4 million since 1989, Gregory Long, president and chief executive officer of the garden, said generating revenue in such ways has become vital.


Mr. Clinton Meets the Enemy
The ability to admit error is a valuable trait for a President -- up to a point.
But for a President to reveal publicly that he does not know where he has been or where he is going upsets the body politic.
Whatever tactical advantage Mr.
Clinton may gain by sliding to the right seems small compared to the danger  that his recent awkward self-flagellations will make Jimmy Carter's announcement that America had the blues look downright clever.
There are plenty of ways to indicate a shift in mood and position that are graceful and befitting the office.
The voters may or may not want someone who feels their pain, but they definitely want someone who knows what he is doing.
It also helps if his analysis of the Administration's history connects more closely with reality than some of Mr.
Clinton's remarks to the columnist Ben Wattenberg.
All this stuff about losing the vocabulary of Democratic change and winding up with a welfare bill not to his liking casts mystifying psychobabble over the actual events.


Allies of Two Minds
From the start, United States officials and their Japanese counterparts never agreed about how to deal with a huge financial institution that misled regulators in both countries and sought to hide losses of $1.1 billion in illegal trades.
But the stunning American response today to the Daiwa Bank scandal again demonstrates the degree to which two powerful nations, which constantly talk to  each other, rarely seem to communicate.


Caught in Fund-Raising Scheme, Charities File Millions in Claims
Religious organizations, colleges, museums and philanthropists caught in the  bankruptcy of the Foundation for a New Era Philanthropy have filed 499 claims that ask for more than $500 million from an organization that folded with only an estimated $31 million in assets.
Lawyers familiar with the case expect that by January, the bankruptcy trustee, Arlin M. Adams, will have drafted at least a tentative plan to address  the creditors' demands.
Unless several hurdles are cleared, the case could become muddled by a flurry of lawsuits.


California Smog Cloud Is Cleaning Up Its Act
The noxious haze of smog that hangs over Los Angeles and the surrounding urban basin has long been the thickest, unhealthiest and most infamous in the country, as much a symbol of the city to many people as Hollywood.
But the latest pollution measurements show that however noxious the cloud might be, determined cleanup efforts are steadily reducing its size and toxicity.


Vote Set on Bills to Keep Government Operating
Republican leaders in Congress said today that they would vote next week on temporary measures to keep the Government in business while lawmakers and President Clinton try to resolve their differences over the budget.
The leaders -- Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip in the  Senate, and Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader in the House -- said no decision had been made on what form the new measures would take or what length of time they would cover.


Powell Record Is Criticized By Conservatives in G.O.P.
The fledging drive to stop Gen.
Colin L. Powell from seeking the Republican Presidential nomination escalated today as a parade of conservatives vilified General Powell as having a flawed military record, as being too liberal on social issues and as posing a grave threat to their party's future.
One speaker, Morton Blackwell, the Republican national committeeman from Virginia, went as far as to suggest that some conservatives were promoting the general only because he is black.


New Chairman For Levitz
Levitz Furniture Inc. said yesterday that it had named Michael Bozic chairman and chief executive, effective immediately.
Analysts viewed the appointment of Mr.
Bosic, the former president and chief  executive of the Hills Stores Company, as a major coup for Levitz, a struggling  retailer.
The news lifted shares of Levitz, which is based in Boca Raton, Fla.,  24 percent, or 75 cents, to $3.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Calling All Malcontents and Assassins
The clammy paranoid sweat that drips from Paul Williams's film "The November  Men" is so pungent that at moments it makes Oliver Stone's conspiracy theories seem like perfumed, Pollyanna-ish daydreams.
Is the movie a joke on Mr.
Stone?
It's never clear how funny this disjointed satirical thriller intends to be.
But its fantasy that a movie about a Presidential assassination plot could trigger the real thing carries the notion of the film maker as political provocateur to ludicrous comic extremes.
Mr.
Williams himself plays Arthur Gwenlyn, an angry leftist director who decides to make a movie about the assassination of President George Bush. ("The  November Men" was completed in 1992 before the election of Bill Clinton.) Instead of recruiting actors to play the conspirators, he enlists a group of malcontents who include two Iraqis, a black nationalist and an emotionally unhinged former Marine sniper named Vincent Duggo (James Andronica), who is signed on as a technical adviser.


Erica Morini, 91, Subtle Violinist Who Explored Concerto Range
Erica Morini, an Austrian-born violinist renowned for her exquisite musicianship as well as a brilliant but unobtrusive technique, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 91 and lived in Manhattan.
Miss Morini was particularly admired for her performances of the concerto repertory, especially the concertos of Ludwig Spohr, which she helped restore to popularity.
She also played and recorded the great concertos of Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms and Tchaikovsky.


Immersed in Business, Funny and Otherwise
Despite its heavy-handed feminist agenda, "A Business Affair" succeeds as a pleasant trifle, thanks to its literate tone and the appeal of the actors it involves in a romantic triangle.
Carole Bouquet, the elegant Chanel model who has been deftly funny in films including "Too Beautiful for You" and "Grosse Fatigue," plays the neglected wife of a successful author (Jonathan Pryce) who locks horns with his publisher (Christopher Walken) over the wife's affections.
Both men find her alluring, which Ms.
Bouquet makes easy to understand.
But this is also the kind of film in which the men show their repressive and buffoonish sides, and Kate (Ms. Bouquet) may just be the biggest literary talent in the bunch.


F.B.I. Isn't Trying to Increase Wiretaps
To the Editor:
Re "F.B.I. Wants Advanced System to Vastly Increase Wiretapping" (front page, Nov. 2):


House G.O.P. Seeking to Bar G.I.'s in Bosnia
House Republicans, spurred on by their aggressive freshman class, are planning stronger measures to try to block President Clinton from sending American troops to enforce a peace in the Balkans.
House members are trying to provoke a constitutional confrontation by introducing legislation to cut off funds for any United States peacekeeping mission, said Representative Mark W. Neumann, a Republican from Wisconsin.
Republican legislators said they believed that such a bill had a good chance of  passing in the House, although its chances in the Senate were considered less certain.


French Loan Rate Cut
The Bank of France cut its interest rate on overnight bank loans by 40 basis  points, to 6.60 percent, signaling its approval of the Government's deficit-cutting plans and an easing of October's weakness of the franc.
The rate for 24-hour bank loans was cut for the second time in 24 days.
It had been lowered from 7.25 percent on Oct. 16.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Diner's Journal
Just listen to this menu: roasted clams with tomatoes on grilled bread with basil aioli.
Buckwheat and sturgeon cakes with salmon roe and confetti creme fraiche.
Lobster congee with deep-fried devils.
Mashed potato cakes filled with  duck confit, pine nuts and roasted garlic.
Clafoutis of potatoes, apples and gingerbread.
Grilled short ribs with horseradish gnocchi.
Wolffish with parsnip  and leek brandade.
Rice pudding brulee.
Now look at the prices: with the exception of the lobster club sandwich, for  which the restaurant is named, nothing on the preview menu at the Lobster Club (available through Sunday) costs more than $16.50.


Rockefeller Sues for More Access to Primaries
In an action that could affect the race for the Republican Presidential nomination, a Republican insurgent yesterday sued to invalidate the rules under  which the party in New York State conducts its primaries.
The plaintiff, Larry Rockefeller, is represented by Richard D. Emery, the civil rights lawyer whose lawsuit toppled the city's Board of Estimate and led to the new City Charter in 1989.
Mr.
Rockefeller, who failed to get on the primary ballot in a challenge to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in 1992, filed the suit yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Advisers to Mrs. Clinton Are Questioned Anew in Foster Case
Under withering questioning by Republicans, two of Hillary Rodham Clinton's closest advisers struggled today to defend their earlier testimony that the First Lady had no role in keeping investigators from the files of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, shortly after he committed suicide two years ago.
Armed with newly available telephone records, Republicans on the Senate Whitewater committee asserted that the two advisers, Margaret A. Williams and Susan P. Thomases, had misled the committee in their testimony last summer and
said that Mrs.
Clinton had been behind the decision to restrict Justice Department investigators from looking at Mr.
Foster's files two days after his death.


A Threat of Violence Ends in Death


Discreetly or Scrappily, They Defied the Soviet Line
Chapter by chapter, the story of Soviet art in this century has been told in  recent exhibitions, and it turns out to be Tolstoyan.
Its first part, meaning the revolutionary years when Lenin and company denounced everything associated with Russia's czarist past, unfolded in events like "The Great Utopia" at the Guggenheim Museum.
The P.S. 1 Museum in Queens presented paintings from the next era, the years when Stalin denounced the art of the revolution.
Those paintings came from the basements of Russian museums to which they had been exiled when Khrushchev denounced Stalin in 1956.
Thirty years or so later, the Soviet people took matters into their own hands and denounced the whole lot of them.
About the art of that volatile period in between, meaning the decades from Khrushchev's 1956 speech to the unraveling of  the Soviet empire that began in the late 1980's, there have been occasional shows, but no major survey.
Until now.


B.P. SELLING NORTHEAST PROPERTIES TO TOSCO
The British Petroleum Company agreed yesterday to sell its refining and marketing assets in the Northeast to the Tosco Corporation.
Tosco, a petroleum refiner and marketer based in Stamford, Conn., said it would pay $75 million for the assets, plus the cost of inventory.
B.P. said it expected the sale price to  total about $235 million.
The sale includes the Marcus Hook refinery near Philadelphia, nine petroleum product terminals and associated pipeline interests in Pennsylvania, Maryland, New Jersey, Massachusetts and Maine.
It also includes a 15-year license agreement for Tosco to sell gasoline under the B.P. name in the Northeast, where B.P. has about 500 service stations.
Tosco shares rose $1.125, to $35.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Stocks Jump, With the Dow Up 41.91 to Another High
Stocks rose sharply yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing to a new high, as weak economic data pushed up bond prices and reignited investors' hopes for lower interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 41.91 points, to 4,808.59, eclipsing its previous high of 4,802.45, reached on Oct. 19.


Fund-Raising Called Unethical
The Hudson County official in charge of insuring fair elections sees nothing  wrong with selling tickets to Democratic fund-raisers.
She says her Republican predecessor sold tickets for the Republicans.


Ex-Im Bank's President Is Stepping Down
Kenneth D. Brody, a former Wall Street executive whose firebrand personality  has transformed the once-lethargic Export-Import Bank, disclosed today that he would leave his post as president and chairman of the Government agency on Dec. 31.
"Our accomplishments have far exceeded my expectations," he said.
"It is now  time to move on and let the next generation of leadership take over."


On Stage, and Off
'King and I' and 'State Fair' in March


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- College;College 'Megasections' Replace Its Electives
At Bernard M. Baruch College, David Rosner's history class has grown so large that he sits in the middle of the room, on a bookshelf, so that his 75 students  can hear him.
A year ago, students could take elective courses about New York City politics and Caribbean civilization.
Those classes are gone, considered luxuries in a time of tightened purse strings.


Financier Resigns From Tracks
Under pressure from state regulators, the troubled financier Robert E. Brennan resigned yesterday as head of a company that operates horse tracks in Cherry Hill and Freehold, The Associated Press said.
In June a Federal judge found that Mr.
Brennan had cheated penny-stock investors.


School to Be Named for Actress
For 65 years, the school was called the Vernon L. Davey Junior High, named after a district superintendent who died in 1914.
Today it will be rechristened the Cicely Tyson School of Performing and Fine Arts, to reflect the fact that the school now focuses on the performing arts and to spotlight a black actress.


Fox's Saturday Night Is Not All Right for Fighting
The Fox Boxing Epoch is over before it started.
Don't expect Fox to reprise the now-postponed Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. bout.
And don't expect Fox to proceed with a monthly Saturday night boxing series featuring the promoter Don King's crew of fighters to start in January.


Liquori Chosen for Hall of Fame
MARTY LIQUORI, who won national titles from the mile to 5,000 meters, heads the National Track and Field Hall of Fame class of 1995.
Liquori, 46, who received the most votes, will be inducted with the Olympic gold medalists VALERIE BRISCO-HOOKS, LOUISE RITTER and FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER, the Olympic coach MEL ROSEN and the late Don Lash, on Nov. 30 during USA Track &amp; Field's annual convention in Atlanta.
The balloting was done by members of the news media, Hall of Famers and USA Track &amp; Field athletes.
In 1967, Liquori became the third prep miler in United States history to run the event in less than four minutes at 3:59.8.
No high school athlete has run a mile in under four minutes since. (AP)


Let's Keep Televising Trials When Viewers Want to See Them
To the Editor:
Prof.
Paul D. Carrington's Oct. 30 letter urging that the transmission of televised trial court proceedings be delayed until a month after a final judicial decision misses the point of televising the proceedings.
According to Mr.
Carrington, one of the advantages of such a rule would be that it would reduce the size of the viewing audience.
Of course it would.


Abroad at Home;End the War
The Million Man March on Washington, a largely middle-class gathering, left tormenting questions about the black underclass.
What can be done to break the cycle of despair in our inner cities?
What, especially, can be done for their lost young men?
If we are prepared to look past shibboleths, one answer should come to mind.
That is to end the so-called war on drugs.


A New York Entry Fee
To the Editor:
Perhaps John Henry (letter, Oct. 31) does not realize the way bridge tolls to an island city appear to outsiders and newcomers to New York City.
Frankly, it comes across as an admission charge.
Like paying to enter an amusement park.


Slashed Boy Can Move Hand and Fingers
A teen-ager whose hand was nearly sliced off in a Halloween night attack in Rego Park, Queens, could be released from the Bellevue Hospital Center as early  as this afternoon.
His hand was reattached during lengthy microsurgery.
The boy, Fatmir Subasic, 15, is able to move his hand and fingers, said Pam McDonnell, a hospital spokeswoman.


Airbus Apologizes For Using a Photo
Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft maker, has apologized to Sir Roger Bannister, the first man to run the mile in less than four minutes, for using a  photograph of him in an advertisement.
It made the apology after learning that he had not granted permission to use his likeness or his name.
David Venz, a spokesman for Airbus Industrie North America in Herndon, Va., said yesterday that Osprey Park in London, the Airbus agency that created the campaign, had bought from a photo library an image of Sir Roger running, under the mistaken belief that it "had full rights to use that picture in advertising."


Prices Rise On Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities rose for the third time in as many days yesterday, as traders gained solace from soft chain store sales reports and talk of softer numbers to describe how many jobs were added to the nation's payrolls  last month.
Investors bought on rising expectations of a Fed easing sometime soon, with December likely.


Florida State Is Stopped at the Goal Line for First A.C.C. Loss
For the first time in the Atlantic Coast Conference, someone other than those who vote in the polls has knocked Florida State from its lofty mooring.
The Seminoles had dropped from No. 1 to No. 2 this week in The Associated Press and USA Today/CNN polls, but rose from No. 7 to No. 5 in The New York Times computer ranking after an open date last Saturday.


Accounts
Sands Hotel and Casino, Atlantic City, owned by the Pratt Hotel Corp., to Earle  Palmer Brown, New York, a unit of the Earle Palmer Brown Cos., to handle its account, previously handled by Colodny Communications, New York.
The billings were estimated at $4 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Daiwa Ordered to Close Its American Operations Banking regulators ordered Daiwa Bank of Japan to close its operations in the United States within three months as a Federal grand jury charged the bank with  a criminal cover-up of $1.1 billion of trading losses at its New York branch.
The former general manager of the branch was also indicted.
Daiwa could face fines as high as $1.3 billion. [Page A1.]


Workers March to Protest Medicare and Medicaid Cutbacks
The budget debate roiling Congress took human form in midtown Manhattan yesterday as thousands of people -- including health care workers, hospital executives, union officials and Democratic politicians -- marched up Broadway to protest the proposed Republican reductions to the current spending on Medicare and Medicaid.
Underscoring the event's partisan overtones, Hillary Rodham Clinton joined the marchers as they massed in Times Square at the height of rush hour.
She promised the crowd -- who shouted and waved banners propped up with folded umbrellas -- that her husband would veto any budget that cut too deeply into the two vast Federal health care programs.


King Opens His Defense By Denying Wrongdoing
Don King took the witness stand yesterday in his Federal fraud trial to deny  charges that he conspired to submit a fraudulent insurance claim for $350,000 in training expenses for a canceled 1991 Julio Cesar Chavez bout.
King's appearance to lead off the defense's case was a surprise and was geared to rebut accusations leveled against the flamboyant promoter last week by Joseph Maffia, a former accountant with Don King Productions.


SABAN TO HELP FOX PROMOTE CHILDREN'S PROGRAMMING
The Fox Broadcasting Company, whose children's television network dominates the domestic market in ratings and revenue, announced an agreement yesterday with Saban Entertainment Inc., one of the largest worldwide distributors of children's programming, to develop Fox's children's television business globally.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
Saban, based in Burbank, Calif., is best known for producing "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers," one of the most popular children's shows of recent years.
The Fox Children's Network is carried on networks owned by its parent company, the News Corporation, in Latin America and Australia.


Never Mind Ava, Mia, the Rat Pack and the Cronies
SINATRA!
THE SONG IS YOU A Singer's Art By Will Friedwald Illustrated. 557 pages.
Scribner. $30.


U.N. Urges U.S. to End Ban on Cuba
The General Assembly, for the fourth year in a row, called overwhelmingly today for an end to the three-decade United States embargo against Cuba, which has been increasingly toughened in recent years.
The Cuban-sponsored resolution was endorsed by a 117 to 3 vote, with 38 abstentions.
Only Israel and Uzbekistan joined the United States in opposing the draft.


Judge Deals Setback to Gay Navy Officer
After two years of court rulings that allowed him to continue his service in  the Navy despite publicly acknowledging his homosexuality, Lieut.
Richard Selland was becoming accustomed to victory.
But on Wednesday, a judge threw out his challenge to the Navy's effort to remove him under the military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy.
The 1993 policy  allows homosexuals to serve if they keep their sexual orientation to themselves  and do not engage in homosexual acts.
Otherwise, they can be honorably discharged.


Japanese Seek to End Semiconductor Pact With U.S.
Japan's electronics industry today called for the termination of a nearly 10-year-old semiconductor trade agreement between the United States and Japan, in what could be the opening salvo in a new trade dispute.
The call, by the Electronic Industries Association of Japan, is the first time the group has taken a public stand against the semiconductor trade agreement.
While the Japanese Government is expected to back that position, today's announcement comes eight months before the agreement is set to expire and before the two Governments have begun serious discussions on whether it should be renewed.


Rosalind Cash, 56, at Home on Stage and Screen
Rosalind Cash, an original member of the Negro Ensemble Company and one of its most vibrant and versatile actresses, died on Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 56.


Corrections
A front-page headline on Wednesday about a Labor Department report showing the smallest increase in labor costs on record misstated the rise in wages and salaries for the last 12 months in some editions.
As the article stated, they rose 2.8 percent, not 2.7 percent.
Earnings, consisting of wages, salaries and benefits, rose 2.7 percent.


Bickering Ends, but Will Nets Be Better?
If you believe the 1995-96 Nets, the 1994-95 Nets were some evil impostors who, for one season, took possession of their bodies and minds and did unspeakable things that this year's team wouldn't dream of doing.
Squabble among teammates?
Not this group.
Talk back to the coach?
Unthinkable.
Refuse to enter games?
No way.


Bartok, Fresh and Fearless;Solo Concertos
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on some of their favorite  recordings of Bartok's works and information about the "Bartok and His World" series at Alice Tully Hall that opens this weekend.
Compact disk prices range from about $15 for a single CD, to $60 to $70 for a four-CD set, to $90 for a set of six.
Unless otherwise indicated, the recordings discussed are single CD's. (An introduction appears on page C1.)
One great thing about Bartok's concertos is that they tend not to attract superficial performers.
Their considerable technical difficulties do not always  translate into the ear-dazzling frippery beloved of run-of-the-mill virtuosos.
So you probably won't go too far wrong if you find a version by a favorite pianist, violinist or violist.
Then again, it is difficult to make hard-and-fast recommendations among a number of good, solid performances.


Yes, the Thumb Is Broken
X-rays confirmed the break in Mike Tyson's thumb, the executive director of the Nevada State Athletic Commission, Marc Ratner, said today.
Ratner asked the orthopedists who diagnosed the injury for the X-rays because of the high-profile nature of Tyson's withdrawal from his bout with Buster Mathis Jr.


Art in Review
Red Grooms Marlborough Gallery 40 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 25


MOBIL CHEMICAL TO SELL ITS MUEHLSTEIN UNIT
The Mobil Chemical Company agreed yesterday to sell H. Muehlstein &amp; Company for about $130 million in an employee buyout.
Muehlstein markets plastic resin and synthetic rubber from suppliers around the world.
Muehlstein, based in Norwalk, Conn., was acquired by Mobil in 1980 and operates as a stand-alone business.
The final sales price will essentially be equal to the working capital invested in the business, Mobil said.
Mobil will continue to supply petroleum products to Muehlstein.
Shares of the Mobil Corporation fell 62.5 cents, to $101.875, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


Yet Another Era Begins as the Yankees Hire Torre
Joe Torre wanted to be wanted as a manager.
Even if it was by George Steinbrenner, who has routinely been a manager's worst friend for 23 seasons.
But Steinbrenner wanted Torre to replace Buck Showalter so desperately that the  Yankees did not even interview another candidate.


Art in Review
Glenn Ligon Max Protetch Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow


Uproar Over O.J. Simpson Visit
Did he or didn't he? Should he or shouldn't he?


Casinos Had a Good Month
The gambling business continues to be good.
Atlantic City casinos took in $322.9 million in October, the eighth-best month they've ever had, according to  the Casino Association of New Jersey.


Concessions on Blind Students Are Insufficient, Officials Say
A Board of Regents committee decided today to give local school officials more say over whether blind retarded children from their districts are sent to a state school in Batavia, at a cost to each district of as much as $175,000 a year.
But the committee rejected the pleas of the officials, from Westchester and other counties, and left the final decision to the Batavia school.


Teacher Faces Sex Charges
A science teacher was arrested yesterday on charges of repeated sexual contact with boys between the ages of 6 and 12, most of them from his Millburn apartment complex, Essex County prosecutors said.
After his arrest, John Howarth, 33, a science teacher at the Middle School in Springfield, was taken to the hospital when it became apparent he had taken a lot of sleeping pills, prosecutors told The Associated Press.


Sampras and Becker Prevail
Pete Sampras and Boris Becker continued toward a potential showdown with third-round victories today at the Paris Open.
Sampras, top-seeded for the third consecutive year, defeated Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 6-3, 6-4, and will  next play Jakob Hlasek.
Becker, who won titles here in 1986, 1989 and 1992, came back from a 3-0 deficit in the final set to beat Todd Martin, 6-4, 4-6, 7-5, and next meets Richard Krajicek.
Becker broke Martin's serve in the 11th game and served out the match, winning the 2-hour-28-minute test on his fourth match point with his  13th ace.


Critic's Choice/Cabaret;Campily Serious Singing
I'm bad!
I'm bad!" sings Christopher Durang, with elocution-school diction,  an altar-boy expression and a neat little bounce that would warm any mother's heart. The style, an automatic disclaimer of the song's macho content, obviously is not Michael Jackson's, although given the star's subsequent image problems, perhaps it should have been.
Mr.
Durang, best known as a playwright who specializes in characters out of sync with the rhythms of life, has returned in his sometime incarnation as a deadpan lounge singer, eternally out of sync with his material.
His cabaret act, "Christopher Durang and Dawne" (weekends at the Triad through Nov. 11), is built around a blissful series of stylistic mismatches.


Carnival Seen as Near Deal to Get Kloster Cruise
The Carnival Corporation is close to acquiring a majority interest in debt-ridden Kloster Cruise Ltd., with the discussions now focusing on bondholders, according to people close to the negotiations.
Adam M. Aron, Kloster's chief executive, said yesterday that the talks "could easily fall apart if the bondholders don't accept the proposal."


French Police Arrest Suspected Leader of Islamic Militant Group
The French authorities said today that they had arrested an Algerian suspected of being the ringleader of militant Islamists behind a wave of terrorist bombings that began last summer.
They also said they had arrested 14 other suspected members of the group and  seized a bomb the group was going to plant in a marketplace in the northern city of Lille.


LOEWEN'S SHARES FALL AFTER $260 MILLION JURY VERDICT
Loewen Group Inc., a fast-growing funeral company, saw its stock price fall more than 14 percent yesterday after a Mississippi jury ordered it to pay $260 million in damages for breach of contract.
The amount was 10 times what the plaintiffs in the case had sought.
Shares of Loewen, based in Burnaby, British Columbia, fell $5.50, to $32, in Nasdaq trading.
Loewen said the state court jury in Jackson had awarded the damages in a case brought by the Gulf National Life Insurance Company and related parties.
The plaintiffs contended that Loewen had breached a 1991 agreement on the sale of funeral homes and insurance marketing.
Loewen, the second largest funeral company in North America, said the jury would consider punitive damages.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows that are to close soon:


SHRINKING THE CITY: Sectory By Sector -- Hospitals;At Hospitals, Less Help And Growing Lines
On a recent afternoon in a cavernous lobby at Kings County Hospital Center, 38 people sat waiting for their prescriptions, alternately watching a television and a huge digital display showing the number of the next to be served.
As the mostly poor men and women made their way up to one of five windows to  pick up their pills, the numbers slowly marched onto the screen: 192. 193. 194.


25 and Under
The Upper West Side has yearned for an unpretentious restaurant that can offer sophisticated contemporary food in boisterous surroundings for less than you would expect to pay.
The kind of place downtowners take for granted.
Savann (pronounced sah-VAHN), which opened just two weeks ago on Amsterdam Avenue, is that kind of downtown place: intimate, crowded and loud, with a small but interesting menu.
It should not come as a surprise that the 30-year-old co-owner and chef, Danforth Houle, who has worked at Bouley, the Quilted Giraffe and the River Cafe, most recently cooked at Jean-Claude and Caffe Lure, two small downtown restaurants owned by Jean-Claude Iacovelli that set the standard  for inventive, affordable bistros.
His sous-chef, Marc Frech, cooked at Po, the  stellar little Italian restaurant in the Village.


More Irish Business
The American Power Conversion Corporation, a computer components maker, will  invest 40 million Irish pounds ($65 million) in four Irish plants, creating 1,000 new jobs in the next three years, the employment minister, Richard Bruton, said yesterday.
The decision follows that of the Intel Corporation, which recently announced a $1.5 billion deal to build a new microprocessor plant in Ireland.
The American Power Conversion plants will be in Galway, Castlebar, Drogheda and Gillogue, County Clare.
(Reuters)


A Volley Over Chrysler Quality
A perverse computer can vaporize hours of work; a bad pair of contacts can strain the eyes.
But a flawed car can do untold damage to the body or psyche.
And what intricate, vulnerable products they are: aggregates of some 30,000 bits and pieces, racked by thousands of explosions a minute, abused by weather and roads, controlled by one frequently neglectful mind.


Bosnian Serbs Reportedly Hold U.S. Newsman
American and United Nations officials are concerned about the apparent detention of an American journalist by Bosnian Serbs.
The journalist, David Rohde, 28, a reporter for The Christian Science Monitor, has been missing since Sunday morning, when he drove into Serb-held territory from Sarajevo.


The Very Model of a Model Lawyer
And it's strike one against Cindy Crawford, who is glaringly miscast as a lawyer named Kate McQuean in "Fair Game," her Hollywood film debut.
The lustrous supermodel may yet salvage her fledgling movie career.
But it won't be by portraying characters who have to spout professional jargon, unless it is the sort of chattery girl talk that Ms.
Crawford already dispenses on television.
The star's matter-of-fact coolness, which works to her advantage on television by giving her an aura of neighborly casualness, backfires on the big  screen, where it makes her seem smaller than life.
Ms.
Crawford is stunning to look at, but her deep-set eyes render her expression forever inscrutable.
From certain camera angles, her face in repose projects the kind of sullen pugnacity  associated with Jane Russell.
But where Miss Russell had a vocal growl to match  this hint of toughness, Ms.
Crawford, even when throwing a snit, fumes in the bland, clipped cadences of an ambitious beauty contestant who doesn't want to smear her makeup.


Beloved Stradivarius Stolen While Owner Was Dying
One of the foremost violinists of the 20th century will go to her grave today mercifully unaware that the precious Stradivarius violin that was the cornerstone of her life was stolen from her Fifth Avenue apartment as she slipped toward death.
Erica Morini, 91, who enjoyed the plaudits of audiences and critics alike in  an international career that began when she was 12, died on Wednesday never knowing that someone had apparently used a hidden key to take the violin, appraised at $3.5 million, from a locked bedroom closet where she had kept it for years.


A New Look for Malls


Quebec Separatist Campaign Leader Says He May Quit Politics
In the aftermath of its slim defeat in Monday's referendum on sovereignty for Quebec, the Parti Quebecois received a fresh setback today when the independence campaign's popular leader, Lucien Bouchard, said he might abandon politics altogether.
Mr.
Bouchard, 56, was widely expected to become the next Premier of Quebec until he startled Canada by announcing at a news conference today in Ottawa that his life was at a crossroads.
He said he was considering abandoning a rising political career because of an agreement he made with his wife, Audrey, who is from the United States.


Lowest Level of Binge Drinking Is Found at Western Colleges
Binge drinking by college students, an extensive problem on campuses, is significantly less common at colleges and universities in the West than elsewhere in the United States, according to a study presented at the annual meeting of the American Public Health Association in San Diego earlier this week.
"Schools located in the West showed a 33 percent lower rate of binge drinkers than schools in the North Central states," said Dr.
Henry Wechsler, a lecturer on social psychology at the Harvard School of Public Health and the principal investigator for the study.


When Adults Go Home To Mom at Thanksgiving
When Claudia Larson (Holly Hunter) goes from Chicago to Baltimore to visit her family for Thanksgiving, her parents (Charles Durning and Anne Bancroft) are poised at the airport gate, ready to film her arrival with their video camera.
"I can see your roots, Claudia," her mother whispers sweetly during the car ride home.
The car is marooned in traffic just then, so Claudia peers longingly into  a neighboring car.
A stranger, apparently another adult child who has just been nabbed by his parents, is mouthing a cry for help.
"Float. Just float." That's how Claudia counsels herself during the course of this visit, but "Home for the Holidays" is not about floating.
It's about being  forced back into the bosom of a family that Claudia, a single mother and newly fired art restorer at a Chicago museum, has obviously gone to great lengths to escape.
And escape is impossible, as is clear when Claudia's mother dishes out career advice.
Claudia paints like van Gogh, her mother loyally insists.
"So why isn't some man from Japan giving you $63 million for one lousy picture?"


A JAPANESE BANK IS INDICTED IN U.S. AND ALSO BARRED
Federal and state bank regulators yesterday ordered Daiwa Bank Ltd., the big  Japanese bank, to close its operations in the United States within three months.
The order came as a Federal grand jury accused the bank of illegally covering up $1.1 billion in trading losses at its New York branch.
The expulsion and the Federal indictment appear to be an action without precedent against a large foreign bank, Federal officials said.
If convicted, Daiwa could face fines of as much as $1.3 billion.


As Ever Bartok, Fresh and Fearless
FORGET about the weather; there is something fresh in the musical air this fall.
It is hard, in fact, to imagine that the music of the Hungarian composer Bela Bartok could ever seem anything but fresh.
Its impudence and daring have scarcely faded with time and familiarity.
It mostly resists casual listening and thus any danger of becoming hackneyed.
So Bartok anniversaries are more welcome than most, even if they do hinge on  his death, which occurred 50 years ago last September in New York.
As on the centenary of his birth, in 1981, musical commemorations abound.


Leading Critic of Drug Corruption Gunned Down in Colombia
A former presidential candidate and ambassador to Washington, who in recent months had become an outspoken critic of the influence of drug traffickers in politics, was gunned down today on a busy street here.
It was the second attack  on a public figure in two months.
The politician, Alvaro Gomez Hurtado, 76, of the Conservative Party, made an  unsuccessful bid for the presidency in 1990.


Police Chief Charged With Abuse and Misconduct
The police chief of West Orange, under fire since a judge's findings of domestic violence became public, was indicted today by an Essex County grand jury on charges of beating his wife, warning a drug suspect that the police were headed for her doorstep, and failing to investigate the harassment of his predecessor.
The indictments mean that the chief, Robert A. Spina, who has been struggling to keep his $75,000-a-year job, will be suspended without pay, his lawyer said.
Chief Spina was appointed to head the 100-member police force a year ago by his  father, Mayor Sam Spina, and both men have defied protests demanding that he step down.


Review/Fashion;Paring Down With Blass and de la Renta
As a young designer, Bill Blass traveled the country eager to meet his customers in the American heartland and learn about their tastes and needs.
Mr.
Blass came to the fore in American fashion decades ago when French style was the predominant reference point.
What he offered was crisp, pared-down suits and sportswear, sweater sets for day and sweaters for evening.
As recently as two years ago, it appeared that what he had learned and used to build his formidable business was yesterday's news.


New York's Highest Court Rules Unmarried Couples Can Adopt
The state's highest court ruled by a 4-to-3 vote today that a couple, homosexual or heterosexual, does not have to be married to adopt a child.
In its majority opinion, the Court of Appeals said it was taking note of "fundamental changes" in the American family, like the sixfold increase since 1970 in the number of unmarried couples with young children.


Ambulances Told to Pay Blue Cross $109 Million
Thousands of trips made by private ambulance services in the last several years were not medically necessary, contends the insurance company that processes Medicare payments for trips in and around New York City.
The insurer,  Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is demanding that 18 ambulance companies repay it $109 million.
The companies, which are contesting the claim, say they will face bankruptcy  and extinction if the demand for repayment stands up.
"This could wind up costing lives," Alfred DelBello, the lawyer who is representing several of the companies, said yesterday.
"Companies aren't going to take over trips that don't pay."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONAGRA INC., Omaha, a food producer, said it had bought back 14.4 million shares, or 57 percent, of its total buyback authorization to offset the pending  conversion of its class E preferred shares.


WPAT Sells Both Bands
Spanish Broadcasting System Inc. has agreed to acquire WPAT-FM, a radio station in Paterson, N.J., from Park Radio of Greater New York Inc. for $83.5 million in cash.
Spanish Broadcasting, based in New York, says it is the largest Hispanic-owned media company in the country, with eight radio stations in Los Angeles, New York and Miami.


Seacor to Buy 5 Ships
Seacor Holdings Inc. said today that it planned to buy five vessels from Compagnie Nationale de Navigation of France for $21.6 million in cash and stock.
Seacor said the purchase would further integrate the companies' fleets of vessels in West Africa and expand their relationship.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL D. PALM, a founder and the chief executive of Centre Reinsurance Holdings Limited, has given $2.5 million to the Gay Men's Health Crisis, where he is a member of the board.
The donation will allow the organization, which is  now spread out over five buildings, to be housed in one place.
"We are probably going to renovate an existing building, " said Mr.
Palm, who was a schoolteacher in Iran in the 1970's.


Ioann, 68, a Russian Prelate Harshly Critical of Outsiders
Metropolitan Ioann, the fervently nationalist head of the Russian Orthodox Church in the St.
Petersburg and Ladoga diocese, died on Thursday in St.
Petersburg.
He was 68.
He had suffered from a heart ailment for several years and died of a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


Ford Has 3.6% Sales Decline, Worst Drop Among the Big 3
The Ford Motor Company's October vehicle sales dropped 3.6 percent from a year earlier, more than expected and the biggest decline among Detroit's auto makers.
Sales of the Ford Taurus sedan were off 16 percent from a year earlier, despite the debut of an all-new 1996 model.
The auto maker attributed the weak sales to shortages of the Taurus wagon and lower sales to rental fleets, but it  has started to offer incentives on Taurus leases.


A Visit To the 70's Without A Goodbye
A mirrored disco ball hung over the stage throughout Urge Overkill's show at  the Academy on Thursday night.
No spotlight ever reached it; it was merely a talisman of the 1970's tackiness that has always been Urge Overkill's gimmick.
When the band emerged from Chicago in the late 1980's, its members' medallions and velour shirts and the music's deadpan 70's references helped to distinguish Urge Overkill from other collegiate rockers.
The band's cool demeanor was perfectly exploited by Quentin Tarantino when it performed Neil Diamond's "Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon" in "Pulp Fiction." But in Urge Overkill's own songs, the pose has become a trap.


J. Bradbury Thompson Dies; Designer and Art Director, 84
J.
Bradbury Thompson, whose talent for graphic design and art direction left  its mark on America's books, magazines and postage stamps and influenced generations of students who studied with him at Yale University, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
Mr.
Thompson was 84, and lived in Riverside, Conn.
Mr.
Thompson's work extended to such limited-edition books as a masterly lectern Bible, Stephen Crane's "Red Badge of Courage" and Herman Melville's "Typee"; to art and fashion magazines like Art News and Mademoiselle, and to the design of more than 120 United States postage stamps devoted to subjects like architecture, belles-lettres and history.


DIME OF WILLIAMSBURGH TO ADD CONESTOGA BANCORP
Dime Savings Bank of Williamsburgh agreed yesterday to acquire Conestoga Bancorp Inc. of Roslyn, L.I., in a deal valued at $21.25 a share, or $103 million.
Dime of Williamsburgh, which is based in Brooklyn and is not related to Dime Bancorp Inc. or its unit, Dime Savings Bank of New York, said no branches would be closed in the transaction.
Conestoga is the parent of Pioneer Savings Bank F.S.B., a savings and loan.
Dime of Williamsburgh also acquired an option to buy, under certain conditions, newly issued Conestoga shares, representing as much as 9.9 percent of the company, for $18 each.
Conestoga's stock was up $1 yesterday, at $20, in Nasdaq trading.


Yeltsin Appears Briefly On TV From the Hospital
A fragile President Boris N. Yeltsin was shown briefly on Russian television  today in his first public appearance since he was hospitalized with severe heart trouble nine days ago.


Corrections
The Movie Clock in copies of Weekend distributed on Long Island yesterday carried outdated listings.
The Times regrets the error.
Current film information is available from the phone numbers given in yesterday's listings.
Computer users who subscribe to America Online may also consult The Times's film schedule on the


Seminoles' Season Falls Short by a Foot
Somewhere under the crush of celebrating Virginia players, beneath the charging feet of students who had come to tear down the goal posts, below the inconsolable visitors from Florida State, lay the ball and the Seminoles' deflated hopes for winning a national championship.
If the season ends unsatisfactorily, as it almost certainly will, the Seminoles will never forget how close they came on Thursday night: a foot.
Maybe less.
All night they had played excitable, uninhibited football, somewhere between abandon and panic.
And then, with 4 seconds left and the end zone 6 yards away, Florida State called for the unexpected.


L.I. Swimmer Still May Face Suspension
The president of the United States swimming federation said yesterday that she would seek the suspension of a 15-year-old swimmer from Long Island who has  been allowed to continue competing despite having failed a drug test.
Jessica Foschi of Old Brookville was placed on two years' probation yesterday by a three-member federation board of review.
The panel ruled, by 2-1, that it believed an anabolic steroid had been administered to the teen-ager without her  knowledge, or that she was a victim of "sabotage," such as a spiked sports drink.


Injunction Allows Freshman to Play
A judge today ruled against the National Collegiate Athletic Association and  in favor of Kenny Thomas, a New Mexico freshman recruit, granting a preliminary  injunction against the N.C.A.A.'s denial of eligibility for the 6-foot-9-inch, 255-pound forward.


LOEWEN GROUP TO FIGHT FUNERAL HOME RULING
Loewen Group Inc. said yesterday that it was appealing a court ruling ordering it to pay $500 million after losing a lawsuit over its 1990 purchase of two Mississippi funeral homes.
A Jackson, Miss., state court jury raised compensatory and punitive damages against Loewen, based in Burnaby, British Columbia, to $500 million from $260 million.
Loewen said the damages awarded were almost 20 times the damages requested by the plaintiffs: Jerry O'Keefe Sr. and Gulf National Group, an insurance company Mr.
O'Keefe owns.
Loewen is the second-largest funeral services operator in North America.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Corrections
A news analysis article on Oct. 24 about a proposed arts lottery in the United States misstated the fee received by the company that manages the British one.
The company, Camelot, splits 25 percent of the proceeds with the Government; it does not receive slightly less than 25 percent.


The N.A.A.C.P., Lost in Yonkers
Last week the national N.A.A.C.P. suspended me as President of its Yonkers branch, not because of something I did, but because of something I said.
At an October news conference discussing education with Yonkers Mayor Terence M. Zaleski, I stated that "school busing may have outlived its usefulness to achieve academic parity" in Yonkers.


CLARIFY SHARES SURGE AFTER PUBLIC OFFERING
The stock of Clarify Inc. surged more than 70 percent yesterday after the software company began a $3.9 million initial public offering.
Clarify provides  adaptable application software for client-server computer systems intended to address corporate external and internal service, support and product quality needs.
Servers are computers that manage the flow of information between other computers, known as clients, on a network.


Juan E. Ramos, 53; Devised Concepts For Fashion Ads
Juan Eugene Ramos, an art director and the creative partner of Antonio Lopez, the late fashion illustrator, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was  53.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Paul Caranicas.


Act Now Against the Terror Network
The West had better wake up to the new terrorism.
When even a small group like Islamic Holy War can threaten worldwide attacks, as it did in revenge for the assassination of its leader, Fathi Shiqaqi, in Malta on Oct. 26, its threats cannot be ignored.
Islamic Holy War is part of a much larger and growing international network that Western countries do not take seriously enough.
Unless the United States and other democracies crack down on this wider international militancy, even more deadly bombings than the one in the World Trade Center are a real possibility.
Today's terrorism in the West differs from the plague of the 1970's and 80's  which dissipated after its chief sponsors were punished (notably Libya and Syria) and after the Soviet bloc was dismantled.
Part of the new wave of terror  is domestic, as in Oklahoma City and Tokyo, and the authorities can deal with it.
But they cannot easily handle the growing global network of militants who have killed people from the Paris subways to Buenos Aires.


Nets Start by Earning a Sorry Place in History
If the Nets are destined for a tailspin similar to last season's, at least they will have accomplished something.
One game into a new season, they have secured their place in National Basketball Association trivia.
Whenever anyone questions from whom the Toronto Raptors took their first victory, he answer will always be the Nets.
They earned that dubious distinction tonight by playing more like an expansion team than the Raptors did en route to a sobering 94-79 defeat before a crowd of 33,306 at the Skydome.


High School Will Hand Out Condoms to Students
After more than two years of debate, Roslyn High School has decided to hand out condoms to students on demand as a precaution against AIDS, school officials said today.
The high school in this affluent Nassau County community is believed to be the state's first outside New York City to adopt a "condom availability" policy, said a State Health Department spokeswoman, Frances Tarlton.


New Jobs for Youths at Risk
The state is setting up an experimental work-study program under which employers would give after-school jobs to students who are considered to be at risk of dropping out of school and becoming involved with the juvenile justice system.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is scheduled to sign legislation today setting up the program in one or more school districts in each of the 21 counties.
Participating employers will receive $150 a month, with $100 of that going to the student, who will work two hours a day, three days a week.
The projected cost is $500,000.


Pupils in Year-Round Program Start a 2-Week Vacation
Amanda L. Zoltanski, age 9, ticks off all the things she likes about going to school on a year-round schedule, listing more time in the classroom, extra programs like opera and, best of all, the vacation that started after today's last bell.
"I especially like it because when we are off, the other kids are in school and they have to suffer," she said with a devilish grin.


G.O.P. Leaders Delay Decision on Debt Limit
Republican leaders in Congress today put off any decisions on temporary measures to raise the debt limit and pay for the Federal Government's operations, with House leaders waiting to see what price their rank and file would demand for those votes.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, said votes on the debt limit were always difficult in the House.
Leaders in the House "have to figure out how to sweeten it a little to get it through," he said, "without making the White House too mad."


Russian President Says He's 'Not Feeling Bad Now'


Weigh-In Tips Oddsmakers' Scales Farther
No sooner did Riddick Bowe step off the scale than the odds shifted.
In boxing, a pound or two can drive people to the bookmakers.


CHRONICLE
There's nothing like a good book to provide the underpinning for a fine meal.
So say PETER DUCHIN, the society bandleader, and his wife, BROOKE HAYWARD.
Along with GENE HOVIS, a chef, they are planning a dinner for 30 guests on Monday to honor BOBBY SHORT.
"We use books as place settings," Mr.
Duchin said yesterday.
Not just any books though, he said.
Not even the autobiography of Mr.
Short, "The Life and Times of a Saloon Singer" (Panache Press), which is the excuse for the party.


33 Players File for Free Agency
Gary Gaetti of Kansas City, Paul Molitor of Toronto and Mark Grace and Randy  Myers of the Chicago Cubs were among 33 players who filed for free agency yesterday, bringing to 106 the number on the free-agent list.
Those four were also among 27 filing players whose clubs did not offer them  salary arbitration by the Thursday deadline.
Pitchers Todd Stottlemyre of Oakland and Norm Charlton of Seattle were the only players out of 49 with repeater restrictions who were offered arbitration.
Others who filed include the Mets' Bill Spiers and Philadelphia's Sid Fernandez and Andy Van Slyke.


Man Gets Life Term In Killing of Tourist
A judge sentenced an 18-year-old man to life in prison today for the murder of a British tourist in 1993, a killing that sparked international outrage and hurt Florida's tourist industry.
The man, John (Billy Joe) Crumitie, will serve at least 25 years before he is eligible for parole.
Mr.
Crumitie was convicted on Sept. 16 of murdering Gary Colley in September 1993 in a botched robbery at a highway rest stop near this rural community in northern Florida.


San Antonio Journal;Caressing Life on the Day of the Dead
Frances Dewhirst wanted to bring beer for her nephew, Joseph Solis, in the quart bottles she said he preferred.
"He is always partying, smiling, laughing," she said on Thursday, her face as bright as if she were about to join in some revelry.
But no, Mary Solis said, no beer for her son.
He has stopped drinking, she said: "He's left all that behind."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Race for Kentucky Governor Slows to a Trot
Staring down at her scrambled eggs and ham this morning at Roundie's Restaurant here, Joan Buckley said she would probably vote Republican in the Kentucky governor's election on Tuesday.
As a retired middle-school teacher, Mrs.
Buckley said, she does not much care for the changes in the state's public education policies that were passed in 1990 -- and as she understood it, neither does the Republican candidate, Larry Forgy.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


Remembering the Victims of Pan Am 103


The Tour de France Someday?


New York State Depends on Its Dairy Farmers
To the Editor:
After reading Richard Schrader's Oct. 28 letter about dairy policy and milk marketing, I suggest he visit a farm and see what's really going on.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 25 about the towing of cars outside a Manhattan restaurant where President Clinton was having dinner on Oct. 23 misstated the circumstances of a 1993 incident in which he got a haircut aboard Air Force One at Los Angeles International Airport.
Initial reports, that several airplanes were delayed, appeared in The Times on May 21, 1993, and were repeated on May 23, May 28 and May 30, 1993.
Later study of airport records established -- and The Times reported on June 25, 1994 -- that the airport was not shut down during the haircut, and no scheduled flights were delayed.


Ambulance Dispute
Thousands of trips made by private ambulances in the New York region in the last several years were not medically necessary, contends the insurance company  that processes Medicare payments for them.
The insurer, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is demanding that 18 private ambulance companies repay it $109 million.
The companies say they face bankruptcy and extinction if the demand stands up.
Article, page 29.


An American Midwife on Trial;With Less Footing Than a Stork, She Fights to Deliver in the Home
When the State of Connecticut's case against Donna Vidam went to a hearing here last month, the proceedings opened with a reminder to the audience: no crying babies or noisy children, please.
In the room where a state hearing officer was taking testimony, little girls  played quietly, babies slept and more births seemed imminent.
Ms.
Vidam is a midwife, and she was surrounded by her clients.


Blame Rules, Not the Cabbies, for Poor Service;Tips Will Go Up
To the Editor:
When Edward Rogoff (Op-Ed, Oct. 30) argues against an increase of New York City's taxi fares, theorizing that an increase would provide added income for the medallion and fleet owners but not for most drivers, he seems to have stiffed the cabbies out of a tip.


Dow Hits a High for 2d Day Despite a Drop in Bonds
The Dow Jones industrial average advanced to a record high yesterday for the  second consecutive day, defying a dip in bond prices that followed a mixed employment report.
The Dow average spent most of the session in barely positive territory.
But a burst of buying near the close propelled it 16.98 points higher, to 4,825.57, topping the closing high of 4,808.59 set Thursday.
It was the blue-chip average's 52d record this year and sent it up 83.82 for the week, more than recovering its 52-point loss last week.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about efforts by casinos and hotels in Las Vegas to attract young customers referred incorrectly to a sign shaped like a guitar atop the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.
It is a Fender guitar, not a Gibson.


Long Island's Quiet Elections
Even though people are not paying a lot of attention, Long Island will hold important elections next week.
Unless voters make a point of showing up at the polls, a handful may wind up making choices on behalf of an apathetic majority.
Suffolk's County Executive, Robert Gaffney, a Republican, is being challenged by Tony Bullock, the Democratic East Hampton Town Supervisor.
Mr.
Gaffney, a former F.B.I. agent, has brought some welcome calm to the center of Suffolk politics.
He bills himself as a tax cutter, but his claim to that title rests on a proposal for a quarter-point reduction in a sales tax he raised by half a point early in his administration.
He could make a better case for himself as a  tax stabilizer.
The county had a small surplus last year, and property tax increases have been generally modest.


SUN MICROSYSTEMS INCREASES ON STOCK-SPLIT REPORT
The shares of Sun Microsystems Inc. surged yesterday to another high after the company announced on Thursday that it would split its stock 2 for 1.
The stock was also helped by securities analysts who said the company would benefit  from increasing demand for computers and software used on the Internet.
Sun Microsystems shares rose $5.48375, to $84.359375, in Nasdaq trading of 6.8 million shares.
An analyst at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc., Philip Rueppel, raised his 12-month stock price target to $110, based primarily on Sun's strength with  work station and server computers, as well as software that is used on the Internet.
Under the stock split, shareholders of record Nov. 20 will receive two shares for each one held.
Shares will be distributed Dec. 11.


In Hartford Schools Election, Private Management Is the Issue
Hartford's controversial experiment with private management of its public schools has become the central issue in the Board of Education elections here on Tuesday, with a slate of candidates supported by the teachers' union vowing to bring it to an abrupt end.
An opposing slate led by the school board's president, however, is campaigning against the union, the Hartford Federation of Teachers, accusing it  of wielding so much power in the school system that the board had no choice a year ago but to bring in a for-profit company to take back control.


AT&amp;T TO INCREASE SOME GLOBAL RATES
The AT&amp;T Corporation has notified Federal regulators that it intends to increase the price of some services, mostly international, to generate about $220 million annually.
AT&amp;T, the nation's largest long-distance company, filed its plan on Thursday with the Federal Communications Commission.
The increases are to take effect in two weeks.
The increases, announced yesterday by AT&amp;T, follow $250 million worth of price reductions announced by the company. (AP)


Few Election Surprises Expected for G.O.P.
Some New Jerseyans may be surprised to discover next Tuesday that Newt Gingrich's name does not appear anywhere on state ballots for the General Assembly.
In a race without a high-profile local issue and with scant evidence of public interest, Democrats and Republicans alike are acting as if New Jersey were on the national stage.
Mr.
Gingrich, the House Speaker, came to a Princeton fund-raiser last month, where he helped raise $600,000 for Republican Assembly candidates, while exhorting state Republicans to soldier on as the advance scouts of the Republican Revolution.


For Riley and the Heat, It Is Mourning in Miami
In his first major trade since leaving the Knicks for the Miami Heat last summer, Pat Riley yesterday boldly acquired the All-Star center he had coveted.
Alonzo Mourning, who was locked in a contract dispute with the Charlotte Hornets, was traded to Miami along with guard Pete Myers and center LeRon Ellis.
The Hornets received the high-scoring swingman Glen Rice, guard Khalid Reeves, center Matt Geiger and Miami's first-round pick in next year's draft.


Elsinore Chapter 11 Filing
The Elsinore Corporation, owner of the Four Queens Hotel and Casino, sought bankruptcy protection this week after being unable to make scheduled payments on more than $60 million in loans.
The filing under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act will hold off creditors and allow the company to continue operating while it works out a plan to repay its debt.
The company said it was trying to reorganize its debt obligations but was unable to reach an agreement with note holders before a 30-day grace period expired this week.


Corrections
An article in Weekend yesterday about the composer Bela Bartok referred incorrectly to a set of archival recordings from Hungaroton, "Bartok: Recordings From Private Collections." The number is HCD 12334/ 7, and the set contains four CD's, not two.


Journal;Get Powell
Like the rest of the world, I haven't made up my mind about Colin Powell, but if you can judge a man by his enemies, the guy must be a prince.
Not yet a candidate -- if in fact he's going to become one -- he has already, with exquisite efficiency, exposed the sleaziness of the extremists in his own party.
It's taken only days to see just how low the leaders of far-right G.O.P. auxiliaries with pious names like the Christian Coalition and the Family  Research Council will sink to defame General Powell -- even as anonymous smear artists, in what seems a rather remarkable coincidence of timing, have taken simultaneous aim at his wife.


With Love or Without, Aimless and Witless
Know Your Enemy!" warns the title of Matjaz Pograjc's new dance-drama, which Betontanc presented on Thursday night at La Mama. For the characters in this hourlong work, their enemies were themselves.
Betontanc (pronounced BEE-tohn-tahnz) is a resident company of the Glej (pronounced GLAY) Theater in Ljubljana, and its name means "concrete dance." It's well named, for this Slovenian troupe's presentations emphasize clear and hard physical realities.


COURT APPROVES FIRM FOR LIQUIDATION OF JAMESWAY
A Federal bankruptcy judge approved the appointment yesterday of a Boston-based concern to handle the liquidation of the Jamesway Corporation, which filed for bankruptcy last month.
The firm, Gordon Brothers Partners Inc.,  edged out three companies -- Jubilee L.P., Alco Capital Group Inc. and the Nassi Bernstein Company -- by offering 53 percent of the retail value of the company's inventory, which it said is about $207 million.
The other companies had offered  to make a cash payment equal to 51 percent.
A spokesman for the company, which is based in Secaucus, N.J., said prices would start coming down on the merchandise of all of its 90 stores beginning next week.


Police Say Rapist in Queens Poses as an Immigration Agent
Carrying plastic handcuffs, a fake Immigration and Naturalization Service badge and a black semiautomatic handgun, a man posing as an I.N.S. agent has robbed and raped at least five women in Queens, the police said yesterday.
The man apparently seeks out Hispanic women who he believes are illegal immigrants, knocking on their doors and asking, in Spanish, to see their immigration papers.
Once the door is open, the man pulls a gun and forces his way in, said Deputy Chief Lawrence F. Loesch, head of Queens detectives.


Oranienburg Journal;Cutbacks Drawing a Curtain on a Holocaust Site
A pleasant autumn breeze blew across the open field where the Sachsenhausen concentration camp once stood.
Warm air wafted through the cast-iron gate that bears the cynical inscription "Work Makes You Free," past the spot where the gallows had been, between the barracks that had housed Jewish prisoners and were burned in a 1992 arson attack, over the ruins of the crematory and toward the granite complex where thousands of prisoners were killed by gassing or shots in the back of the neck.


Typhoon Hits the Philippines; Dozens Die, Damage Is Wide
With a fury not seen in a decade, a typhoon raged through the main Philippine island of Luzon today, killing dozens of people and destroying millions of dollars worth of crops and property.
[By early Saturday, the death toll had reached 80, Reuters reported, quoting  relief officials.]


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Last-Minute Crisis Results in a Partnership Gidon Kremer, violinist, Vadim Sakharov, pianist Carnegie Hall


METRO DIGEST
STATE PROPOSES TOUGHER REGENTS EXAMS


CHRONICLE
Is there something about a Harvard education that inspires lofty language?
Take the announcement sent out by six Harvard classes (from 1938 to 1943) saying that they would be sharing a tent with the Yale class of '38 at the Harvard-Yale football game in New Haven on Nov. 18.


Beliefs
It is pretty clear where most American Jews stand in the cultural wars now dividing the nation.
It is not so clear where Judaism stands.
Most Jews in the United States continue to vote Democratic, back abortion rights, uphold strict separation of church and state, favor Federal initiatives  to combat discrimination and inequality, respond with alarm to the emergence of  a conservative Christian political movement and generally feel that the more secular the society, at least in its public demeanor and certainly in its government policies, the safer it is for the Jewish minority.


TOYOTA SAID TO BE IN INDIANA PLANT DEAL
The Toyota Motor Corporation has chosen Evansville, Ind., as the site of its  third factory in the United States, Japan's leading financial newspaper reported yesterday.
The paper, Nihon Keizai Shimbun, reported on its front page that Toyota's president, Hiroshi Okuda, would sign an agreement with the government of Indiana at the beginning of December.
But both Toyota andGov.
Evan Bayh of Indiana called the newspaper report premature, and local land ownership records  offered no confirmation that any property had changed hands.
The plant will make 100,000 T100 pickup trucks a year.


Along Bosnia Dividing Line, Federation Is Only on Paper
To speak with her daughter and granddaughters in Los Angeles, Adila Glavovic  must use the telephone of a friend who lives 10 minutes away, across a river in  her hometown of Mostar.
On the other side is also the apartment she once lived in, groceries that are more affordable and the medical care her husband needs.
But the west side of Mostar is largely forbidden to Mrs.
Glavovic and people who, like her, are refugees in their own city.


Senators Say Agency Shows Anti-Gun Bias
Ten Senators, including Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, have accused a division of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of playing politics by issuing reports on the dangers of guns in homes.
The Senators said they were sympathetic to a proposal to eliminate the division, the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control.


Blame Rules, Not the Cabbies, for Poor Service;Tougher Screening
To the Editor:
In "Don't Raise the Taxi Fares" (Op-Ed, Oct. 30), Edward Rogoff argues that the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission should carry out the following:


5 Men Are Convicted in Beating of Police Sergeant in Brooklyn
A 20-year-old man was convicted yesterday of attempted murder and four other  young men were found guilty of assault for severely beating an off-duty police sergeant when he confronted them and others drinking beer and smoking marijuana  outside his Brooklyn home.
The 20-year-old, Everett Miller, was convicted by one of two juries that had  tried the five defendants in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
The same jury also convicted David Pagan, 20, of first-degree assault, acquitting him of attempted murder.


Two Die in Blaze at the Upper West Side
Two residents of the Frederick Douglass Houses at Columbus Avenue and 100th Street died early this morning when a smoky fire broke out in a stairwell, the housing police said.
The two-alarm fire apparently started in a couch left in a third-floor stairwell vestibule, and the flames and heavy white smoke spread quickly up the  stairs of the 25-story building to the roof, said Lieutenant Frederick S. Horman, of the Housing Police.
The two people who were killed, whose identities  were not immediately available, were walking in the stairwell and were overcome by the smoke, the lieutenant said.


Voters Will Decide Whether to Curb State-Imposed Programs
Testing New Jersey schoolchildren for curvature of the spine sounded like a good idea when it was proposed in the 1960's.
Today, however, the program is considered by some the epitome of what is wrong with local governments being ordered by the state to adopt programs without receiving the money to operate them.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the international tribunal on war crimes in Bosnia referred incorrectly to correspondence between the tribunal and the United States Government.
A confidential letter asking that any peace accord compel cooperation with the tribunal's inquiries was sent to Madeleine K. Albright, the American delegate to the United Nations, by the tribunal's president, Antonio Cassese, not by its chief prosecutor.


Tax Shelter of Rich and Famous Has Final Date in Court
Price Waterhouse is famous for never revealing the names of the Oscar winners until the envelopes are opened on the Academy Awards broadcast.


The Active Patient
To the Editor:
Re "The Ticket to Managed Care" (Op-Ed, Oct. 28): Michael A. Stocker has it all wrong that health maintenance organizations must give patients more information.


World Bank Helps Zimbabwe Serve Poor
To the Editor:
Sister Mary Elizabeth Lloyd (letter, Oct. 19) correctly focuses on poverty in Africa, but she is wrong in saying that the World Bank's reforms have often overlooked the poor.
The bank does focus on the needs of the poorest.
But no single institution will ever be able to meet Africa's needs, nor should it.


INSIDE
The Jury System Revisited


Race Certainly Has a Biological Reality;Lynching and Frontier
To the Editor:
In Anthony Lewis's Oct. 13 column, "Racist Chic," he speaks of anti-black books and a supposed thesis of mine that lynching "was their fault."


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Football


Tampering With Cadavers
A pathologist's assistant was arrested yesterday for tampering with cadavers  at the Kings County Morgue, including having sexual contact with some of the bodies, the police said.
The man, Lester Grant, 33, works as an assistant at Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, L.I., and apparently impersonated a morgue worker  to gain access to the cadavers, said Officer John Giammarino, a Police Department spokesman.
Mr.
Grant, of Rosedale, Queens, was charged with burglary, criminal trespass, sexual misconduct, criminal impersonation and tampering with physical evidence.
Officer Giammarino said it was unclear whether Mr.
Grant's actions might have damaged evidence crucial to criminal cases.


NEW YORK PLANS HIGHER STANDARDS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS
The State Education Commissioner, with strong support from the Board of Regents, proposed today that all students in New York be required to pass the state's rigorous Regents exams to earn a high school diploma.
More than just changing a test, the plan would bring about fundamental revisions in high school education across the state, requiring every district to revamp its basic curriculum and raise its minimum standards to the college-preparatory level.
In the process, the state would eliminate what is now the most common pathway to high school graduation on the ground that it leaves many high school graduates with skills insufficient for success in today's technology-driven society.


Under Fire, Jury System Faces Overhaul
Responding to a growing public disenchantment with juries after a raft of unpopular verdicts, state legislatures and court systems across the nation are starting to rewrite the rules of the jury system.
Some states have already changed the way juries operate.
Starting next month, Arizona will permit jurors to take notes, question witnesses through the judge and, in some cases, discuss evidence while a trial is in progress.
Delaware is considering a similar list of proposals.


DeBerg: American Movie Classic
If you played for five different teams in 17 National Football League seasons, threw for more than 33,000 yards, completed almost 3,000 passes, then there's a video of you of playing football.
N.F.L.
Films must have a Steve DeBerg shelf in its warehouse.
There is one classic shot of DeBerg when he played for the Kansas City Chiefs.
He runs a play-action fake to his running back, sticks the ball out with one hand, removes the ball from the running back's stomach and then throws a touchdown.


Review/Fashion;Three Designers Struggle With Image
The most intriguing drama of American fashion this season is about how three  of the top names are struggling with their status as icons.
For Calvin Klein, the issue is his role as a useful symbol for the political  right, in showing how subversive current society is.
For Donna Karan, it is overcoming her reputation as the working woman's hero and expressing herself as a designer.


Executive Changes
BANKERS LIFE HOLDING CORP., Chicago, promoted Fred E. Crosley, its executive vice president and chief financial officer, to president and chief executive, succeeding Barth T. Murphy, who plans to retire from those positions at the end  of the year.
Rollin M. Dick was named to succeed Mr.
Crosley as chief financial  officer; Mr.
Dick is executive vice president and chief financial officer of Conseco Inc., which owns an 87 percent stake in Bankers Life.


Grizzlies Win Behind Benjamin
The Vancouver Grizzlies were a stunning success tonight in their National Basketball Association debut, beating the Portland Trail Blazers, 92-80, behind  the 29-point, 13-rebound performance of Benoit Benjamin.
Boos echoed through the Blazers' new $262 million Rose Garden arena as Vancouver outscored Portland, 23-8, over the final 7 minutes 15 seconds.


Observer;And a Year Yet to Go
Does anyone else have the impression that the Republicans and Democrats both  wish the country would shut up and leave them alone?
This was surely the message from all those G.O.P. righties who lined up in Washington the other day to say that General Powell just won't do.


Isles Play Nice, Finish Last
During the Islanders' two days between games this week, Coach Mike Milbury cautioned his players against committing thoughtless penalties, mindful that they had racked up five infractions in the first 12 minutes Tuesday night against Florida.
So the Islanders went out against the Tampa Bay Lightning tonight and committed a mere four penalties for the entire game.
The problem was, two came in the game's final 7 minutes 22 seconds, with the Islanders down by 4-3 and scrambling to even matters.
Short-handed down the stretch, they never caught up  and lost, 5-3, to a Lightning team that had scored two goals while the Islanders had the manpower advantage.


Principals Fearful Schools Won't Meet New Standard
Tougher new graduation requirements mandated yesterday by State Education Commissioner Richard P. Mills will bring a dramatic change to the New York City  school system, where most of the almost 300,000 high school students are not now enrolled in the academically rigorous Regents courses.
But principals said that, while they welcomed the higher standards, they worried that there would not be enough qualified teachers, adequate equipment or up-to-date textbooks to teach the tougher courses.
Jerry Resnick, the principal of Clara Barton High School for the Health Professions in the Bronx, also worries that at least initially, the failure rate among students will be high.


Cash Bail Set in Murder Case
After serving 18 years for a 1977 murder conviction that was overturned by a  Federal court, Lawrence Simmons will remain in jail at least until Nov. 22 while the Passaic County Prosecutor's Office decides whether to retry his case.
At a bail hearing yesterday, Superior Court Judge Randolph Subryan could have released Mr.
Simmons, 37, on his own recognizance but instead ordered him held on $500,000 cash bail.
Mr.
Simmons was convicted of murdering Dr.
David Doktor outside the physician's Paterson home.
In overturning the conviction last January, the Federal appeals court agreed with the defense contention that blacks had been improperly excluded from the jury.
The United States Supreme Court declined to review the ruling last month.
JOE SHARKEY


A Call to Cut Immigration
The number of non-refugee immigrants allowed in the United States would fall  at least 20 percent under a bill introduced today by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming.
Mr.
Simpson said he was concerned that too many immigrants were competing for jobs.
He said it was time "to make certain we are assimilating well the extraordinary level of immigration." Last year, there were 804,416 legal immigrants, including refugees and asylum seekers.


In Some Judicial Races, Dark Horses Wear Blinders
Christopher Renzulli is a 29-year-old lawyer who was sworn in as a member of  the New York bar in April.
Under state law, he will not be eligible to run for judge until 2005.
Yet Mr.
Renzulli, a resident of Westchester County, will appear on Tuesday's ballot as a Conservative candidate for Bronx Supreme Court justice -- a job he does not want.
"It's like a bad joke," said Mr.
Renzulli, an associate at Fischer Fiden &amp; Norris in Manhattan who is a 1994 graduate of St.
John's University Law School.
"The Conservative Party didn't even bother to call me. I've called them, but they don't return my calls."


Lou Levy, 84, Publisher of Decades of Hit Songs
Lou Levy, whose company published songs by Sammy Cahn, Bob Dylan, Henry Mancini and others, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan and London.
In a music publishing career that began on Tin Pan Alley in the 1930's, Mr.
Levy amassed a catalogue that included the hit songs "Strangers in the Night," "Downtown," "C'est Si Bon," and "The Girl From Ipanema." He published the Beatles' first hit in the United States, "I Want to Hold Your Hand," and developed the careers of artists like the Ames Brothers, the Andrews Sisters, Les Paul, Connie Francis and Bobby Darin.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Six Ardent Young Singers Take Over Leading Roles 'La Boheme' New York City Opera


Best Place to Lose A Wallet Is Seattle
If there is such a thing as a good place to lose your wallet, Seattle is it,  an experiment by Reader's Digest has found.
The magazine left a trail of 120 "lost" wallets in 12 communities around the  nation and kept track of how many were returned with the $50 contents intact.
Seattle had the best rate of return, 9 of 10.


Blame Rules, Not the Cabbies, for Poor Service
To the Editor:
Re Edward Rogoff's "Don't Raise the Taxi Fares" (Op-Ed, Oct. 30):


Job Growth Remains Sluggish Nationwide
The economy generated new jobs at a lackluster pace in October, Government data showed yesterday.
While the nation's unemployment rate slipped to 5.5 percent from 5.6 percent  in September, a modest 116,000 jobs were added to employer's payrolls, less than what economists had expected.


Slur on a Blackboard
The police are investigating an incident in which an anti-Semitic insult was  written on the blackboard of a teacher at John Jay High School in Brooklyn.


Florence Greenberg, 82, Pop-Record Producer
Florence Greenberg, a one-time New Jersey housewife who parlayed an unlikely  hit record by a teen-age group known as the Shirelles into an improbable career  as the proprietor of a leading independent label of the 1960's, died on Thursday at the Hackensack University Medical Center.
She was 82, and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
As a pioneering woman in the male-dominated world of rhythm-and-blues, Mrs.
Greenberg was, by her own later account, a triple anomaly: "a white woman who was in a black business and who couldn't carry a tune."


Bonds Slip After Data On Payrolls
Treasury prices slipped yesterday as traders and investors took profits after recent gains.
The lackluster showing followed a report on employment in October that failed to give the market a clear indication of the direction of the economy and of interest rates.
The employment report, which showed a weaker-than-expected increase in the number of new jobs, echoed the market's view that economic growth was slowing.
But it did not provide a compelling case for the Federal Reserve to lower short-term interest rates anytime soon.


King Insists Accountant Made Spending Decision
The prosecution in the Federal wire-fraud trial of the promoter Don King tried to show yesterday that a man who insists on signing company checks for as  little as a nickel would surely concern himself with the steep cost of insuring  a boxing match against a cancellation.
But under cross-examination in a Manhattan courtroom, King said he let his accountant decide to spend $80,000 on a $750,000 Lloyd's of London policy to insure the 1991 Julio Cesar Chavez-Harold Brazier fight, which was canceled when Chavez cut his nose.


1-Man Crusade Over Lobbying Ensnares a Bill
Of all the Republican underclassmen in the House of Representatives who have  crusaded this year to turn decades of liberal rule on their ear, few have been as ardent as Representative Ernest Jim Istook Jr.
Mr.
Istook, a 45-year-old lawyer from Oklahoma, is one of the most conservative members of the House.
Legislation he proposed to limit abortions has slowed action on at least three of the 1996 spending bills; he is chief sponsor of a constitutional amendment on school prayer, and he is among a cadre  of members who succeeded in winning a House vote to deny money for the health care of partners of unmarried District of Columbia employees.


Two Cowboys Are Suspended
Leon Lett and Clayton Holmes of the Cowboys were suspended for four games today for violating the National Football League's substance-abuse policy.
The suspensions were effective immediately and would sideline Lett, a Pro Bowl defensive tackle, and Holmes, a reserve cornerback, until Nov. 24.
They would miss games against the Eagles, 49ers, Raiders and Chiefs.


British Gay Ban Upheld
The Court of Appeal upheld the British military's ban on homosexuals today, although one of the three justices said the policy was "ripe for review."
Attorneys for the woman and three men who had been dismissed by the armed forces said they would appeal to the House of Lords.


BUSINESS MAY PAY MORE FOR HEALTH AS CONGRESS CUTS
Businesses tallying the effects of projected cuts in Government health care spending are beginning to worry that they will have to help make up the difference.
At the heart of their concerns is cost-shifting -- the notion that as projected Medicare and Medicaid spending shrinks, hospitals and doctors will demand that employers and their insured workers pay a greater share of health care costs.


From Botany to the Beatles at Park Conservancy
At year's end, when Karen Putnam takes over as president of the Central Park  Conservancy, she will inherit a park that is two-thirds of the way through a $100 million restoration and has become a model of public-private cooperation for parks from Atlanta to Louisville to San Francisco.
It was not always so.
In the mid-1970's, before the conservancy was created,  Central Park was by all accounts a disgrace.
Fountains were never turned on, commercial events like food fairs ripped at the fabric of the Mall, hippie "be-ins" wreaked havoc.
Things slipped so badly that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan introduced legislation to give the park to the National Park Service.


Gang Tried to Kill Officer As a Rite, Prosecutors Say
A 14-year-old boy being initiated into the Latin Kings gang was told to drop  a 60-pound steel mesh trash basket from the roof of a housing project onto a police officer, prosecutors said yesterday.
The basket, heaved over the edge of the roof with the help of another gang member, officials said, dropped 13 stories and narrowly missed housing police Officer Paul Pagan -- by coincidence, a colleague of an officer who was killed two years ago by a 30-pound bucket of spackle thrown from a roof.


Vehicle Ignites Toll Plaza
Around 7:15 A.M. yesterday, a 30-foot motor home carrying eight golfers to their game overheated and stalled in a toll booth at Interchange 5 on the New Jersey Turnpike.
The motor home burst into flames, and soon the entire toll plaza was ablaze, officials said.
No one was injured in the fire, which was extinguished by Burlington Township firefighters.
But the fire destroyed the motor home and three toll booths and a canopy, and the administration building was damaged, said a Turnpike Authority spokesman, James Robinson.
Both directions of the interchange are closed until temporary toll booths can be installed, probably by Sunday.


Mixed Reports for New York and New Jersey
The unemployment rate in New York State fell to 6.3 percent in October from 6.8 percent in September, but the number of people with jobs also declined, the  Labor Department reported yesterday.
In New Jersey, the jobless rate increased to 5.8 percent from 5.7 percent, but employment increased.
In New York, the number of residents employed in October fell by 38,000, to 7.99 million.
The size of the labor force shrank by 91,000 people, to 8.52 million.


Job Growth Was Sluggish Last Month
Despite fresh signs of stability in factories, the economy generated new jobs at a lackluster pace in October as the unemployment rate edged down to 5.5 percent from 5.6 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
The figures, the most comprehensive gauge of economic performance for the month, tended to confirm other recent indications -- including weak store sales  -- that the economy had decelerated in recent weeks after a surge in the summer  months.
In terms of job growth, the rise of 116,000 in nonfarm payrolls last month was below economists' expectations.


WELLPOINT ACQUISITION OF HEALTH SYSTEMS DELAYED
The completion of a $1.6 billion deal to merge WellPoint Health Network Inc.  and Health Systems International has been delayed by at least a month to the end of the year, the two California companies said yesterday.
The acquisition agreement, which would create one of the nation's largest managed-care organizations, expires at the end of the year and would have to be renegotiated  if the transaction is not completed before then, the companies said.
Analysts and company officials said they still expected the deal to be completed.


Prices of Heating Oil Retreat As Concerns on Inventory Ease
Heating oil prices fell on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday as concerns eased that inventories were too low.
On other commodity markets, corn prices fell while orange juice gained.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities fell 0.48 point, to 243.35.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Mexico's Lifeblood On the Auction Block;Workers Call the Selloff of Parts Of Oil Monopoly Almost Unpatriotic
Petroleos Mexicanos S.A. is one of Mexico's most powerful national symbols, and for many of the thousands of Mexicans employed by the Government oil monopoly, corporate loyalty verges on patriotic fervor.
Wearing khaki uniforms with Mexico's flag on one sleeve, Pemex workers often  view their jobs as a handsomely paid form of national service, as when engineers braved 100-mile-an-hour winds in October to batten down offshore oil platforms during Hurricane Roxanne.
Now, however, this identification of Pemex with the motherland is complicating the efforts of the Government to sell its petrochemical operations, the first big chunk of Pemex the Government has ever attempted to split off.


MSB BANCORP REJECTS A TAKEOVER BID FROM HUBCO
MSB Bancorp Inc. said yesterday that it had rejected an unsolicited acquisition offer of $35 a share from Hubco Inc.
Despite the rejection of the offer, MSB's stock jumped $9.25, to $27.25, in Nasdaq trading.
MSB, based in Goshen, N.Y., said it wanted to remain a community bank and grow through acquisitions.
On Sept. 29, MSB said it would purchase eight upstate New York branches of First Nationwide Bank.
MSB will raise funds for the purchase through an equity offering, it said.
Hubco, based in Mahwah, N.J., is the holding company for Hudson United Bank.


A Bond Firm Notifies Denver It May Sue
A Philadelphia bond underwriting firm has notified the City of Denver that it may try to recover any fines that may be assessed against it as a result of an investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission into the sale of Denver  International Airport bonds.
The firm, Pryor McClendon Counts &amp; Company, told the city of its plans in a notice of intent to file a claim.
The notice protects the firm's right to sue at a future date.


Corrections
A sports article on Thursday about the Federal wire-fraud trial of Don King misidentified the witness who testified that only one of the 1,400 King boxing contracts he examined provided for payment of nonrefundable training expenses.
The witness was Daniel Quinn, a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent, not John  Ryan, a forensic accountant.


Outlawing an Abortion Method
The House of Representatives succumbed to emotional blackmail this week when  it approved a bill that would ban a specific abortion procedure and impose criminal penalties on doctors who use it.
The House action would undermine women's constitutionally protected right to choose to terminate a pregnancy and  doctors' right to determine what is best for their patients.
The Senate would be wise to exercise more restraint.
The procedure to be banned, known as intact dilation and evacuation, is used  only in late-term abortions, after 20 weeks of gestation, and even then its use appears modest.
About 13,000 of the nation's 1.5 million abortions each year take place after 20 weeks, usually because of special circumstances, such as a threat to the mother's health or severe fetal abnormalities.


Mortgage Rates Lower
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.44 percent this week, down from 7.45 percent last week, according to a national survey by the Federal Home Loan  Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.67 percent, down from 5.73 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 6.97 percent this week, down from 7.01 percent a week earlier.


Reservoirs Are No Longer Low
The rains came, and the drought emergency that began Sept. 13 in 119 North Jersey municipalities was declared officially over yesterday.
As October's heavy rains continued into this month, water levels in the reservoirs serving the municipalities were actually higher than normal for early November.


More Talk of Possible Sumitomo-Daiwa Deal
The Sumitomo Bank Ltd. is negotiating to take over the beleaguered Daiwa Bank, creating the world's largest bank, two leading Japanese newspapers reported today, bolstering widespread speculation on such a deal in the Japanese financial community.
Masaji Tamura, a spokesman for Daiwa Bank, said of the reports: "There has been nothing decided yet about a merger with Sumitomo Bank. I think that all the Japanese press reports have been written with too much certainty about this." Nevertheless, it is not unusual for word of pending negotiations to be leaked to Japanese newspapers, allowing companies to gauge the reaction before committing  themselves.


New Coach and Three Guards Add Up to Victory
The chalkboard inside the Knicks' locker room before tonight's game read, "Small-guy lineup, be ready," alluding to the Detroit Pistons' unending supply of backcourt players.
Hubert Davis sat a few feet away, slowly pulling a new wristband halfway up his arm.
Charlie Ward laced his sneakers across the room.
They were about to be  welcomed to their new coach's gimmick-laden career, about to add to Don Nelson's reputation as one of the game's better strategists.


Baltimore Browns May Be a Done Deal
It appears that Art Modell has decided to relocate the Browns from Cleveland  to Baltimore and is planning to make the announcement on Monday in Baltimore, according to someone close to the team owner.
The person, who requested anonymity, would not provide details about the Baltimore deal, but he said that a proposed $175 million in renovations to Cleveland Stadium would not be enough to keep Modell from moving the team, which has been in Cleveland since 1946.


As Powell Ponders, Friends And Family Proffer Advice
Late in August, Colin L. Powell spent a weekend at Walker's Point in Kennebunkport, Me., talking politics and the Presidency with George and Barbara  Bush.
A Bush cousin, George Herbert Walker 3d of St.
Louis, who is active in the draft-Powell movement, sat in, as did the retired general's wife, Alma.
Toward the end of the international tour promoting his book, General Powell spent an evening at the Atlanta house of James Bostic, a good friend since 1972, when the two were White House fellows together.
The general also slipped,  unannounced, into Jimmy Carter's office at the Carter Center for a chat.
Again,  the Presidency was a topic.


A Virtuoso Revisits A Favorite Garden
Thirty years ago Alicia de Larrocha made her debut with the New York Philharmonic, playing a work closely associated with her: Manuel de Falla's "Nights in the Gardens of Spain." This week, to celebrate the anniversary of her debut, Ms. de Larrocha is again performing the de Falla, a fitting and clearly very personal choice.
This piece is less a soloistic concerto than a tone poem for orchestra with a fetching, coloristic but not dominant piano part: not the sort of work to win big ovations.
Those who know of de Falla only as the composer of sultry Spanish dances would be surprised by "Nights in the Gardens of Spain." The music abounds in Impressionistic evocations of steamy evenings in ancient, stone-walled gardens;  and the composer doesn't mask his debt to Debussy.
But the music has striking emotional severity and compositional rigor, and it was these qualities that Ms.  de Larrocha emphasized in her restrained and incisive reading yesterday.
In certain passages, she projected de Falla's spare, compressed tunes with an intentionally dry, plunky sound that was very effective.
Yet when called for, she brought color and radiance to the Debussian swirls and figurations.


The San Francisco's Fire and Energy
The latest New York premieres from the San Francisco Ballet, presented on Thursday night, are vastly different.
Helgi Tomasson's "Sonata," set to Rachmaninoff's music, was an evocative dance-drama without a plot but with plenty of passion in its use of classical technique.
Val Caniparoli's "Lambarena," danced to a mixture of Bach and African music, was an exuberant experiment that set off an audience ovation.
There was also a spectacularly danced performance of "Con Brio," a neo-Romantic nosegay created by Mr.
Tomasson in 1990; it rounded out this third  program of the company's season at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan).


Russians in a Panic Over New Currency: The U.S. $100 Bill
It is unlikely that most Americans will pay much attention when the United States Treasury introduces a redesigned $100 bill in January.
The old bill will  still be accepted everywhere of course, and it's not exactly as if hundred-dollar notes are the coin of the realm.
But things couldn't be more different here, because Russians are completely obsessed with C-notes.
They covet, hoard and trade them more than in any country other than America itself.


Queens Man And Girl, 3, Die in Plunge
A 56-year-old man and a young retarded niece cradled in his arms plunged to their deaths yesterday from a window of his seventh-floor apartment in Queens, the police said.
While the circumstances were unclear and a suicide-homicide was not ruled out, officials said the deaths appeared to be accidental.
The man's sister told the police she had just left the room, and no one saw Liaquat Hussain and his 3-year-old niece, Aima Arif, plunge 60 feet onto the roof of a lobby at the well-kept cooperative apartment building at 83-00 Talbot  Street, at Lefferts Boulevard in Kew Gardens, shortly after 1:30 P.M.


New Chief Named For British Airways
The second-ranking executive at British Airways, Bob Ayling, will become chief executive of the carrier on Jan. 1, the company announced yesterday.
The chairman, Sir Colin Marshall, will stay on but in a nonexecutive capacity.
Mr.
Ayling, 49, was elevated to his current post of group managing director  in February 1993, when the former chairman, Lord King, retired early amid the fallout from a battle in which the rival Virgin Atlantic Airways accused British Airways of waging a campaign of "dirty tricks." Sir Colin, 61, is expected to become president of the Confederation of British Industry next year.
(AP)


Rights Issues Complicating Bosnian Talks
During the three days of peace talks on Bosnia this week, human rights abuses and reports of massacres have been pushed high on the agenda as the Bosnian Government has demanded that the Serbs do more to uncover abuses and punish those responsible.
Washington plans to send an envoy to the Balkans on Saturday to confront the  human rights issues so the three parties can focus on a draft peace agreement and on elections, constitutional issues and the separation of military forces.


Asprey to Be Acquired By Brunei Prince
Asprey P.L.C., the British-based luxury goods retailer, agreed yesterday to a takeover bid by one of its biggest customers, Prince Jefri Bolkiah of Brunei, that is worth L243.5 million ($385 million), or almost double the company's market price on Thursday.
Prince Jefri, the brother of the Sultan of Brunei, will pay 250 pence a share for the company, an exclusive chain that is jeweler to the British Crown.
Asprey's shares closed at 127 pence on Thursday.
The Asprey family has agreed to sell its 51.7 percent controlling stake in the business.
The family will receive cash for 41.7 percent of its shareholding  and new shares in the company for the remaining 10 percent.
Prince Jefri has the option to buy the remaining shares within three years.
(Bloomberg Business News)


The Gay Search for Equality
The first program's title, "Out Rage '69," of course refers to the celebrated Stonewall riot, when a police raid on a Greenwich Village bar brought five nights of demonstrations.
The pictures, although familiar by now, are still strong and sometimes funny.
One participant tells of New York City's tactical police being confronted by a high-kicking line of demonstrators: "We are the Stonewall girls. We wear our hair in curls." And there they are.


120 Are Felled By Toxic Gas At Boeing Site
An accident at a Boeing Company manufacturing plant today created a cloud of  toxic gas that sent at least 120 people to area hospitals and forced the evacuation of several thousand people, officials said.
The accident occurred when chemicals were being handled by supervisors who were filling in for striking workers, said a Boeing spokesman, Peter Conte.


Hungry Shareholders vs. Wary Managers
Would the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation face dire legal consequences if it immediately spun off its food business from its tobacco operations, as the company contends?
Or is the company needlessly risk-averse, denying hungry shareholders the quick financial windfall that might follow a spinoff?
These are the crucial questions that shareholders, analysts and industry executives are asking after RJR Nabisco's firm rebuff on Tuesday of the demand by the financiers Carl C. Icahn and Bennett S. LeBow for a complete and immediate spinoff of RJR Nabisco's food business, the Nabisco Holdings Corporation, in an effort to raise the value of the stock.
The two investors are attempting to rally shareholders to their cause, and they promise a proxy fight  to elect a slate of directors committed to an immediate spinoff of Nabisco's food company.


Edison Joins Retail Chains In Chapter 11
Edison Brothers Stores Inc. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection today, the largest mall-based specialty retailer to do so in recent times and the latest of several filings by retail chains.
The St.
Louis company, which operates more than 2,600 shoe and apparel stores including Jeans West, Oaktree, J. Riggins and Wild Pair, attributed the filing to a combination of too many unprofitable stores and slow sales.
The company has 24,750 employees.


College Vote of Confidence
After its regular monthly meeting yesterday, the Rutgers University Board of  Governors issued a statement reiterating its "full confidence" in the university's president, Francis L. Lawrence.
The statement was in response to a letter signed and released publicly by 16 senior faculty members that accused Dr.
Lawrence of failing to consult with faculty, isolating himself within a "protective staff" and being "preoccupied with image rather than substance."


Scandals in South Korea
For years, South Koreans have presumed that their ruling elite benefited from a corrupt relationship with the nation's industrial giants, but their suspicions have never been proven.
Now the confession of former President Roh Tae Woo that  he had amassed a huge political slush fund while in office has shocked even the  most cynical of the country's citizens.
President Kim Young Sam must not flinch  from a full investigation and punishment of those guilty of corruption, even if  it means sending Mr.
Roh to prison.
For President Kim, the first civilian leader of his country in 30 years, it may be difficult to pursue the truth, at least in part because of suspicions that he too may have benefited from the illegal funds.
He denies that he is getting any money from companies or got any money from Mr.
Roh.
But skeptics note that he became President in 1993 only after allying himself with Mr.
Roh's  party.
The President now controls Parliament by a coalition that could break apart if Mr.
Roh, a former general, is imprisoned.


Quebec Party Unlikely to Seek a New Sovereignty Vote Soon
Its goal remains an independent Quebec, but the Parti Quebecois looks unlikely to call soon for a new referendum on sovereignty after its frustrating  loss in the latest referendum on Monday.
Though it has vowed to try again, the party is turning attention back to governing Quebec, leaving its members in Canada's Parliament to keep pressing the Government of Prime Minister Jean Chretien for constitutional changes that would give the province at least nominal independence.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8


Talks Seen on CNBC-Dow Jones Linkup Abroad
Executives at Dow Jones &amp; Company and at the General Electric Company's CNBC  have held discussions about merging their cable television services in Europe and Asia, according to several people familiar with the talks.
Executives at both companies declined to comment.
Both companies have expanded into Europe and Asia with English-language news  services, and both are said to be losing money on those operations.
The reports that they were considering combining their services has a logic that appeals to some industry analysts, given the cost of starting cable services.
"In an era of global markets, it would make sense to achieve economies of scale," said Larry Gerbrandt, a cable analyst for Paul Kagan Associates, a consulting firm.
But one media executive pointed out that discussions go on continuously.
He said that he doubted either company would be willing to give up control of its own services.


An Underdog Democrat Is Gaining in Mississippi
If it is still possible for a progressive Democrat to win statewide office in the Deep South, the pollsters and consultants say, it is by forging a coalition  between black voters and white women.
That theory will meet a significant test in next Tuesday's election for governor of Mississippi.
Although Mississippi is one of the most conservative states in the nation and has enjoyed robust economic health in recent years, Dick Molpus, a Democrat, has managed to stay within striking distance of Gov.
Kirk Fordice, a Republican, by seeking a large black turnout and appealing aggressively to women.


Sports of The Times;First Flight Of an African Dream Team
ALBERT MOKOENA sensed that his basketball team needed a lift.
After a grueling 13-hour trip from South Africa, as the 12 black players from Soweto made their way to the baggage claim, Mokoena turned to them and announced, "Hey  guys, we have tickets to see the Boston Celtics tonight."
That brought a smattering of cheers and lots of smiles.
Spirits were raised,  a perfect tone struck.


Review/Fashion;Beene's Homage to Mondrian
Mondrian made geometry gorgeous, but Geoffrey Beene was inspired this season  by other qualities in the artist as well.
His wit.
His love of boogie-woogie, and the wall in Mondrian's atelier full of pictures of nudes.
In a still-life presentation at the American Craft Museum, across the street  from where the Museum of Modern Art has recreated the artist's 59th Street studio as part of its Mondrian retrospective, Beene made a case yesterday for his own gorgeous geometry.


British-I.R.A. Talks Break Off, and Sinn Fein's Leader Looks toWashington
Talks between British officials and political representatives of the Irish Republican Army broke off inconclusively today.
Afterward Gerry Adams, the I.R.A. political leader, said he would go to Washington to confer with top American officials before President Clinton visits Britain and Ireland later this month.


Race Certainly Has a Biological Reality
To the Editor:
Ira Glasser of the American Civil Liberties Union (letter, Oct. 28) criticizes Shelby Steele (Op-Ed, Oct. 24) for pretending that racism does not exist.
Mr.
Glasser further asserts that race is not a biological fact but rather a "social and political construct" based purely on skin color.


Joe Camel Rebuttals Had Tobacco Ties
To the Editor:
In "Why Medical Journals?" (letter, Oct. 30), Jean J. Boddewyn, Baruch College marketing professor, writes in response to your Oct. 24 editorial on teen-age smokers: "The 1991 studies of Joe Camel advertisements that appeared in the Journal of the American Medical Association have been debunked by at least three reputable advertising scholars. Yet you keep quoting them."


Rage Grows in Okinawa Over U.S. Military Bases
Children are flipping through their books and a teacher is passing out note pads when suddenly the floor trembles and the classroom is engulfed in a roar.
It is not an earthquake, or Armageddon, but an interruption that occurs at least hourly: A military helicopter soars into the sky from the American air base next door.


JAZZ
Improvisation Grounded In Laughter and Play Manny Orquendo and Libre S.O.B.'s


McDonnell Gets Pentagon Order For 80 Planes
Handing the McDonnell-Douglas Corporation a major victory, the Defense Department said yesterday that it had decided to order 80 more of the company's  C-17 military jet transport planes, in a contract it said was worth about $18 billion.
McDonnell triumphed over an alternative proposal to buy a mix of 32 C-17's and 30 C-33's, the military freight version of the Boeing Company's 747 jumbo jet.
Although the Boeing jet would have cost far less, Pentagon officials were said to favor a plane designed from the ground up for military use, with the ability to land on dirt runways and to unload cargo without additional equipment.


Attacking the G.O.P.'s Plan for Medicare
The Democratic National Committee is airing a new 30-second commercial this week in 20 states, in what a committee spokeswoman called a $1.6 million campaign.
It is the latest volley in the Medicare war.
PRODUCER Squier Knapp Ochs


Jury Awards Girl's Mother $1 Million in Choking Death
A Brooklyn woman whose 13-year-old daughter choked to death in school while hurriedly eating a hot dog has been awarded more than $1 million by a jury that  found that teachers and a school aide were negligent for not helping the girl.
The six-member jury returned the verdict on Oct. 24, in a lawsuit filed by the girl's mother, Julia Garcia, against the Board of Education and New York City, after a trial before Acting Justice Martin Schneier of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Bridge
Fatigue breeds lack of concentration, and lack of concentration breeds errors.
Most are soon forgot, but one last month in Beijing changed the result of the 1995 Bermuda Bowl world championship.
A young Brazilian player, Sergio Aranha, played the diagramed deal in three no-trump doubled against the formidable American partnership of Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff.


Man Accused of Fake Calls; One Led to an Officer's Death
Since the beginning of September, officers from the 10th Precinct in Chelsea  had responded more than a dozen times to false reports of pistol-toting men, drug deals and gunshots in the blocks around the Chelsea Houses on West 26th Street.
Yesterday, officers were sent to the Chelsea Houses again.
But this time they made an arrest, charging a 38-year-old unemployed laborer with making 13 false 911 calls to increase the police presence in his quiet neighborhood.
One bogus call in late September led to the death of a police officer in a car crash.


Jordan Scores 42 Points As Bulls Win Their Opener
Bulls 105, Hornets 91


Review/Fashion;Visions for Changing Times
One of the challenges that designers face is how to keep their visions viable as tastes and times change.
That which is too obviously linked to a particular moment is difficult to carry forward or dilute for a broader market.
In their shows this week, Cynthia Rowley, Byron Lars and Russell Bennett all demonstrated, in different ways, that they could overcome this obstacle to their developing businesses.
Cynthia Rowley has staked out her ground in sweet innocent fun, an approach that, given human nature, will always have currency.
And she made sure this season, with her styles that conjured up the leisurely life in the 50's and 70's, that she remained in step with fashion's current good-time feeling.


Business Apology in South Korea Scandal
South Korean business leaders, bowing to public anger over corruption, apologized today for links with the $654 million slush fund of former president  Roh Tae Woo and vowed never again to make secret political donations.
As heads of the country's largest business conglomerates issued their apology, about 5,000 students demonstrated on one Seoul campus and thousands more staged protests in other major cities to demand Mr.
Roh's arrest and the seizure of his hidden money.


Fokker Shares Jump After Bailout Report
Shares in Fokker N.V. jumped 9.1 percent yesterday after a newspaper reported that the Dutch Government was willing to provide the company a maximum of 800 million guilders ($501 million).
The Dutch daily Het Algemeen Dagblad reported that the Government would be willing to furnish 800 million guilders if the company's parent, Daimler-Benz Aerospace A.G., came up with the remainder of the needed funds.
(Bloomberg Business News)


On TV, Neo-Noir That's Cheap Enough for Fun
Danny Glover is not the most obvious choice to play Philip Marlowe, and Agnieszka Holland ("Europa, Europa") is not the most likely director to give Raymond Chandler's iconic detective new life.
But in "Red Wind," a segment of Showtime's "Fallen Angels" series, they make Marlowe seem wonderfully mysterious all over again.
And if you've wondered why there isn't more sexual heat and suspense in the current movie "Devil in a Blue Dress," based on Walter Mosely's first Easy Rawlins novel, you'll be much happier with "Fearless," another in the series.
Based on a Mosely story, it has remarkably similar characters, plus the wit and  sex appeal "Devil" so cautiously avoids.


No Headline
Congress is not required to subsidize lobbying activity for anybody, and that's what we're talking about." -- ERNEST J. ISTOOK JR., Republican Representative from Oklahoma. [10:5.]


A Case of an Ethnic Attack Is Called a Hoax
An Iranian immigrant's assertion that she had been the victim of a vicious hate crime last month prompted a march and speeches against bigotry.
But the police grew suspicious as they delved into the story that the 38-year-old woman  had told about having been bound, slashed and left to die in a fire at her family's Middle Eastern restaurant here.
On Thursday, the woman, Zhaleh Sarabakhsh, was arrested, and today she was arraigned in East Central District Court on state charges of arson, arson-for-insurance, endangering and making a false report.
The charges carry a  maximum of 31 years in prison.
Ms.
Sarabakhsh, whose bail was set at $100,000, was ordered to have a psychiatric evaluation.


Pavarotti Risking High C's Again
Luciano Pavarotti turned 60 last month.
But passing this milestone has not made him reflective; it has made him "completely crazy," as he put it recently.
Tonight at the Metropolitan Opera, Mr.
Pavarotti will reclaim a role he has not sung -- there or anywhere else -- since 1973: Tonio, the heart-sick Tyrolean peasant who falls in love with the vivacious Marie, who has been raised by a regiment of French soldiers.
The opera, of course, is Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment." Mr.
Pavarotti's performances 22 years ago, with Dame Joan Sutherland
as Marie, made him an international celebrity.
It was his tossing off of Tonio's aria at the end of Act II, with its nine high C's, that drove Met audiences to delirium.
At the time, even sober-minded critics could not quibble when London Records starting billing Mr.
Pavarotti as "King of the high C's."


Motor Agency Under Fire
A train wreck" is how Democratic Senator Wayne R. Bryant described operations at the state Division of Motor Vehicles since Gov. Christine Todd Whitman privatized some agency operations in July.


Play It Again Wins Again
The National Horse Show's $10,000 Puissance Stake, the daredevil-friendly event with a wall that grows taller as the entrants grow scarcer, was captured tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a 6-foot-10-inch leap by the six-time Canadian Olympian Ian Millar and Play It Again, the horse he is schooling for the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
The duo also won the Puissance class last week with a 7-foot effort at the Washington show.
"He's like a bull in a china shop; I felt serious power there," said Millar, 48, a five-time winner of the National's Puissance class.
Play It Again, a rust-hued 1,400-pounder who stands 17.3 hands, has won three of the four Puissance tests Millar has given him.


Steinbrenner Shows Interest In Mattingly
George Steinbrenner has a new manager and a new general manager, but he apparently wants his old first baseman back in a Yankee uniform for 1996.
The Yankees' principal owner called Don Mattingly's agent, Jim Krivacs, earlier this week and informed him that retaining the 34-year-old captain is very important to him.


Inquiry on X-Rated Film
An X-rated film was briefly shown to children at an elementary school on Wednesday, and the new Schools Chancellor, Dr.
Rudy Crew, has asked officials at the school district in Harlem to find out how the film got into the school and briefly onto an auditorium screen.
Parents of schoolchildren at Public School 125 on West 123d Street were as angered as school officials were embarrassed about the incident.


New York's New Housing Plan
New York City has long needed a way to encourage owners to hang on to their buildings instead of abandoning them to avoid paying taxes, thus forcing the city to foreclose and become the landlord.
The foreclosure program has been a disaster, costing the city millions while perpetuating some of the worst living  conditions in New York.
The best way to keep owners solvent would be to repeal rent stabilization laws and permit landlords to charge realistic rents -- a political impossibility given opposition from renters' groups.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's plan for withdrawing the city from the real estate business will help troubled landlords  and is an important piece of New York's housing puzzle.


Riley's Back in a No-Lose Situation
The bemused smiles in the Knicks' locker room gave them away as people who were beginning to suspect that they can't win.
Or maybe, since they did win here last night, it was more the realization that Pat Riley just can't lose.


PERSONAL COMPUTER SALES IN NORTH AMERICA SET
Hitachi Ltd. said yesterday that it would begin selling personal computers in North America, starting with a line of notebook computers.
The Japanese computer maker said its Hitachi PC Corporation unit would initially sell notebooks aimed  at mobile officer workers who need to tap their corporate computer networks while on the road or from far-flung offices.
The new line will be available in the spring.
Hitachi joins two Japanese computer makers, the Toshiba Corporation and the NEC Corporation, in selling personal computers in the United States.
Hitachi PC, based in San Jose, Calif., will employ about 100 people and  be capitalized at $20 million.


Executive Plans to Leave Paine Webber
The vice chairman of Paine Webber Inc., Michael D. Madden, is leaving the securities firm, his wife said yesterday.
Mr.
Madden, 46, joined Paine Webber amid much fanfare last year when it acquired the assets of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company from the General Electric Company.


No O.J. Show in Atlantic City
A sports memorabilia show at which O.J.
Simpson was to appear has been canceled here but may be held elsewhere, the promoter said yesterday.


Dollar Down on Profit Taking After a Week of Posting Gains
The dollar retreated yesterday, hurt by weaker-than-expected economic news in the United States, a drop in the Mexican peso and traders who sold the dollar to lock in profits from its run-up during the week.
"The market clearly was going to consolidate," said Bob Near, vice president  of the Bank of New York.
"Then the baton was passed over to the Mexican peso problems, and people sold the dollar on that."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Proposed Medicare Cuts May Shift Costs to Business While the proposal to cut Medicare and Medicaid spending has won the support of  business people, economists and some executives are beginning to warn that many  employers could end up paying more for health care as a result.
They said that millions of working people could also pay more, and that many people who work for small businesses could lose their insurance.


Gag Orders Can Do Wonders for a Peace Talk
GETTING enemies to see their way clear to making peace is like putting them in a hall of mirrors -- a place where reality can be reflected in endless ways.
The key to success is to accentuate the positive.
That's what the United States is trying to do with the parties in Bosnia now, nudging them into making  small breakthroughs and making sure none of them leaves the negotiating table.


MY FATHER'S BLACK PRIDE
Interesting timing for your publication of Bleecker's article -- a day before the Million Man March, led by a black man who hates Jews.
Perhaps you should have asked Bleecker (the son of a black woman and a white Jewish man) to talk about those contradictions.
HOWARD WEXLER Bronx


Little Sigmund and the Flipouts


Julienne Morriss, John Callaway
Julienne Marie Morriss and John Patrick Callaway, who work for investment banks in New York, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
John Gilmartin performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Callaway is an equity research associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Judy and John Morriss of Valhalla, N.Y.
The bride's father is a senior manager at McGraw Hill, the New York publisher.
Mrs.
Morriss is a speech and language pathologist at the Douglas Graflin elementary school in Chappaqua, N.Y.


This Author of Homelessness Has Two Theatrical Houses
IF AMERICANS WISH TO MAKE FOOLS OF themselves in front of us -- day after day after day after day after day -- what are we supposed to do, cover our eyes?" asks a character in Richard Nelson's play "New England."
Of course, the speaker is British.
But what is unusual is that the words are  by an American who has made a successful career in the English subsidized theater by contrasting different cultures.


Yet Another Interpretation
To the Editor:
Remember Belle Poitrine, the heroine of Patrick Dennis's satire of show business, "Little Me"?
When Belle filmed her version of "The Scarlet Letter" (by Nat Hawthorne), she transformed Hester into the captain of the Allstate College  cheerleader team, who is seduced by the captain of the football team, Brick Barclay.


Encore at UConn: Rizzotti Gets Set for One More Dramatic Dash
The basketball caromed unusually hard off the back of the rim, beyond the reach of the desperate crowd of Connecticut and Tennessee players underneath, and Jennifer Rizzotti recognized the opportunity of a lifetime.
The national championship game was tied at 61-61 as the clock ticked under two minutes, and as the sense of finality grew on that Sunday afternoon in Minneapolis last April, the teams had been led into an odd, temporary caution.
"Everyone was kind of nervous," Rizzotti remembered.
"No one was really being assertive and taking it hard to the basket like they had been playing all game.  Both teams were being a little tentative. They didn't want to make the big mistake. The way the ball bounced out, that was a very rare defensive rebound. Pretty much right into my hands."


If Quebec Ever Goes, There Goes Canada;Official Language Perils
To the Editor:
House Speaker Newt Gingrich's interpretation of the referendum in Quebec as an "interesting warning" on the dangers of bilingualism (in remarks at the Nixon Center for Peace) couldn't be more wrong.


Ford Is Recalling Trucks
The Ford Motor Company is recalling 38,300 medium- and heavy-duty trucks from the model years 1993 and 1994 to replace a part of the hand throttle system that might fail.
The hand throttle swivel is used to set an engine's speed.
There have been no reports of accidents or injuries related to the problem, which prevents the engine from returning to idle, Ford said on Wednesday.
Of the 38,300 affected trucks, 2,535 were sold in Canada.
Ford dealerships will perform repairs at no charge.


Patriots-Jets: Two Quarterbacks in a Quandary
One is a 23-year-old phenom for the New England Patriots whose first two years in professional football gave Hall of Fame promise.
The other is a 33-year-old, 10th-year journeyman for the Jets who was unseated on the Pittsburgh Steelers by Neil O'Donnell and then backed up Randall Cunningham with the Philadelphia Eagles and now Boomer Esiason with the Jets.
When the Patriots (2-6) meet the Jets (2-7) at 1 o'clock today at Giants Stadium, the quarterbacks will be Drew Bledsoe for the Patriots and Bubby Brister for the Jets.
Both have endured puzzling problems this season, Bledsoe as the leader of a struggling projected playoff team and Brister in relief of Esiason, who is sidelined by post-concussion syndrome.
The Patriots are slight favorites because they have more talent and more hope.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Men's Clothing Shop in SoHo Plans to Double Its Size


Loss Chills Orangemen's Hopes of Playing in Major Bowl
After 15 minutes, today's Syracuse-Virginia Tech game changed like the weekend weather.
A stinging cold front blew through the Blue Ridge Mountains, and along with the temperature, Syracuse's major bowl hopes went plummeting on an afternoon of numbing self-destruction.
An early 7-0 lead crumbled into a pummeling 31-7 defeat that saw the Orangemen lose their grip on first place in the Big East and lose any apparent hope of playing in the Orange Bowl or the Sugar Bowl.
At 6-2 over all and 3-1 in the Big East with a road game at Miami still ahead, Syracuse is suddenly faced with descending into the jumble of second-tier bowl invitations.


Waiting for the Candidate Who Can Change Everything
TO gauge the potentially huge repercussions of a Colin L. Powell candidacy for President, consider the reach of his noncandidacy.
From the basement of his home in McLean, Va., the command center for his deliberations, General Powell has stopped the Republican contenders in their tracks in Iowa and New Hampshire.
They are, like everyone else, waiting for the
decision.
Gossip about General Powell's intentions has consumed the White House, where President Clinton is hardly eager to compete with a more popular figure who draws publicity in heroic proportions.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
Your article is a morose put-down of a beautiful state and its wonderful "underpopulous." One would think from the prose and pictures that old women and  Government programs are all that North Dakota has going for it.
It is only toward the end of his essay that Margolis touches on the human and physical values to be found there -- the spirit and warmth of the people and their way of life.
North Dakota is, in fact, quite necessary: it is a marvelous retreat from the crime, the filth, the abrasiveness, the rudeness, the dourness, the high prices, the overcrowding and dozens of other less than wonderful aspects of life in New York City and places like it.


Correction
The Westchester Q&amp;A column last Sunday with John F. Le Bel, about the Bridge  Fund, which helps county residents avoid homelessness, misstated a statistic from Stanley Schear, the fund director.
He said the average cost of preventing homelessness is $1,000 a case, not a month.


Debate on Plan for Elderly Housing
A PROPOSAL to build 172 cooperative apartment units in Woodbury to house elderly residents is setting off a debate in the Town of Oyster Bay.
On one side are planners, developers and older residents, who say theaging population of Long Island, including many people on fixed incomes, has created a need for additional less expensive housing for the elderly.


Trying to Do Without a Glorious Dust Bowl
For the next two years, my sports universe will be without a sun.
Central Park's dreaded Great Lawn Project has begun.
If Central Park really is the lungs of New York City, the place where New Yorkers go to breathe freely and relax, the Great Lawn is the heart of the lungs.
Thousands of sports stories, love stories and life stories spring from that 15-acre so-called lawn.
As a person who plays softball there from April through September, along with players from 200 other teams, and regularly chases footballs and Frisbees there, I have lived many unforgettable New York moments on those grounds.
Like the time I turned out for a regular Wednesday evening ultimate Frisbee game and Paul Simon and his band showed up to rehearse for his  free concert the next day.
We ran and dove and danced around the lit-up field while Paul strummed and sang to his new Brazilian beat.
Then, we came out the next day and squeezed into the crowd of 600,000 for the concert.


Winning the Shows and Loving the Equine Life
Like most horse show prodigies, 17-year-old Megan Johnstone started off humbly enough: Right around kindergarten time, she was smitten with a pony, and she persuaded her parents to buy it.
The fascination with all things equine, however, did not stop there; it took  her all the way to the National Horse Show, where today she became just the second rider in the show's 112-year history to compete in the prestigious daylong Rolex-Maclay National Championship and then return to the ring at night  for the elite $50,000 Budweiser Grand Prix event that closed the show.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
Jon Margolis's "The Reopening of the Frontier" (Oct. 15) asks provocatively,  "Is the state of North Dakota really necessary?" On occasion, great newspapers are expected to answer childish questions (e.g., "Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus") but not pose the questions themselves.
It's true that as the reality of global competition in agriculture prevails  over the call for the preservation of family farms, North Dakota's population is migrating from the rural areas to cities.
But I doubt that anyone asked, "Is Lawrence, Mass., necessary?" when the textile mills moved South.
The numerical size of a community says little about its values or contribution to the greater  whole.


Classroom Journal: Am I Really Ready for This?;A new professor faces jitters -- and endless work.
AFTER 17 YEARS AS A JOURNALIST, THE last 5 as a reporter for The New York Times, I am experiencing first-hand what I have reported on -- higher education.
It turns out that teaching is not the semiretired, laid-back stroll through the Colorado aspens and firs that my former newspaper colleagues seemed to think it would be.
They haven't seen me or my colleagues grading papers late into the  night, planning the next week's lessons, or frantically looking for time to write free-lance articles. (A body of work on a significant theme is required for tenure.) They haven't watched me sweat through "practice" lectures during orientation sessions offered to neophyte professors.
This teaching business is more demanding than it appears from the outside.


Bowe Gets Knockout Holyfield Predicted
Riddick Bowe pushed Evander Holyfield into athletic old age tonight, but it wasn't easy.
Bowe survived a sixth-round knockout and the loss of a point for a low blow,  and came back with a right in the eighth round that sent Holyfield flat on his face.
As Referee Joe Cortez reached the count of 9, the 33-year-old Holyfield rose from the canvas and stood there momentarily, arms at his side, like a gladiator waiting to be chopped down.


How to Live Happily Ever After in the Theater
IF YOU EVER DOUBT THAT Theater is in the blood, meet the Whiteheads.
Dad -- Robert Whitehead -- has produced plays by Tennessee and Arthur.
Mom -- Zoe Caldwell -- wins a Tony Award almost every time she puts on a costume.
Older son Sam (the turncoat!) is a theater critic.
Even Charlie, the baby of the family, works for the group that runs the TKTS booth in Times Square.


Friend Says Two Officers Stranded Man Before Killing
On the last day of his life, Richard Will, a 32-year-old white man, begged two black police officers in this dangerous, almost entirely black Chicago suburb to give him a ride to the police station, Mr.
Will's friend says.
About 15 minutes later, after walking five blocks in search of a telephone, Mr.
Will was attacked by a group of young black males.
He was beaten, doused with lighter fluid and set afire.
He died a few hours later.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about sector analysis of the economy misstated the market ticker symbol for Coca-Cola Enterprises.
It is CCE, not KO.


Pants of a Salesman


Call of the Wild


Politicking for NATO's Top Post Becomes Surprisingly Intense
If anyone thought the NATO Secretary General's job was nonpolitical, the way  the Netherlands and a few of its powerful European friends are maneuvering to get a former Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, into the job may come as a surprise.
Mr.
Lubbers, a Christian Democrat, and Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, a Danish Liberal, emerged last month as the two main candidates to succeed Willy Claes, the former Belgian Foreign Minister who resigned as Secretary General on Oct. 20 to face charges in a Belgian arms-buying scandal.


'Babe': Beyond Frivolous
To the Editor:
In his article "Australia's Serious Side Fades From the Movie Screen" [Oct.  22], Philip Shenon suggests that "Babe" is a not a serious film.
I maintain that its genius is proved by its being seen as a comedy.


Shunning Cable, Some Select Satellite
WITH home teams' performing poorly this year, Michael Cincotta of Huntington  was desperate for "good football," beyond the Giants and Jets.
Reading about an 18-inch antenna, or satellite dish, that receives 175 direct broadcast channels and a package that would bring him every professional football game in the country, he decided to go for it.
If one game was a blowout, he said, he could switch to another.


Some Say a Powell Candidacy Could Make Black Voters Abandon Democrats
Here inside the Beltway, Republican speculation over whether a Colin Powell candidacy would thwart Newt Gingrich's conservative revolution has all but eclipsed an equally intriguing issue: Were General Powell to seek the Republican Presidential nomination -- and possibly go on to win the Oval Office -- would a  significant number of blacks eventually abandon the Democratic Party?
In its most basic form, that issue is currently underlying the sound bites of former Vice President Dan Quayle -- who wants General Powell in the Republican Party -- and is on the minds of politically engaged black academics at both ends of the political spectrum.


Gay Bar to Help AIDS House After All
After several bomb threats, a barrage of angry phone calls and rumblings of a boycott, a West Village gay bar says its cancellation of an agreement to feed neighborhood residents with AIDS was the result of an in-house miscommunication.
And the bar, the Dugout, has reached a new agreement to feed the 44 clients of Bailey House, a residence for homeless people with AIDS.
The Dugout's managing partner, Jack Allen, said last week that another partner, David Waxtel, rescinded the original agreement because he had misunderstood comments Mr.
Allen made when the two men discussed Bailey House's  needs during an $1.8 million renovation.
"I had concerns about operating hours and logistics, but I never told him to cancel the agreement," Mr.
Allen said.
"I don't think David understood me, and he certainly didn't understand the impact of his statements."


Out of Focus
IF HE'S REALLY innocent, the camera led a lynching.
When two-thirds of all Americans come away persuaded -- by evidence they think they've seen with their  own eyes -- that he did it, they brand him and burden him as if he'd done it.
They take judgment out of the hands of the jury and punishment out of the hands  of the judge.
If, on the other hand, he's guilty, the camera ravaged justice.
It leaves too many people convinced that in an American court, celebrity and wealth, slick lawyering and appeals to racial passion can prevail over truth.


In the Region: Connecticut;Plugging Into the Right Niche for New Housing
HOUSING starts in Connecticut were down through late summer and early fall by as much as 20.3 percent from last year.
But a developer who knows his or her niche can do surprisingly brisk business.
Two projects in different parts of the state at disparate but regionally competitive prices are currently attracting ready buyers thirsting for new construction.


Christine Hearst, S. A. Schwarzman
Christine Hearst, a lawyer, and Stephen A. Schwarzman, the investment banker, were married on Friday at the bridegroom's apartment in New York.
Rabbi Bertram  Siegel officiated with the Rev.
Sam Matarazzo, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Schwarzman is a senior associate at Cowan, Liebowitz &amp; Latman, a law firm in New York, where she specializes in intellectual property law.
She graduated from Hofstra University and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Peggie Mularchuk of Hicksville, L.I., and the late Peter Mularchuk.
The bride's father owned Electritek Industries, a former distributor of appliance parts in Hicksville.


Balkan U.: Rutgers Gropes For a Vision
THE RAGE that coursed through Rutgers University last winter has ebbed, and here on the main campus, where students amble along College Avenue and cluster in cafes, life has resumed a predictable pace.
It was one year ago this week that Francis L. Lawrence, the Rutgers president, told a faculty group that black students lacked the "genetic, hereditary background" to excel on college admissions tests.
When the remark was publicized in January, the university exploded in protest and racial recrimination.
At a basketball game in February, 200 students, mostly black and  Hispanic, flooded the court to demand that Dr.
Lawrence resign.
In return, the spectators, mostly white, shouted their disgust, chanting, "Let's play ball! Let's play ball!"


Corrections
An article on Oct. 8 about an oral history project at the University of Connecticut, on the Nuremberg trials, referred incorrectly to Peter Jacobsohn.
It was his parents, not he, who published an anti-Nazi magazine before fleeing Germany in 1933.


The 4-1-1 On Urban Cool: Hype or Hope?
SILHOUETTED in the last light of a setting autumn sun, a group of young black men recently strolled along the teeming bazaar that is the Fulton Mall in downtown Brooklyn.
Without a word, without a smile, they walked with a stylized strut -- a graceful sway of shoulders, an easy sling of arms, a slight bob of the head.
The bounce of their steps was so buoyant it suggested that Earth's gravity was everybody else's burden.


What Does Camden Need? Education, Jobs and Mentors
Let's face it: we need help."
So said Mayor Arnold Webster two weeks ago after Camden's 48th homicide this  year, two shy of the city's record of 50 set in 1992 with two full months of 1995 to go.


Chasing a Deal on Water With a Few Pitchers of Beer
Last spring, when Gov.
George E. Pataki asked his counsel and close friend, Michael C. Finnegan, to try to mediate a conflict between New York City and the  communities around the city's upstate reservoirs, Mr.
Finnegan took a drive up to Delaware County to take the temperature of the dispute.
As he spoke with farmers and townsfolk, he felt the heat of their anger at the metropolis to the south that for a century had flooded fields, dug up cemeteries and condemned villages to make way for its expanding water-supply system.


Rebecca Rosenblum and Grant Tolson
Rebecca Mira Rosenblum, a privitization consultant, was married yesterday to  Michael Grant Tolson, an investment banker.
The Rev.
Kevin Madigan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Cantor David Benedict took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Tolson, 28, was until recently a project manager with the International  Finance Corporation in Minsk, Belarus.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
The bride is the daughter of Lorie Rosenblum of Chicago and Michael Rosenblum of Bloomington, Ind.


Yitzhak Rabin, 73, an Israeli Soldier Turned Prime Minister and Peacemaker
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, who was shot dead yesterday at age 73, was a soldier turned statesman who led his country into uncharted territory  to make peace with the Palestinians and put an end to the wars, bloodshed and terrorism that had plagued his country since its founding.
It was General Rabin, the Commander in Chief of Israel's armed forces in 1967, who had led the lightning strike that captured broad swaths of Arab territories.
Twenty-six years later, on Sept. 13, 1993, it was Prime Minister Rabin who reluctantly extended his hand to Yasir Arafat, leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, to put a symbolic seal of approval on an accord that would lead to the return of much of that territory and to Palestinian self-rule on the Israeli-occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


Elizabeth O'Neil, Frederick Gerson
Elizabeth Anne O'Neil, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. O'Neil of Lynn, Mass., was married yesterday to Frederick Evan Gerson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Gerson of West Orange, N.J.
Justice Robert McGann of the State Supreme Court in Kew Gardens, Queens, officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
O'Neil, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a media supervisor at Bates U.S.A., the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from St.
Anselm College.
Her father is a regional director in Boston for the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Her mother, Catherine O'Neil, is a bacteriologist at the Leahy Clinic in Boston.


Leslie L. Bennett; Physiology Professor, 86
Leslie L. Bennett, a retired professor of physiology who played a crucial role in the expansion of the University of California at San Francisco, died Oct. 28 at a nursing home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 86 and lived in Albany, Calif.
Dr.
Bennett was associated with the University of California system for nearly 65 years.
He received degrees in zoology and anatomy at the university's  Berkeley campus.
He then received his medical degree at the San Francisco branch.


Boxcars on Amtrak?
Besides Pullman coaches and observation cars, Amtrak may soon be able to add  baccarat, blackjack and keno cars.
The State of Missouri may allow gambling on Amtrak's service between Kansas City and St.
Louis.
The proposal by Missouri is  meant to generate revenue to save the state-subsidized passenger service between the two cities, which are now linked by two trains: the Ann Rutledge and the Missouri Mules.
An amendment to the state constitution must be approved by Missouri voters before the dice start rolling down the tracks.


One Radical Critic of Marx, And Hold the Ice, Please
To The Editor:
I appreciate the piece about me ("The Marxist Professor," Oct. 29), but I have two small corrections.


Is Nebraska Focused? 73 Points Answer That Question
Lawrence who?
The game between Nebraska and Iowa State was supposed to feature the return of Cornhuskers tailback Lawrence Phillips from suspension, and perhaps another good game from Nebraska quarterback Tommie Frazier.
It did.


RABIN SLAIN AFTER PEACE RALLY IN TEL AVIV; ISRAELI GUNMAN HELD; SAYS HE ACTED ALONE
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who led Israel to victory in 1967 and began the march toward peace a generation later, was shot dead by a lone assassin this evening as he was leaving a vast rally in Tel Aviv.
Mr.
Rabin, 73, was struck down by one or two bullets as he was entering his car.
Police immediately seized a 27-year-old Israeli law student, Yigal Amir, who had been active in support of Israeli settlers but who told the police tonight that he had acted alone.


Jeffrey P. Soros, Catharine A. Cosover
Catharine Ann Cosover, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Cosover of Milford, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Paul Soros, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Soros of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
David Dyson, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Church United Methodist in New York.
Mrs.
Soros, 30, is a graphic designer in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father teaches physical education in the public schools in Teaneck, N.J.
Her mother, Harriet Cosover, teaches reading and mathematics at the Lester D. Wilson School in Alexandria Township, N.J.


dig those crazy threads


Surge for Peres and Peace, Till Elections
The assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin throws an enormous question mark over Israeli politics just a year before elections that could decide the future of the Arab-Israeli peace.
For the near term, his death is unlikely to affect the process of Israeli-Palestinian disengagement that was begun with an agreement signed in Washington on Sept. 28.


Fashion Editors' Choice
The coat of the season, a pared-down, plain silhouette, showed up on a half-dozen fashion editors attending the New York collections last week in Bryant Park.
Elizabeth Tilberis (far right), the editor of Harper's Bazaar; Anna Wintour (far left), the editor of Vogue, and four Conde Nast editors all wore an identical Versace design made of cashmere.
The simplicity of the cut in luxurious fabric, and the couture technique of extending the lining to the edge  of the coat, left, eliminates bulk and emphasizes the lean minimalist design.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Oct. 22, about the 1996 Olympic Summer Games in Atlanta, misstated the number of people among 314,000 early applicants who received tickets to both the opening and closing ceremonies.
Laurie Olsen, a spokeswoman for the Atlanta Committee for the Games, said it was at least five people, not just two.
The column also referred inaccurately to the timing for ticket orders by credit card.
Orders by telephone will start in February; mail-order requests have been accepted since May 1.
The telephone number is (404) 744-1996.


Merrimon Cuninggim, 84, Minister and Educator
Merrimon Cuninggim, an ordained Methodist minister who brought a finely honed sense of ethics -- and a wicked backhand -- to his work as an educator and foundation official, died on Wednesday at his home in Cockeysville, Md.
He was 84.
In a career in which he taught religion at four colleges, served as president of Salem College in North Carolina from 1976 to 1979 and held a series of philanthropic posts, Mr.
Cuninggim twice made major ethical stands.


Splat! Take That, Superhero!
FORGET the ballyhoo over Bowe-Holyfield 3.
Wrestle-mania?
Child's play.
The showdowns of the century, the fights of all fights, begin on Wednesday when the  comic world's most famous superheroes meet in an unprecedented clash of the titans.
At stake: the titles of the most invincible creations ever illustrated.
Readers will decide the outcomes.
It's DC Comics versus Marvel Comics.
The five main events are: Superman vs. the Incredible Hulk, Batman vs.
Captain America, Superboy vs.
Spider-Man, Wonder Woman vs.
Storm, and Lobo vs.
Wolverine.


Chirac Says Deficit Cuts To Come First
Cutting Government budget deficits is high on the agenda in France, but President Jacques Chirac has told people here to expect their taxes and social security premiums to go up, not down, during the next two years to narrow a $60  billion annual shortfall.
And the conservative majority in Parliament applauded him for it.


POSTINGS: New Life for Old Doubleday Building;Printing Plant To Offices
In the first major office construction project in Nassau County since 1990, Rockrose Development Corporation of Manhattan has begun converting the former printing facilities of Doubleday, Page &amp; Company, in Garden City, L.I., into office space.
Interior demolition of the Georgian-style, red brick facility began six months ago and was recently completed.
Further construction will commence when a major tenant is found for the building.


New Face Transforms Leftover Pumpkins
HALLOWEEN may be over, but pumpkins aren't.
In the country, they are still piled up outside markets or scattered over empty cornfields, waiting to be picked.
If you consider pumpkin pie a dish that is nice for Thanksgiving but one you  don't crave at any other time, then you are probably wondering what will become of all those pumpkins, now that they are no longer useful for making jack-o'-lanterns.


Foreign Affairs;The Death Of Israel's Everyman
I desperately want to write a column that says that despite the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, the peace process between Israel and  the Arabs will survive.
I am not sure.
The reason is that this is a case where the death of one man really can make  an enormous difference.
It was only Yitzhak Rabin, among contemporary Israeli leaders, who had the credibility and courage to sell the peace treaty with Yasir Arafat to the Israeli public.
Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, deserves  enormous credit for having the initial vision to see the possibility for a breakthrough between Israel and the Palestinians, and to push Mr.
Rabin in that  direction.
But it was Mr.
Rabin who, once convinced that Yasir Arafat was ready  to deal, persuaded Israelis that they could trade land for peace with their mortal enemy.
They would not have bought the deal from anyone else.


Big Fish, Big Pond
Even after a lifetime of protecting and celebrating the sea, he is buoyant.
JACQUES-YVES COUSTEAU - MY FIRST 85 YEARS is about the world's legendary living  argonaut and his achievements, from the invention of the revolutionary Aqua-Lung in 1943 to international awards for global preservation.
Mr.
Cousteau is interested in the unplumbed depths of the future, which he calls his "next 50 years," when, he hopes, education and awareness about the environment will lead to better lives for those above and below oceal level.


INSIDE
LOOKING BACK 3 The infancy of Times Square: The birth of the Olympia Theater.


Bishops Steer Middle Course On Politics
At a time when political conservatives are gearing up to recruit Catholic voters, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops are reaffirming today their longstanding commitment to defend the unborn, the poor and the vulnerable while  guarding against attempts to enlist the church in partisan politics.
The bishops have begun the widespread distribution of a 14,000-word statement on political responsibility that sets out familiar positions on issues like abortion, welfare, immigration and arms control, but also declares, "Our moral framework does not easily fit the categories of right or left, Republican or Democrat."


Leslie J. Adisman, Geoffrey B. Mintz
Leslie J. Adisman, a writer, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Belford Mintz, the controller of the Stateside Construction Corporation, a real estate company  in New York.
Rabbi Michael Gelber performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
The couple graduated from Columbia University, she cum laude.


Millstone's Neighbors in a Quandary
ALARMED by recent reports of unsafe practices at Millstone Unit 1 nuclear power plant in Waterford, residents of the area have organized to watch over operations at the plant.
They formed the Citizens Regulatory Commission, the first group of its kind in the area since Millstone I started operating in 1970.
Residents began raising questions about safety at the plant after George Galatis, a senior engineer at Northeast Utilities, the owner of Millstone, charged publicly that the practice of unloading the full reactor core into the spent-fuel pool during the refueling process is unsafe and could cause a nuclear accident.
The plant's license allows removal of only a third of the core at a time.
Mr.
Galatis and We the People, an organization in Massachusetts that works with whistleblowers in the nuclear industry, petitioned the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to suspend the Millstone I license for 60 days and deny the company's request for an amendment that would allow unloading of the full core.


Powell, Speaking Empirically
THE books have been sold.
The polls have been encouraging.
The entire political establishment is paralyzed.
So what is Colin L. Powell waiting for?


Jennifer A. Tafet, David S. Klausner
Jennifer Anne Tafet and David Scott Klausner, associates at New York law firms, were married last evening at Singers, a caterer in Nanuet, N.Y.
Rabbi Jeffrey Wartenberg performed the ceremony.
The couple received their law degrees from Yeshiva University.


Owners Could Block Browns' Move to Baltimore
The Browns' majority owner and president, Art Modell, could face stiff opposition from other owners if he tries to move his team from Cleveland to Baltimore.
Modell is expected to announce at a news conference tomorrow in Baltimore his intention of relocating the team to play in a proposed $200 million stadium to be built near Camden Yards.
Modell will need the approval of 23 of the 30 National Football League owners.
He will face other owners at a meeting in Dallas on Tuesday, where the move will be discussed, but no vote will be taken.


Radically Different
VIRTUAL EQUALITY The Mainstreaming of Gay and Lesbian Liberation.
By Urvashi Vaid. 440 pp.
New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday. $24.95


Pianists' Programs: Baroque to Jazz
THE keyboard prevails this week at several programs, ranging from Baroque to  jazz.
The parade starts this afternoon at 2 at Wave Hill with Billy Lester and his trio playing traditional and modern jazz.
Those who prefer Chopin and Ravel can wait until 4 o'clock when Peter Basquin gives a free recital in Briarcliff Congregational Church.


Habitats: 644 Broadway;From SoHo to NoHo, Adventures in the Rag Trade
ROWS upon rows of sturdy paper collars and parts of vests and halves of miniskirts hang on racks, near where the actual clothes are piled up, hidden under blue sheets.
Not exactly all the clothes -- the rest are lost somewhere on a jet from a fashion show somewhere in Texas; it's all really kind of vague.
Or at least that's the way the inhabitants of the apartment portray it.
To a  certain extent, they appear a trifle blase, people whose world is effortless, people who raise strange and exotic pets in their grand Broadway loft, designers who stage fashion shows in their living room, their magnificent Russian wolfhound named Manhattan lying at the visitor's feet.
"You are the only person  he's ever done that to before," they say, with amazement.


Laurel Ann Cook And Todd Gitlin
Laurel Ann Cook, a public relations counselor at Doubleday in New York, was married on Friday evening to Todd Alan Gitlin, a professor at New York University.
Justice Louise Gruner Gans of the State Supreme Court officiated in  her chambers in New York.
Ms.
Cook, 42, is a daughter of Virginia and Eugene Cook of Costa Mesa, Calif.
The bride's father retired as a construction supervisor at the Maco Corporation  in Santa Ana, Calif.
Her mother owned Image Supplies, a cosmetics retailer in Cypress, Calif.


The Man Who Makes the Rangers Run
Before long, perhaps even this week when the Rangers play three games at Madison Square Garden, Mark Messier will put a puck past a goalie with a slap shot, a wrist shot, a tip-in or a rebound.
A red light will flash.
His teammates will rush toward him as fans cheer.
Someone will rush for the puck, pick it up and hand it to the captain, who will  take it out of play and put it safely away.


The Home Of the Emperors
The documentary FORBIDDEN CITY: THE GREAT WITHIN recreates through dramatizations the day-to-day life of a Chinese emporor and the thousands of other people who lived within the walls of the Imperial Palace in Beijing.
Built in the early 15th century by the Ming Dynasty Emporor Yongle, the city-within-a-city consisted of 900 buildings constructed on 178 acres.
Much of the program focuses on one particular emperor, Kangxi (who ruled from 1662 to 1722), and the intricate protocol involved in dealing with his concubines and the 3,000 eunuchs who attended all of them.


For Sale: One Theater With a Checkered Past
In the last year or so, passers-by could have dropped into the Blooming Grove Theater in Montclair for gospel music, a David Mamet play, an opera in concert or a Sunday morning prayer service.
They could rent the space for a social, cultural or spiritual event.
Or buy it.
It's been more than four years since Alberta Handelman and Michael Huseman did just that, dreaming of starting a regional company that would pick up where  the Whole Theater, which had owned the building for 17 years, left off.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NON FICTION
HEART OF WHITENESS Afrikaners Face Black Rule in the New South Africa.
By June Goodwin and Ben Schiff.
Scribner, $27.50.


Officials Investigate Arson Fire On West Side
The flash fire that killed two people early yesterday in the Frederick Douglass Houses on the Upper West Side was arson, fire officials said.
The fire, at 826 Columbus Avenue, at 100th Street, was set just after 1 A.M.  in an abandoned folding bed on the third-floor landing of the building's back stairway, said Marilyn Mode, the deputy commissioner of public information for the Fire Department.


Lisa A. Kotler, Howard S. Shafer
Dr.
Lisa Anne Kotler, a resident in psychiatry at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, is to be married today to Howard Scott Shafer, a partner in  the New York law firm of Killarney &amp; Salmon.
Dr.
Jacob J. Schacter, a rabbi, is  to perform the ceremony at the Hilton Hotel in East Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Sheila and Dr.
Stuart Kotler of Holmdel, N.J.
The bride's father, a radiologist, is a partner in Raritan Radiologic Associates in Perth Amboy, N.J.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist at the Marlboro (N.J.) Elementary School.


Mean, Egregiously Self-Serving Bev
On screen as Bev, mom of the title character of ABC's "Roseanne," Estelle Parsons frequently manages to be as egregiously self-serving and unpleasant as,  off screen, Roseanne seems to be herself.


Going the No-Load Route
WHAT'S the best sales strategy for a fund with superior performance?
Some fund sponsors, deciding that a top performer can sell itself, drop the sales charge, or load.
In a closely watched test case, Skyline Special Equities went the no-load route a few years ago and had measurable success.
Reducing the load is also the route chosen by Universal Capital Growth, a small fund with just $8 million in assets, which just cut its maximum sales charge to 1.5 percent from 4.75 percent of the amount invested.
Universal also reduced its minimum investment, to $500 from $1,000.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Streetscapes: The Herald Square Hotel;Old Life Building Getting a New Look
FOR years, Abraham Puchall has been proudly restoring the old Life Building at 19 West 31st Street, a Beaux-Arts jewel built in 1894 and considered of "outstanding significance" by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Now he has  demolished the top of the building's facade -- now the Herald Square Hotel -- for a modern addition, and says he is "too busy" to discuss it.
John Ames Mitchell, who started Life Magazine in 1883 as a humor magazine aimed at educated readers, was a well-born painter and architect who studied at  Harvard and the Ecole des Beaux-Arts.
Mitchell's editor, Edward Martin Sandford, was another Harvard man and a founder of the Harvard Lampoon in 1876.
In an article in Life in 1936 Sandford said that, with Life, he sought to adapt the Lampoon to a wider audience; the original Life was sophisticated and satirical,  something like the old Spy magazine without the nastiness.


Marrying Well
IT is a Wednesday night at Le Club, the opening night fete for the fall season, and Mohamed Khashoggi is having a very good time.
He is sipping Dom Perignon in the dimly lit dining room, sitting on a gilded chair cushioned with  burgundy velvet.
Behind him are mirrored walls draped with gold curtains pulled  back with cabled ropes.
He is laughing with his friends.
The only annoyance is the Italian counts trying to corner his group's dates.
"Boulevardees," he sniffs. "All they do is walk up and down the boulevards."


In the Zoop
Most computer games are of the "killing-shooting variety," says Michele DiLorenzo, and the targets of this sport are mostly boys and young men.
As president of Viacom New Media, DiLorenzo is now marketing a new game called Zoop, which she says has been drained of blood and thus devised to appeal to shes as well as hes.
"Zoop doesn't have the baggage of being destructive," says Sandra Higashi, who along with Byron Glaser designed its graphics, "but could be looked at as a tapestry that unfolds from the center, a beautiful experience that ultimately  ends up at the blue sky, the spirit-freeing payoff."


The Great Synogogue Is Coming, With Room for 10,000
It will seat more people than the Metropolitan Opera House, Avery Fisher Hall and the New York State Theater.
Combined.
One of the world's largest synagogues is about to be built in Williamsburg by the Satmar sect, New York's biggest Hasidic community.
The new Great Synagogue,  to go up on Bedford Avenue and Wilson Street over the next two years, will hold 8,500 to 10,000 people.


Report Says 2 Saw McVeigh Near Blast
A recently unsealed document about the Oklahoma City bombing investigation says two witnesses saw a man they believed to be Timothy J. McVeigh and another  person leave the scene shortly before the April 19 attack.
Mr.
McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols are accused of blowing up the Federal office building here, killing 168 people and wounding hundreds.


You Won't Find Jamesway (Or Anyone) in This Town
To the Editor:
A map with your article "A World Without Jamesway" (New Jersey &amp; Co., Oct. 22) located a store in "Bridgetown," Cumberland County.
In fact, the place is called Bridgeton, and the store is actually located in the neighborhood of Carll's Corner, in Upper Deerfield Township.


A Cab That's a Van!' and Other Reactions to a Test Drive
Mauri Jaffe, cane in hand, approached the cab slowly, opening the rear door and lowering himself gingerly to sit.
The seat was a bit higher than he expected, and only then did Mr.
Jaffe, 77, seem to notice that the cab he had entered was not a car.
He was one of the first people to ride last week in the first minivan to be used as a New York City taxi, and Mr.
Jaffe, an architectural designer, was very taken with the model, a Honda Odyssey.


Yiddish: The Seminar
Mama-loshen lebt! Yiddish lives!
Yiddish is a language whose death has been forecast for a half century, a victim of Nazi extermination and linguistic assimilation.
But, like the rising inflections that often serve as coda to its sentences, Yiddish refuses to die.


He's Got a Little Big List
Looking to send promos to manufacturers of adhesives?
Maybe you've developed  a new product of interest to pest-control pros.
Or perhaps you want to reach out to teachers in Colorado.
Mailing lists for these and a zillion -- well, 11,000 anyway -- other groups  are available from Hugo Dunhill Mailing Lists, a 58-year-old New York concern that helps companies take aim with direct mail.
The 1996 catalogue, by itself great bathroom reading, offers lists ranging from the large and broad (auto dealers and service stations: 351,967 names) to the small and specific (C.E.O.'s of stone, clay, glass and concrete manufacturers with more than 1,000 employees: 56).


Shuttle Crew Prepares for Return to Earth
Dr.
Kathryn Thornton said today that she and fellow astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia "have put our toys away" as they shut down experiments to get ready to end a 16-day mission.
The shuttle is scheduled to land at the Kennedy Space Center on Sunday at 6:45 A.M.
Eastern time if it can zoom through low clouds and wind gusts following a cold front.


A 401(k) Isn't Enough
To the Editor:
"Building a Better 401(k)" (Oct. 22) lingers over details to compare various  features of 401(k) plans but fails to follow through to the bottom line.
By 2000 there may be 25 million American workers at 350,000 companies with $1.175 trillion invested in such plans, but that would come to only $47,000 a worker, hardly a foundation for a comfortable retirement.
Compare this with a traditional defined-benefit plan from which a worker could expect a guaranteed benefit, in most cases much more valuable than anything he could accumulate in a 401(k).


Using Technology for Affordable Housing
FROM modest offices in a former school building here, now known as the Eastview Technology Center, a young company called Grassroots Technology Associates has managed to propel itself into prominence on the global housing market.
Using a new construction technology called Cubic-Crete, a patented proprietary compound, Grassroots has an agreement with South Africa to produce more than a million homes there over the next decade.


Appraising the Role Of the Appraiser
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 3 article titled "Appraising the Role of the Appraiser" was an interesting description of the plight of appraisers in today's changing lending  environment.
However, the situation may not be as dire as the article infers.


Ready, Aim. No, Wait a Second. Hold That Gun Sideways.
IN THE NEW THRILLER "Copycat," Holly Hunter teaches Dermot Mulroney a valuable lesson: Hollywood heroes are no longer straight shooters.
Ms.
Hunter plays a detective in the film, which has been generally praised by critics.
In one scene she talks with her young partner, played by Mr.
Mulroney,  on the practice range while she fires a pistol using the standard police stance: two hands on the gun, arms in a straight V. But when her practice is finished, she smiles, thrusts out a single hand and, turning her pistol horizontal to the  ground, fires off a clip.


Bribe Alleged For Testimony On Noriega
A Colombian cocaine cartel may have paid $1.25 million to a witness in the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega possibly in exchange for testimony against  the deposed Panamanian dictator, Federal prosecutors have learned.
An informer told the Drug Enforcement Administration that the Cali drug cartel paid the witness, Ricardo Bilonick, to testify about General Noriega's ties to the rival Medellin cartel, with which Mr.
Bilonick had worked, according to papers filed by Government prosecutors in Federal District Court here.
The testimony of Mr.
Bilonick, a Panamanian lawyer and former diplomat, helped lead  to General Noriega's 1992 conviction for drug trafficking, on which he is serving a 40-year sentence in Federal prison here.


Sarah Greenberg, Matthew Morse
Sarah Dora Greenberg, the daughter of Jenny Van Horne Greenberg of New York and the late Clement Greenberg, is to be married today to Matthew Glenn Morse, a son of the late Donna Gardner Morse and Matthew L. Morse.
Canon Joel Gibson, an  Episcopal priest, is to officiate at the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries in New York.
The bride, 32, was until recently an independent art curator and consultant.
She graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father was the art critic who propelled the career of Jackson Pollack and was one of the most influential supporters of Abstract Expressionism.
Her mother is a playwright in New York..


Gripping Dust Jackets Of 1995
Elspeth Dragoon began her stage career in the London production of "Captain Jinks of the Horse Marines" in 1903 and was last seen in a recent episode of the hit TV series "Batwatch." In between, Dame Elspeth has appeared sober numerous times.
She once beat up Noel Coward and is the only actress to have thrown an onstage tantrum during a royal command performance.
This memoir was stitched together from press clippings and four rambling, almost incomprehensible interviews taped by her niece, whom Dame Elspeth has now cut out of her will.


ON THE TOWNS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state  this week.
To submit items for consideration, write to On the Towns, Sunday New  Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or send a fax to (212) 556-7219.
MUSIC


Telling a Late Bloomer From a Real Loser
A PUBLIC corporation in the early development stage is sort of like a teen-ager.
It's awkward, has lots of blemishes and tries to mooch money from just about anyone.
But the family puts up with it in expectation of a big payoff: one day it will be able to support itself with a good income.
Some teen-agers, though, keep hanging around the house, using up cash and jabbering about their dreams.
Just as parents seem to maintain their faith that  someday these children will be a success, some shareholders keep hanging on to companies stuck in adolescence.


A $10 Device Seen as Help To Diabetics
The use of a simple test and better patient monitoring could eliminate most of the 54,000 foot amputations performed on diabetics each year, health experts  say.
Federal health agencies said on Friday that they are starting a national educational campaign centered on a simple $10 device that could ultimately result in reducing diabetic limb amputations by 80 percent to 90 percent.


Devils Win In Los Angeles
The Devils ended a four-game winless streak tonight with a 4-2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings at the Forum.
Neal Broten scored twice for the Stanley Cup champions, who conclude a four-game Western road trip Sunday night at Anaheim.
Broten broke a 2-2 tie at 13 minutes 33 seconds of the third period against Kings goalie Byron Dafoe.
It was the first game between the two teams since Larry Robinson -- Jacques  Lemaire's assistant with Devils last season -- became coach of the Kings.


On the Roads This Week: 7 Spots to Steer Clear of (if You Can)
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Hackensack River.
Express lane closed.
Monday through Friday.
Through Nov. 10.


Pop Briefs
MADONNA; 'SOMETHING TO REMEMBER' Maverick/Warner Brothers


The Lake District
To the Editor: Having just returned from the Lake District, I enjoyed Susan Spano's article "Barn to Barn in the Lake District" (Sept. 10).
My wife and I stayed just outside Keswick in a small inn called the Heights Hotel, which is south of town, off A591.
The hotel had nice views north to the town, upper lake  and Skiddaw, the second highest mountain in the Lake District.
More important, however, one could walk from the hotel to the Wallacrag trail, an easy walk that leads to a spectacular viewpoint over Derwent Water and the surrounding mountains.
The walk to the crag is just over a mile, with a rise of about 450 feet in the beginning and relatively flat thereafter.
A side trail rises to a peak called Castlerigg.
At 1,973 feet, it provides another 700 feet of vertical climb.
The trail is difficult to follow in spots.
The main trail continues beyond the crag and in another mile reaches the southern shore of the lake.
From here you can catch a boat back to town.


Talks Seek to Revive Enron Power Project in India
Three months after the Indian state of Maharashtra canceled the Enron Corporation's plan to build a $2.8 billion power plant outside Bombay, the state government began formal talks today on reviving the project.
Both sides are said to be hoping that a new deal can be worked out quickly, perhaps by the end of this month, to end what has been a damaging chapter in India's faltering efforts to attract foreign investment.
If the plant is built at close to the scale originally envisioned, it will be by far the biggest single foreign investment ever made here.


Crime
I'll say this for Bill Pronzini's BLUE LONESOME (Walker, $21.95) -- you always know where you are.
There is a sharp sense of place in this moody crime novel, which evokes even the inner landscape of the hero's mind.
Anyone who would pick up a book called "Blue Lonesome" will feel right at home in the Harmony Cafe, where a solitary woman dines in silence, night after empty night.
To a San Francisco accountant named Jim Messenger, whose own life seems just about as bleak as hers, "she was the saddest, loneliest person he'd ever encountered." When this haunted-looking woman, whom he calls Ms.
Lonesome,  commits suicide, Messenger determines to find out who she was and what had made  her life so miserable.


Annette L. Giraud, Michael N. Testa
Annette Lynn Giraud, the director of the New York wholesale division of Hermes of Paris, the saddle, boot and clothing maker, was married yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Michael N. Testa, a vice president of foreign exchange at Citibank in New York.
The Rev.
Patrick Slevin performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Pius X.
Mrs.
Testa, 30, graduated from the University of Florida and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Leonor Carvajalino Giraud of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and Pierre H. Giraud of Plantation, Fla.
Mr.
Giraud is the president of Land 'n Sea Distributing, a marine wholesaler in Fort Lauderdale.


PAX ANTIBIOTICA
In "Pax Antibiotica" (Method &amp; Madness, Oct. 15), Nicholas Wade neglects to mention one important point: in many cases, the "prophylactic" use of antibiotics is to prevent liability, not infection.
A physician sued for bacterial complications is doomed if the answer to the question "Doctor, did you use antibiotics on this patient?" is no.
Jury consultants make sure that there are no Nicholas Wades on their medical  malpractice panels.
A jury "of my peers" will probably understand as much about  the danger of resistance to antibiotics as the 12 people on the O. J. case understood DNA.


F.B.I. Setting Standards for Computer Picture File of Criminals
When a car thief fled after crashing a stolen truck in Sunnyvale, Calif., recently, he left the police with one important clue: his name on a piece of paper.
The officers had no idea what he looked like, but because of the growing use  of computers to store and transmit photographs, the Santa Clara County Police Department was able to get a picture of the suspect to officers in the field in  minutes.


Last Words at Last Rally: A Renewed Call for Peace
Following are excerpts from the address today at a peace rally in Tel Aviv by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, as translated by Reuters:
This government, which I have the privilege to head with my friend Shimon Peres, decided to give peace a chance -- a peace that will solve most of the state of Israel's problems.


Of Bullies, Big and Little, Back in 1950's Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's reminiscences about bullies ("My Bullied Days: A Smart Fat Kid's Story," Oct. 22) immediately returned me to the schoolyard of John Marshall Junior High School in Brooklyn in the mid-1950's.
My adult height and weight at age 12 protected me from the bullies; not so my more normal-sized, high-I.Q. friends and classmates in the Special Progress program.


NEWT'S REAL TARGET: THE OTHER ROOSEVELT
Walter Russell Mead's review of the nation's lifelong attachment to the political traditions of Hamiltonianism and Jeffersonianism was an insightful reminder of historical truths intended, perhaps, to comfort those of us appalled by current politics ("Newt's Real Target: The Other Roosevelt," Oct. 15).
He concluded with a convincing prophecy that two new parties (with probably the same old names) are likely to emerge from today's chaos, each representing one of the two traditional views.
Mead recalled that on two prior occasions exactly such a refocusing took place after politicians had fallen too far into factionalism.
He did not point out that each of these rebirths was followed by particularly painful times -- the Civil War and the Great Depression.


Recipes Put a New Face on All Those Leftover Pumpkins
HALLOWEEN may be over, but pumpkins aren't.
In the country, they are still stacked up in piles outside markets or scattered over empty cornfields, waiting  to be picked.
If like me, you consider pumpkin pie a dish that is nice for Thanksgiving but one you rarely crave at any other time, then you are probably wondering what will become of all those pumpkins now that they are no longer useful for making  jack-o'-lanterns.


Getting Goofy on the Santa Ana Freeway
LET'S FACE IT: AMERICANS WILL never love buildings as much as they love cars.
That's just the way it is.
We're a mobile society, and buildings don't move.
They sit there by the side of the road looking as if they've run out of gas.
Few American living rooms can compete with a windshield view of the world whizzing by.
Still, a good roadside building can really pep up the scenery.
Frank Gehry is now completing a superb one in Anaheim, home of the archetypical roadside attraction.
Situated on the edge of Disneyland, the new Team Disneyland Building stretches nearly 900 feet along the Santa Ana Freeway.
By the end of the year, the four-story office block will house the nearly 1,100  people who administer the theme park's operations.
At the moment, a chain-link fence that runs along the highway partly obscures the lower part of the building; Gehry would like to see the fence removed.
But what is the world coming to when Frank Gehry wants to take down a chain-link fence?
Welcome to Goofyland.


Children's Books
ZIN!
ZIN!
ZIN!
A VIOLIN By Lloyd Moss.
Illustrated by Marjorie Priceman.
Unpaged.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 5 to 9)
AN orchestra, large or small, is a nifty metaphor for the best aims of any society: a group of individuals, each of whom contributes to a melodious, colorful whole.
Lloyd Moss, the author of "Zin! Zin! Zin! A Violin," will be familiar to many readers as the host of a late-afternoon weekday radio program on WQXR, a New York classical music station.
In his first book for children -- and one hopes not his last, for it's a treasure -- he has taken on the task of introducing the members of a chamber orchestra, with obvious and infectious delight.


Dana Winingder, Thomas C. Sulger
Dana Lynne Winingder, a daughter of Dr.
Lesley A. Ward of Atlanta and Thomas  K. Winingder of New Orleans, was married yesterday to Thomas Connors Sulger, a son of Marie S. Roberts of Vero Beach, Fla., and the late Alden H. Sulger Jr.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald R. Frampton, assisted by Jennifer D. Winingder, a seminarian who is the bride's sister, performed the ceremony at the St.
Charles Avenue Presbyterian Church in New Orleans.
Mrs.
Sulger, 29, is a consultant in the New York office of Kurt Salmon Associates, management consultants.
She graduated from Princeton University and  received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, a commercial real-estate developer, is building Jazzland, a theme park, in New Orleans.
Her mother is a psychologist in Atlanta.


On Safari in High Style
THE four torpid male lions lay on their sides, their swollen bellies heaving  rhythmically, heavy from the just-completed ingestion of two impala.
Unlike the  other predators found in the Northern Transvaal -- the cheetah and the leopard -- the lion, at the head of the food chain, feared nothing.
And so, this group slept soundly through the night, oblivious to the screeching of other animals, to the 400,000-candlepower beacon illuminating them in this secluded brush, and to the presence of we four gawking tourists, perched in a completely-exposed Land Rover just six feet away.
My wife, Carol, and I were able to watch this well-fed pride because we were  among the 16 guests at Singita, a new South African private game reserve bordering Mozambique that, in its two years of existence, has become known as one of the most luxurious and expensive in southern Africa.


Tuck In Perennials, Root Out the Annuals
NOW is the time for a few thoughts on putting the garden to bed for winter.
Actually, the plants can get ready quite responsibly by themselves.
But those of us who like to putter usually gain a sense of satisfaction from at least trying  to help.


In Mississippi, Plan for Plot At Cemetery Draws Critics
Aimee Walsh has one more wish before she dies of cancer.
A member of the Colonial Dames of the 17th Century, Mrs.
Walsh, 85, plans to  be buried in her family's plot at Greenwood Cemetery, the city's most prestigious burial ground.
She is seeking to insure a place there for her descendants as well.


Few Clues in Robberies in Which Bandits Used Amish Disguise
When the reports of a bank robbery in Wall Township came into the F.B.I. office in Newark on Oct. 25, agents knew it was the same two men who had been robbing banks in central and southern New Jersey for two years.
The men were efficient, aggressive and disguised as Amish farmers.


Street Fairs Rob the Weary Of Restorative Weekends
To the Editor:
As I sat in my living room on an Eastside avenue, reading the Oct. 8 article  about a street-fair entrepreneur, "The Tenuous Times of Mort Berkowitz," the deafening sound of angry horn-blowing traffic told of another weekend day made maddening by another street fair.


Christmas Looks Bad, So Buy Retailers
When Wall Street looks at America's shopping centers, it sees little but woe.
The big retail chains just ended their worst month in years.
The better retailers seem to consistently post disappointing earnings, while the poorer ones go bankrupt.
Analysts are competing to identify the next disaster.
There seems to be little hope for a turnaround.
The economy seems to be weakening.
With consumer debt burdens at record levels, there are signs that Americans are keeping a tighter hold on their wallets.
The holiday season is already being written off as the worst in years.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Oct. 22, about Jerusalem, misstated the year that  reconstruction of the Jewish Quarter began.
It was 1967, not 1948.


As the Sabbath Wanes, Word Spreads, Bringing Sadness and Tears
Sadness and disgust hit David Sack, a Reform Jewish internist in Cheshire, Conn., when he heard last night that Yitzhak Rabin had been assassinated.
"Oh, God," he sighed.
"I think the people who want to make peace have to pay  with their lives, and this we have had to learn over and over again, from Martin Luther King to Anwar Sadat."


Christina Allen, V. C. du Vigneaud
Christina Field Allen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy Field Allen 2d of Greenwich, Conn., was married there last evening to Vincent Cosmo du Vigneaud, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent du Vigneaud of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs. du Vigneaud is a job counselor at Advantage Staffing Services, a temporary employment agency in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Salve Regina University.
Her father is the president of the J. W. Allen Company, an insurance broker in New York.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4;The Middle East Riviera That Isn't -- Not Yet
HOW'D you like to take a morning dip on an Israeli beach, play nine holes in  Gaza before lunch and watch the sun set from a dune buggy in the Sinai?
Welcome  to the East Mediterranean Riviera!
A most enticing notion, at least as presented by Israel in a glossy book titled "Development Options for Cooperation" at an economic conference here last week for 1,000-odd delegates from 60-odd lands.


In Florida, A Market That Plays by Different Rules
I NEVER had any intention of moving to Florida!" said Gloria Olsher. But there she is, to her astonishment, in the Palm Isles active-adult community in Boynton Beach, amid a bevy of new friends.
A retiree in her 60's with three children "back North," she made the move a year ago, yielding to the advice of old friends who were in Florida already.
She bought a large villa unit -- a single-level home in a building with four units -- for $140,000, plus a few thousand more for upgrades such as larger floor tiles and patio screening.


Bluefish Are Running, So What's Wrong?
A CHILL wind whipped off the sea.
Fading sunlight streaked the clouds pink as the fishing boats appeared one after the other on the horizon and chugged into port like horses in sight of the stable.
On the dock, gulls as fat as Thanksgiving turkeys shrieked in anticipation.
"Late today," commented a young woman who was waiting beside a piling for one of the boats to tie up.
Her brother and her uncle were on it and she had to pick them up and drive them home to Trenton.
They go out fishing two, sometimes three days a month, she said.
It costs about $40 each, including the boat fare, the gas, the incidentals like lunch.
The idea is to catch enough fish to cover the cost and put protein on the table of a big extended family.
"Coming in late is a good sign," the woman said.


Irish Lose a Quarterback, Find Another
Tom Krug had every reason to be nervous when the Notre Dame starting quarterback Ron Powlus broke his arm.
Krug had played less than seven minutes this season and hadn't thrown a pass.
But the junior showed the poise of a veteran today, throwing for two touchdowns and rallying Notre Dame, ranked No. 7 by the New York Times computer  and No. 8 by The Associated Press, to a 35-17 victory over Navy.


On a Wing and a Fare: Deregulation Decoded
IT was a turbulent idea in 1978, when the Government's decided to deregulate  the airline industry.
Now the question is: was deregulation a good idea for the  airlines and their passengers?
For the airlines themselves, the experience has not been pleasant.


Selling My Place. Naked Before the World.
THE real estate lady drove in from New Jersey with a box of cookies, a nice touch.
She planned to put them near the front door so people would feel welcome  to walk through my apartment as if they'd been invited to a party instead of an advertised Sunday open house.
But if they saw cookies, would they think it was O.K. to raid the fridge, annotate my books, sneer at my posters, snoop through the medicine chest, send faxes and leave thumbprints on my photographs?
Just thinking about that, I knew I would eat all the cookies before anyone came, and then, feeling extra stuffed for having stuffed my anger, I would reminisce about being mugged in the Madrid airport as a far more pleasant experience than waiting for people to reject my apartment, a thinly disguised way for them to pass judgment on me, which was really why they were coming in the first place.


North Bergen Returning To Playoffs After Rout
With a playoff berth at stake, NORTH BERGEN head coach Vinny Ascolese had little doubt that his team would be ready to play against FERRIS yesterday at Cochrane Stadium in Jersey City.
"They were up for this game and I felt that we would play well," Ascolese said, after North Bergen (6-1) routed Ferris (2-5), 54-0, to clinch its fifth straight playoff appearance.
"But I never thought we'd score this many points."


Staten Islanders Consider Change
Guy V. Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President who would be its District Attorney, met his constituents on the way home Friday afternoon.
He was glad-handing at the Manhattan terminal of the Staten Island Ferry during the final weekend rush hour before Tuesday's election, which will determine whether he remains Staten Island's chief executive officer or moves over to become its chief law enforcer.
Mr.
Molinari accepted a good luck hug from Curtis Sliwa, the leader of the Guardian Angels, and then greeted Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Support from the Mayor, a fellow Republican and a former United States Attorney, has established  the foundation of Mr.
Molinari's campaign.
The scene took on a celebrity feel, with a campaign volunteer urging commuters to "share a historical moment" with the two men.


Katherine Smethurst, A. R. Schlein
Katherine Ludlow Smethurst, the daughter of Ludlow Bixby Smethurst and E. William Smethurst of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Anthony Rosen Schlein, a son of Shirley Muse of Houston and Elmer Schlein of Austin, Tex.
The  Rev.
Daniel Kreller, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Tahigua, an  estate in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Ms.
Smethurst, 33, who is keeping her name, is a personal trainer in Houston.
She graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the president of Schroder Wertheim Investment Services in New York.
Her mother is an artist in Ridgewood.


Monuments of Assyria On View in Fort Worth
Thirty-three monumental carved stone reliefs that once lined the walls of ancient Assyrian palaces and temples are on view at the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth to Feb. 4.
The exhibition also includes a selection of palace furnishings from the first millennium B.C. in northern Mesopotamia.
The objects  make up the largest loan ever sent abroad by the British Museum.
"Art and Empire: Treasures From Assyria in the British Museum" features 250 artworks created for the kings of the walled cities of Nimrud, Nineveh and Khorsabad during the ninth to seventh centuries B.C., when the Assyrian empire was the primary power in the Near East.


Chrysler Gains Tentative Pact In Plant Strike
Chrysler and union workers reached a tentative settlement today that could end a three-day strike at the plant where most of the automobile maker's windshields and windows are produced.
Nearly 1,000 members of Local 227 of the United Automobile Workers went on strike on Wednesday at the McGraw Glass Plant, largely over job security.


Melissa Biggs, Michael Bradley
Melissa Elaine Biggs, a daughter of Mrs.
O.
Kelley Anderson Jr. and Jeremy H. Biggs, both of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Thompson Bradley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Michael Bradley, also of New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Cushman performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church..
The bride, 28, is a senior editor of Town &amp; Country magazine in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in creative writing from Columbia University.
Her father is the vice chairman and chief investment officer of Fiduciary Trust Company International in New York.
Her stepfather, O. Kelley Anderson Jr., is a private art dealer in New York.
Her stepmother, Friederike K. Biggs, is an interior decorator in New York.


Florida Residential Sales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
DAYTONA AREA


Jeri A. Levin, Howard Freeman
Jeri Ann Levin, a daughter of Sandra and Herbert J. Levin of Massapequa Park, L.I., was married last evening to Howard Freeman, a son of Kay and Irwin Freeman of North Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Kenneth N. Hain officiated at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Freeman, 31, and Mr.
Freeman, 29, work at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm in New York, she as an adviser in the mergers and acquisitions group, he as a manager in the real estate consulting group.


For the Love of Jane, and All Her Creations
YOU want to talk about Jane?" said Barbara Crafton, an Episcopal priest and writer from Metuchen. She could have been referring to an admired elder sister.  But the Jane she means is Jane Austen, dead nearly 200 years.
The fans of Jane Austen, unlike those of, say, Ernest Hemingway or Anthony Trollope or the Beastie Boys, call her by her given name.
Janeites know they are taking liberties.
In Jane Austen's day, the late 1700's and early 1800's, a  lady's given name was used only by her family and very close friends.
Jane Austen's fans consider themselves intimates -- of Jane Austen and of her characters, who they know in their heads are fictional and in their hearts are real.


Inside the Silicone Implant Debacle
THINGS aren't going so well these days in Midland, Mich.
Last week, one of the town's two big companies, Dow Chemical, lost a product-liability lawsuit to a plaintiff who won $14.1 million in damages.
The other, Dow Corning, filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this year under a flood of claims.
The cause of all this trouble: a consumer product line that began as an industrial quartz-and-sand synthetic, the silicone breast implant.


Laura H. Schoenbaum, John P. Gerry
Laura Helene Schoenbaum, a landscape designer, and Dr.
John Philip Gerry, an  anthropological archeologist, are to be married today in the Cronkhite Graduate  Center at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Albert Axelrad is to perform the ceremony.
The couple graduated from Grinnell College.
The bride received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Cornell University.
The bridegroom received a master's degree and a Ph.D. in anthropology from Harvard.


Sergeant Is Charged In Fort Bragg Attack
The Army has charged a sergeant from the 82d Airborne Division with murder and attempted murder in a sniper attack that left an officer dead and 18 soldiers injured at Fort Bragg, N.C.
The sergeant, William J. Kreutzer, 26, was charged with premediated murder, 18 counts of attempted murder, four counts of maiming, wrongful transport of weapons on a military base and stealing ammunition, a spokesman for the 82d Airborne said today.


Saari Goodman, Richard Kirschner
Saari Lynn Goodman, the daughter of Nina and Kenneth Goodman of Woodbury, L.I., is to be married this evening to Richard Paul Kirschner, the son of Judy and Elliot Kirschner of Hewlett, L.I.
Rabbi Stuart Geller is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 26, is the coordinator of the New York State Burglar and Fire Alarm Association in Port Chester, N.Y.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is the vice president of Micropage, a graphic arts company in New York.
Her mother, a former education specialist for the International Business Machines Corporation in New York, is a computer trainer in Woodbury.


Eugene Adkins; World War II Veteran, 76
Eugene Adkins, who served as the flight engineer and turret gunner on the famed World War II bomber Memphis Belle, died on Friday after collapsing at his  home here.
He was 76.
Mr.
Adkins was part of a crew that completed 25 bombing missions over Nazi-occupied Europe in 1943 and 1944.
At a time of heavy Allied flight crew losses, the entire Memphis Belle crew survived the war.


Precautions Against Crime
WITH the end of anti-apartheid sanctions and the election of the country's first black president in free elections last year, the tourist industry has been booming in South Africa.
This year alone, Government officials say, the number of foreign tourists is expected to rise 35 percent to nearly 1 million.
But crime has been rising, too, and tourists have not been immune.
Even in a  country where neighbors routinely exchange tips on the best barbed wire to buy and security companies, and where guard dogs are as common as picket fences, the attack on four young tourists visiting South Africa last month was stunning.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Governor Attains Pact With Guards In Prisons
The Pataki administration and a labor union representing 23,300 correction officers and other state security personnel agreed early yesterday on a four-year contract providing layoff benefits and modest wage increases in line with budget constraints and with other union packages negotiated earlier this year.


Independence Party Marching Off to War
As far as most of the city is concerned, Tuesday's general election is a dull, off-year affair.
But as far as Michael N. Niebauer is concerned, it's a war.
In fact, Mr.
Niebauer, who was appointed in August as the Queens County chairman of the Independence Party, refers to the attic of his Beechhurst home as "the war room," where a wall map of the borough's 16 Assembly districts represents the battlefields, and manuals from the Board of Elections are his version of Sun Tzu's "Art of War."


Safe in a Storm
To the Editor: On Monday, Sept. 4, I was vacationing with two friends at Cap  Juluca on Anguilla.
We had heard that Hurricane Luis might hit the island.
It was the beginning of an experience that held us in its grip for two days.
Cap Juluca has often been cited as a top hotel in the Caribbean and I want to report how such a hotel operates under severe circumstances.
Brian Young, the manager, and his staff took incredible care of the guests.
Before the storm, they kept us informed of the progress of Luis.
They reviewed the steps they were taking; they boarded up windows and made sure our rooms were as safe as possible.
The most important aspect of the preparation was communication between staff and guests.


POSTINGS: Foundation to Have Offices, Auditorium and Museum;Freedom Forum Is Moving to the IBM Building
If a tree falls and no one hears, has it made a sound?
If a foundation holds  a conference and no one comes, has it made an impact?
It's a question that the Freedom Forum, a foundation devoted to First Amendment issues, has asked itself of late.
For 11 years its Media Studies Center has been crammed into 17,000 square feet at Columbia University, in out-of-the-way Morningside Heights.
Its sad choice was to run programs for 40 people at most, or to rent hotel rooms or club space, and hope the people it wanted to attract knew when and where to go.


BENEFITS


Promoted to Queen
SOMETIME during the last four years, Linda Genteel, a curvaceous Californian  who performs in skin-tight sequined gowns and bills herself as the Piano Princess, became the de facto queen of Atlantic City's casino lounges.
It would be gratifying to say that Ms.
Genteel, who says she is "perpetually  29 -- a princess only ages by royal decree," earned this distinction on talent alone.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about proposed changes in Federal income  tax laws referred incorrectly to current rules for contributions to individual retirement accounts.
Contributions are generally not deductible if both of these conditions (not just one) apply: the taxpayer participates in a retirement plan  at work, and adjusted gross income exceeds $50,000 for a married couple or $35,000 for a single taxpayer.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A SON OF THE CIRCUS By John Irving.
Ballantine, $7.99.
Dr.
Farrokh Daruwalla, an Indian orthopedic surgeon who secretly writes screenplays, becomes embroiled in a murder investigation that involves, among other things, transsexuals, twins and trapeze artists.
Of John Irving's works, it is "his most entertaining novel since 'Garp,' " Robert Towers said here last year.


A Writer Who Means Norway to Movie Makers
SOME NOVELS LEND THEMSELVES to screen adaptation so easily, it is as if they  had been written with that intention.
There is no demon interior monologue; all  is action, dialogue and plenty of dramatic tension to smooth the path.
Not so with movies based on books by the Norwegian author Knut Hamsun, movies like "Hunger" and "Pan," which will be shown starting Friday at the Museum of Modern  Art in the series "Hamsun on Film," which runs through Nov. 15.
Knut Hamsun, who lived from 1859 until 1952, won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1920, and influenced writers like Franz Kafka, Bertolt Brecht, James Joyce, Henry Miller and the contemporary American novelist Paul Auster.


This Naked City Had Better Get Its Clother On
BY early afternoon, the dancers were back to the usual grind at Gallagher's,  a topless bar on Queens Boulevard that sits under the el at 39th Place in Sunnyside.
The unadorned stone front of Gallagher's gave no hint of the action to be found inside.
In the laundromat across the street, Stephen Chudhoff said he had had no idea it was a bar at all -- let alone one with a dress code for the help -- and Katherine Langer, who lives around the corner, knew about "those girls" but couldn't care less.
"They don't bother me, and I don't bother them,"  said Mrs.
Langer, a woman of years, as they used to say.


Dropped Stitch
To the Editor:
Laurie Halpern Benenson's article about the film "How to Make an American Quilt" ["Of Women and by Women: Talking Love," Oct. 15] prompts me to point out  that both the movie and the novel by Whitney Otto that it is derived from contain a tale based on the life of Harriet Powers, a 19th-century African-American quilter from Athens, Ga.
Yet neither acknowledges the source of the story.
The quilt described in the book and pictured in the movie is clearly based on Powers's story quilt, a masterpiece on permanent display at the National Museum of American History in Washington.


L.I. Vines
Merlot Corey Creek, Southold, 1993. $16.


Facing the Agony Of Being Different
SIXTEEN-YEAR-OLD Cat B. was walking out of White Plains High School on a recent afternoon, when the verbal assault began.
"There was a group of guys, all football players," Cat said, adding that the  name callers used words that alluded to her sexual orientation and yelled, "Don't hit on my girlfriend!" and "If you sleep with me one night, you'll change!"


Perseverance


40 Years Ago: A Drive Down the Fairway for Integration
The philosophies of Alfred (Tup) Holmes and Georgia governor Marvin Griffin collided in the mid-1950's when Holmes and his family challenged segregation in  Atlanta: not in the schools or work places, but on the golf course.
In 1951, Tup, his brother Oliver and their father, Dr.
Hamilton M. Holmes, were turned away from the Bobby Jones course, one of seven public golf courses in Atlanta at the time, because they were black.
Then, they launched what their  lawyer, Roscoe E. Thomas, recently recalled was "the first desegregation suit in Atlanta."


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING


JUDGE HAYDEN'S FAMILY VALUES
Hayden's work as "Judge, Shrink, Mother, God" could be made easier and more effective with the assistance of some well-placed "shrinks." As part of my training in child and adolescent psychiatry, I worked at the Cambridge (Mass.) Family Court Clinic.
There, a staff of child psychiatrists evaluated clients for the purpose of offering recommendations to the family court judges.
The cases were as complicated and painful as those mentioned in the article.
However, a decision about the placement of a child like Mr. and Mrs.
B.'s daughter was reached after hours of interviews with the daughter, alone, and with each of her parents, rather than after the few moments of discussion that a truly generous and well-meaning judge can allow.
SHOSHANA R. SOKOLOFF, M.D. Amherst, Mass.


An American Icon
SINATRA!
THE SONG IS YOU A Singer's Art.
By Will Friedwald.
Illustrated. 557 pp.
New York: Scribner. $30.


Knicks Develop an Intimidating Presence
The book is "Winning Hideously." You will not see it at Barnes and Noble any  time soon because, frankly, the Knicks are not done writing it yet.
Borrowing a page from their defensive-minded teams of the past, they put the  clamps on Glenn Robinson and Vin Baker when it counted most tonight.
They won their second straight game to open the season, beating the Milwaukee Bucks, 84-71, at the Bradley Center by pretty much putting a keep-out sign in the middle of the key.


Scholars Are Not Amused
To the Editor:
It was with profound dismay that I came across "The Starlet Letter" [Oct. 8].
Unlike the persons responsible for this cartoon, scholars of Nathaniel Hawthorne are taking Roland Joffe's film adaptation of "The Scarlet Letter" seriously -- so much so that an academic conference next spring will feature a session to study Mr.
Joffe's interpretation in the context of Hawthorne scholarship.


Russian Supreme Court Restores Key Liberal Party to the Ballot
Russia's Supreme Court overturned today a controversial ruling that would have barred the country's leading liberal party from taking part in next month's parliamentary elections.
The court gave the Central Election Commission three days to register the Yabloko party, which is led by Grigory Yavlinsky, a 43-year-old economist.
The decision came less than a week after the commission -- ruling on a technicality  -- barred the party from the Dec. 17 elections.


Sports of The Times;Where Will Parcells Be Next Year?
SOONER or later, Bill Parcells always seems to be surrounded by whispers.
When his 1986 Giants won Super Bowl XXI, the whispers were that he was going  to join the Atlanta Falcons, but that never happened.
When his 1990 Giants won Super Bowl XXV, the whispers were that he was going to resign and that did happen.
When he was in the NBC television booth in 1991, the whispers were that he was going to join the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, and that almost happened.


If Quebec Ever Goes, There Goes Canada
To the Editor:
As a former Canadian and a former citizen of the province of Quebec -- I was  born in Montreal in 1929 and left for New York in 1955 -- I am most unhappy about the vote on separation (front page, Oct. 31).


Wildcat Victory Train Leaves Lions at Station
Looking much like a team fully aware of the potential glory ahead while distancing itself from the ashes behind, Northwestern continued climbing the mountain today.
The Wildcats have taken on all serious comers now, among the best the Big Ten has to offer, including last season's conference and Rose Bowl champion.
That would be Penn State.
Include that bunch now as another stop for the Northwestern express, much like Notre Dame and Michigan and Wisconsin were.
Because when Northwestern defeated Penn State by 21-10 at rocking Dyche Stadium  this afternoon, the Wildcats moved oh-so-close to a possible Big Ten banner, the Rose Bowl and, at the very least, a New Year's Day bowl appearance.


There Are Two Sides To Every Game in Town
PERHAPS no American industry this decade, with the possible exception of computer software and on-line technology, has grown as rapidly and pervaded society as thoroughly as legalized gambling.
In 1988 casino gambling was legal in only two states -- Nevada and New Jersey.
Today casinos, including those on Indian reservations, operate or are authorized in 23 states.
In 1994 gamblers armed with lottery tickets, chips and  slot machines wagered a whopping $482 billion in this country, which is more than the gross national product of China and represents a 22 percent increase
over the previous year.
In the same year consumers spent nearly three times as much on lottery tickets as they did on movie tickets, according to International Gaming and Wagering Business magazine.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
North Dakota may be empty, but it's also home to the largest concentration of wind energy in the United States.
If wind farms were put there, instead of wheat, it could supply about a third of the country's electric power -- cleanly, sustainably and inexpensively.
The building, installing and maintaining of wind turbines could support the  state economy for the next 20 years.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4: Graphic Photos;Anti-Abortion Lawmakers Score a Victory With a New Technique
Against a backdrop of poster-sized medical drawings, a new chapter opened last week in the decades-old fight over abortion.
The 288 to 139 vote in the House of Representatives to ban a particular method of abortion and to impose criminal penalties against doctors who perform  it represented the first time the chamber had taken on the issue head-on.
But the debate also unveiled a major new weapon in the effort to dismantle Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 ruling that upheld a woman's right to abortion: detailed pictures showing the abortion procedure.


WHAT'S YOUR BIGGEST CHALLENGE?
I found the responses of some of the teachers to the question "What's Your Biggest Challenge?" in your illustrated Sunday feature (Oct. 15) discouraging.
As a fellow teacher, I expect early burnout for Elisa Aragon, who said that each year of teaching is like a dog year.
As for John LaPolla, who says his day is ruined, literally, if he cannot answer every question his students ask, I hope he is as new at teaching as his caricature indicates.
I admire his energy and dedication, but he would better serve his students if he were to admit his own occasional ignorance and make a joint effort with them to find the answer.


Larger Than Life
Commenting about his onetime teammate Babe Ruth, Harry Hooper said, "I saw a  man transformed into something close to a god." In IDOLS OF THE GAME: A Sporting History of the American Century (Turner, $23.95), Robert Lipsyte, a sports columnist for The New York Times, and Peter Levine, a professor of history at Michigan State University, try to pinpoint exactly how and why Ruth and 15 other outstanding athletes metamorphosed into cultural icons.
Books about the lionization of sports figures are nothing new, but Mr.
Lipsyte and Mr.
Levine have constructed an interesting premise: they contend that their subjects are literally symbols of different periods in 20th-century America.
There is something about sports that defies rigid classification.
But one does not have to agree totally with the authors to enjoy their book.
The description of John L. Sullivan's 75-round bare-knuckle championship bout against Jake Kilrain -- in 115-degree heat, no less -- is worth the price of the book in itself.
CAROLYN T. HUGHES


Shock and Satisfaction
There was shock across the Arab world tonight at the assassination of Mr.
Rabin, who had won grudging respect even from many of his one-time enemies.
But that reaction was mixed with quiet satisfaction expressed by Islamist governments and others who still regard the Jewish state and its leaders as a permanent enemy.


A Pathetic Living at the Symphony?
THE MONEY ISSUE AT THE NEW YORK Philharmonic has been settled, but the attitudes from every direction seem just as bad as ever.
After recent contract negotiations, players may be angrier than usual.
Management and board members evidently aren't too happy either, but they are saying little at the moment.
Job descriptions in the symphony business look simple: musicians play music;  managers manage; boards make sure that money is in the bank and a workable future is in sight.
Yet a team of Harvard University psychologists studying satisfaction and fulfillment in the workplace ranks orchestra players just below Federal prison employees on the happiness chart.
Operating-room nurses and hockey players smile even less; string quartet members and airline cockpit crews lead the league in satisfaction.


Pop Briefs
GORKY'S ZYGOTIC MYNCI: 'BWYD TIME' Ankst


Campbell's Decisions Leave Both of the Rangers' Goalies Growling
While the Mighty Ducks were embarrassing the Rangers by a 7-4 score here Friday night, there was comic relief between the second and third periods.
That's when Buddy the Wonder Dog got in front of the net and began to make saves on balls that were shot at him.
How was Buddy different than Glenn Healy, the Ranger goalie who gave up 4 goals on 13 shots, and Mike Richter, who gave up 3 goals on 9 shots?


If Quebec Ever Goes, There Goes Canada;Disproportional Voting
To the Editor:
Re "Canada United, Quebec Divided" (editorial, Nov. 1): Overlooked in your analysis of Quebec's referendum on sovereignty is a disturbing fact grounded in  Quebec's winner-take-all voting system in singlemember districts: the referendum won in 80 of Quebec's 125 electoral districts despite losing overall.


For Gay Couples, Ruling to Cheer On Adoption;Typically, Only One Member Had been Considered Parent
There is not a scintilla of doubt in Barbara Berger's mind or heart: She is a mother to Billy Berger-Bailey, a reality played out daily when she picks out his clothes, smothers him with kisses or reads him bedtime stories.
His current favorite is "Humphrey the Lost Whale," about a wayward humpback in San Francisco Bay.
But in the eyes of the law there is ambiguity aplenty, because Ms.
Berger's companion of 10 years, Nan Bailey, who gave birth to Billy three years ago after donor insemination, ultimately controls all custodial rights.


Finding Fame For All The Right Reasons
LOOKING SOMEWHAT DISHEVELED AND WITH his hair unkempt during a visit to America last summer, Jonathan Pryce was browsing in a store on the East Coast when he was recognized by another customer.
But not as Hamlet or Macbeth or the  Tony Award-winning Engineer in "Miss Saigon" or Fagin in the smash revival of "Oliver!" on the West End.
He was spotted as the suave British pitchman for Nissan's luxury Infiniti in television commercials.
"Amazing how much better people look on television," the customer muttered, shaking his head in astonishment at the seedy figure before him.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
John Dodge connected to the Internet using software from a Microsoft competitor, Compuserve's Internet in a Box.
Not anymore -- Windows 95 silently disabled a key piece of his setup and made it too difficult for him to reinstall it.
Dodge is no novice.
He is senior executive editor of the trade journal PC Week and so had access to the highest-level support engineers.
But life is short and even software professionals learn to take the path of least resistance -- in this case, the path leading to Microsoft.
He has become a regular user of the new Microsoft Network, though he has trouble with its Internet features.


Michael P. Sewell, Erica S. Perl
Erica Sarah Perl, the daughter of Eleanor Perl and Dr.
Daniel Perl of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Paul Sewell, a son of Maryann and  John Sewell of Washington.
Judge Ginger Berrigan of the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana officiated at the Boucvalt House in New Orleans.
The couple graduated from Hampshire College and received graduate degrees from Tulane University, she in law and he in architecture.


If Colin Powell Sang and Played Guitar . . .
THE TWO-WEEK PERIOD en-compassing both the O. J. Simpson verdict and the Million Man March also produced these two comic moments: the cast of NBC's Uber-yuppie hit show "Friends" stumbled and argued its way through a Hootie and  the Blowfish concert.
And on "Saturday Night Live," Tim Meadows played Hootie's  lead singer, Darius Rucker, as a gimme-cap-wearing, beer-swilling Louis Farrakhan, leading a nation of white fraternity boys in a boisterous march to celebrate their solidarity in privileged obnoxiousness.
It's not surprising that Hootie and the Blowfish should serve as comic relief amid serious racial tensions, although it's not the role the group might have chosen for itself.
The South Carolina group makes its large, primarily white but definitely integrated audience feel comfortable not only because of its soothing music but because its very existence is the pop-culture fruit of an old ideal.
A rock group led by a black man, playing easy-to-swallow soft rock indebted to both Bob Dylan and Sam Cooke, Hootie embodies the liberal dream of a successful  civil rights movement.


Ready for a Close-up
Billy Wilder's SUNSET BOULEVARD (1950) is a lobby video seller at the stunning musical production on Broadway.
Even more handily, the original movie can be snapped on without charge at home this week.
A memorable and mordant tale of Hollywood reality vs. past glory, it entwines a bitter young scenarist (William Holden) and an aging, faded star (Gloria Swanson(. Scene after scene thrusts and lingers, in the script by Wilder, Charles Brackett and D.M. Marshman Jr. Hooray for Hollywood, and grab a life preserver. It's on THURSDAY at 9:30 P.M. on TNT.
Howard Thompson


Tokyo Fails To Resolve Bases Impasse
A last-ditch effort to break an impasse over American bases in Okinawa failed today, landing the dispute squarely in the lap of Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama just two weeks before President Clinton arrives in Japan for a summit meeting.
Mr.
Murayama met for almost five hours today with Masahide Ota, the Governor  of Okinawa, who has refused to sign documents extending leases on land used for  American bases.
But Mr.
Ota again refused to sign and presented the national Government with demands to curb the American military presence.


Suspect Killed In Shootout; Officer Is Hurt
A suspect in a drug purchase was killed and a police officer was shot in the  leg during a struggle on a street in Red Hook, Brooklyn, yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The suspect, identified as Roberto Ramirez, 43, of 717 Henry Street, died at  6:50 P.M. at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, two and a half hours after the incident, said Officer Robert Samuel, a police spokesman.
The shooting took place at West Ninth and Hicks Streets in the Red Hook Houses, where Mr.
Ramirez lived.


Contacts and Congeniality Among the Canine Crowd
To the Editor:
What a surprise to see Metro, my Airedale, as pack conversation leader in your photograph of the Carl Schurz Park dog run.
I was in Paris on business at the time the photo was taken and Metro was the house guest of her best beau, an  Airedale she met in the dog run nearly four years ago.


Should the Market's Policeman Also Be a Teacher?
ONE of the little-known battles in the war to cut billions of dollars from the Federal budget is being waged over a minuscule unit of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
It is the Office of Investor Education and Assistance, an office so small that last year it cost taxpayers just $1.3 million, or four-tenths of a percent of the S.E.C.'s $297 million budget.
Despite its size, the office looms  large in the mind of Arthur Levitt Jr., chairman of the S.E.C.
He characterizes  it as "the individual investors' gateway" to the regulators of mutual funds, brokerage firms and companies that sell securities to the public.


At Trade Fair, Aspiring Actors in Search of an Agent or Image
For an actor, seeming to be other than what the mirror reveals in the morning is critical.
There was nothing hidden about that truth at a trade fair for actors and actresses yesterday in midtown Manhattan.
Hundreds of aspiring performers -- some looking anxious, many looking sleepy from unaccustomed early awakening, a few blatantly not dressed for the cold weather -- assembled at the Marriott Marquis to be pitched to by ingratiating vendors, most of them offering a smiling promise of transforming images that maybe were not perfect.


A Shaken Clinton Mourns Rabin, 'Martyr for His Nation's Peace'
President Clinton, who plans to leave on Sunday for the funeral of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, went to the Rose Garden of the White House tonight and, his voice cracking, called Mr.
Rabin "a martyr for his nation's peace."
"Peace must be and peace will be Prime Minister Rabin's lasting legacy," Mr.
Clinton said.


Once More, in Yiddish: A Theater Turns 80
Nobody counted on the Folksbiene Playhouse living this long, not even Zypora  Spaisman, who dropped almost everything 40 years ago to become its star.
Today she is the soul of the Folksbiene, the only surviving Yiddish theater company in the United States (or maybe anywhere) and probably the longest-running theatrical troupe in New York, where it opens its 80th season on Saturday night  with a musical, "Double Identity," based on the Sholom Aleichem comedy "It's Hard to Be a Jew."
"We are the only Yiddish company to survive," said Mrs.
Spaisman, looking back at the days when one of the world's great conglomerations of Yiddish theaters converted lower Second Avenue into a thriving Yiddish boulevard often dubbed Knish Alley.
"That is sad but it's better than nothing."


NEWT'S REAL TARGET: THE OTHER ROOSEVELT
Mead can't see the forest for the trees.
The South started shifting 30 years ago.
When I got to Washington in 1966 (after a special election) as a Representative from New York's 17th Congressional District, I was amazed to find five Republicans from Alabama.
After 100 years, they had finally gotten over the Civil War.


Recipes Put a New Face on All Those Leftover Pumpkins
HALLOWEEN may be over, but pumpkins aren't.
In the country, they are still stacked up in piles outside markets or scattered over empty cornfields, waiting  to be picked.
If like me, you consider pumpkin pie a dish that is nice for Thanksgiving but one you rarely crave at any other time, then you are probably wondering what will become of all those pumpkins now that they are no longer useful for making  jack-o'-lanterns.


Murderer Says He Is Too Ill to Be Executed
A man who murdered a boy and raped the boy's mother says he is unfit to be executed because he has a bad heart.
The man, George Delvecchio, has asked the Illinois Supreme Court to stay his  scheduled Nov. 22 execution, contending that a recent heart attack, his medication and his level of incoherence make him no longer fit.


Texas Democrat Retiring
Representative Ronald D. Coleman said today that he would not seek an eighth  term, becoming the 11th Democrat and third Texan to announce plans to leave Congress since the Republicans took control.
Mr.
Coleman accused the Republicans of declaring war "on working families, seniors, the disabled, veterans and children." Some reports have recently linked him politically and financially to developers of border slums called colonias, but he has denied getting any benefits from colonia developers.


Will You Vote?
Tuesday is Election Day.
What are the issues in your town or district?
Do you plan to vote?
For a Healthy Change


Pop Briefs
GRATEFUL DEAD: 'HUNDRED YEAR HALL' Arista


GORED
I agree with Allan Rich (Letters, Oct. 15) that "what Christopher Matthews saw in the corrida in Barcelona was the height of mediocrity" (About Men: "Gored," Sept. 24).
What Rich himself saw in May 1968 may have been "the height of drama, spectacle and artistry," but what I saw in Barcelona in the spring of 1944 was greatness itself, in the person of Manolete, the greatest matador of all time.


Will It Please the Court? A Litigation Analyst Calls the Verdicts
JUDGING by how wildly the stocks moved, the upstart Advanced Micro Devices shocked many people last year when it won a legal victory over Intel, the giant  of the semiconductor business.
But Calvert D. Crary, a stock analyst here, was unruffled.
In fact, he had predicted the victory.
A former securities lawyer with a perpetually bemused look, he is the Peter Lynch of litigation, a bottom-up, kick-the-tires, taste-the-pudding kind of guy who aims to determine how investors might profit from pending litigation.


A Booming Colorado Weighs Its Future
Lighting a small, makeshift flamethrower in his cluttered kitchen, Hunter S.  Thompson pointed to imaginary Boeing 737's flying overhead and ranted, "Greedheads, greedheads."
Not confining pyrotechnics to his mountainside home, the irascible journalist is rallying Aspenites to vote on Tuesday against a proposal to widen and strengthen this remote resort town's airport runway to accommodate long-haul jets.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Arts and Leisure Section 2


Vicky Fernandez, Angus Duncan
Ivelisse Ortiz Fernandez, an advertising executive, and Angus McAlpine Duncan, a mortgage securities trader, were married yesterday in Old San Juan, P.R.
The Rev.
Regis Schlick performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Iglesia San Jose.
Mrs.
Fernandez-Duncan, 33, is known as Vicky.
She is a senior account executive at Font &amp; Vaamonde, a Spanish-language advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Loyola University.
She is the daughter of Carmen Ortiz Fernandez of Tampa, Fla., and the late Leopoldo Diaz Fernandez.
The bride's father was a businessman in San Juan.
Her mother retired as a Spanish teacher at the Bonnabel High School in Kenner, La.


Keep Evacuation Roads Clear for Emergencies
The only real preparedness on Long Island is to get out of the way," Bruce J. Swiren, a hurricane specialist, is quoted in "Ready for Storm's Worst, L.I.


In Mayoral Election, Race Is Real Issue
Tradition and numbers should make the Democratic candidate the odds-on favorite to win Tuesday's mayoral election in this city where Republicans and independents are vastly outnumbered and treated like embarrassing relatives.
But unlike past years, the electoral outcome is far less certain.
The Democrat is white.


Saying Volumes About Why Actors Act
AFTER a recent performance of "The Model Apartment" at Primary Stages at 354  West 45th Street in Manhattan, a member of the audience did not leave the theater.
He waited in the lobby until the actress Lynn Cohen emerged from her dressing room.
When she did, he introduced himself, handing Ms.
Cohen his card.
Jack Polak,  chairman emeritus of the Anne Frank Center U.S.A., it read.
Mr.
Polak, the very  picture of a debonair gentleman, told Ms.
Cohen how moved he had been by her performance, how deeply the play by Donald Margulies touched him.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Cape Town's Inventive Chefs
THE whirling blades of the approaching helicopter distracted us from the attention we were lavishing on our lunch in the beautiful countryside outside Cape Town.
After years of isolation from the rest of the world, culinary and otherwise, South Africa is beginning to serve food that is worthy of attention.
At Bosman's, for example, a charming small restaurant in the five-star Grande Roche Hotel about half an hour outside Cape Town, the food and service are on a par with those of the best restaurants in the United States.
The helicopter says it all.
Flying in for lunch has become so common since the restaurant opened in 1991 that this mode of transport gets no more notice from the staff than the arrival of a car.


Q. &amp; A.
The Rules On Co-op Subletting


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NON FICTION
BY TWO AND TWO The Scandalous Story of Twin Sisters Accused of a Shocking Crime of Passion.
By Jim Schutze.
Morrow, $23.


If You're Thinking of Living In: West End Avenue;A Calm Oasis Near the Buzz of Broadway
LEAVING the buzz of Broadway behind, residents carrying food-laden shopping bags from Zabar's and Fairway walk one block west to a gentler, tree-lined world of distinguished doormen buildings, churches and schools.
In the morning, school buses are the only large vehicles permitted on the avenue, and baby strollers parade the sidewalks.
With Riverside Park one block to the west for much of its length and Broadway close by, West End Avenue is residential yet close to transportation, shopping and entertainment.
"For the most part, once people move to the avenue, they nest," said Cathy Blau of the Corcoran Group, a real estate agency.
"In many cases, both partners are serious professionals and don't want to be one hour away from Manhattan."


Tokyo Takes Hand in Bank Merger Talks
The Finance Ministry has summoned Daiwa Bank and two other Japanese institutions for consultations as early as Monday in an attempt to avert a banking crisis days after Daiwa was expelled from the United States by American  regulators.
Japanese financial experts said today that Daiwa and Sumitomo Bank were discussing a merger to create the biggest bank in the world, allied with Nomura  Securities, the world's largest securities firm.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Who Has the Flashlight?


Heat Announces Riley Era With a Victory
This much was evident about Pat Riley's regular season debut tonight as Miami Heat coach: The organization is pitching the new-found notion of winning basketball and leaving a lot of the off-court frills behind.
For its game with Cleveland at Miami Arena, the Heat eliminated all the hoopla that had been a seven-year staple on opening night.
No laser show, no players running through smoke, no cheerleaders gyrating on the sideline.
Nobody  wearing a tuxedo.


Alexander Surveys Challenges To the Arts
THE bagels and pastries were in her honor, but Jane Alexander did not eat at  the breakfast reception held for her at Purchase College here one recent morning.
Her eyes were drawn to the paintings in the school's Visual Arts Gallery, but discipline and a rigid schedule kept her from browsing through them.
College officials, members of news organizations and well-wishers thronged Ms.
Alexander, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, after she spoke to a full house at the school's performing arts center.
The occasion was a President's Leadership Forum lecture, one of a series of three talks by public figures sponsored by the college.


In Angleton's Custody
To the Editor:
We write to correct what in our opinion is an error in Ben Bradlee's autobiography, "A Good Life" (review, Oct. 1).


MY FATHER'S BLACK PRIDE
According to Bleecker, his father, a Jewish man, went to great lengths to make sure his son participated in black cultural activities and community.
But what Jewish activities did his father make available?
Is it necessary for Jewish identity to be minimized in order to assert African-American identity?
What does it mean when Jews like Marcus's father eloquently assert the rights of other groups but are mute when it comes to asserting or even articulating their own ethnicity?


Deborah L. Moody, Fredrick F. Jaffe
Dr.
Deborah Lynn Moody, an anesthesiologist, and Dr.
Fredrick Francis Jaffe,  a surgeon, are to be married today at their home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard J. Jacobs is to officiate.
The couple work in the North Division of the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
The bridegroom, the chief of adult reconstructive surgery in the orthopedic division, is also an assistant clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.


PEOPLE
Carrying the Koran Into Cyberspace


Cocaine Sentencing, Still Unjust
A decade ago a Congress panicked by the latest drug epidemic decreed that crimes involving crack cocaine be punished 100 times as harshly as crimes involving powdered cocaine.
That unjust disparity remains in force despite a recommendation from the United States Sentencing Commission that it be abandoned.
A demagogic Congress passed legislation maintaining the disparity and last week a timid President Clinton signed it into law.
Crack, the cheaper, smokable form of cocaine is chemically nearly identical to the powder form, usually snorted.
But selling five grams of crack brings a mandatory five-year minimum sentence while it takes a sale of 500 grams of powder to bring the same penalty.
Crack is the only drug for which the penalty for simple possession is a mandatory five years.
Possession of powder carries a  one-year maximum and is often punished simply by probation and treatment.


Let's Look Again at How We Treat Indonesia, China and Cuba
To the Editor:
"Real Politics: Why Suharto Is In and Castro Is Out" (news analysis, Oct. 31) highlights failed Administration policies toward disparate authoritarian regimes.
Political and economic expediency seems to drive these policies, rather than commitment to any consistent principle, including protection of universal human rights.


Nets Are Eager to See What They're Made Of
Their season is only one game old and already the Nets' character is being tested.
"I'm interested to see how we rebound from this after the last year we had,"  guard Kenny Anderson said Friday night after the Nets were beaten, 94-79, by the expansion Toronto Raptors before a crowd of 33,306 at the Skydome.
"Last year, we would have been pointing fingers with our heads down. Now, let's see what we're about."


'Rough Crossing' At the Coyote Theater
PLAYWRIGHTS traditionally take to adapting (in contrast to simply translating) other playwrights.
But no one does it more gleefully or ingeniously than Tom Stoppard.
Witness his comedy "On the Razzle," which turned to the 19th-century Austrian source, Johann Nestroy's "He Will Have His Fling" instead of the play's better-known guises, "The Merchant of Yonkers," "The Matchmaker" and "Hello, Dolly!"


My Muse Works Hard, But the Pay Is Peanuts
WHEN most of us in the words business set out to be writers -- fiction writers and poets, especially -- we imagined leading idyllic literary lives, our wine-marinated days ripe with literature, great thoughts and witty conversation.
Oh, well.


Will Democrats Return To the Fold on Tuesday?
The Democrats would like this Election Day, when voters will choose the 80 members of the Assembly, to be a referendum on Newt Gingrich and the Republican  revolution in Washington.
Mr.
Gingrich has not specifically accepted the challenge, but being venturesome, he might just be willing to.


An Ode to Schaeffer Street And to Childhood Memories
To the Editor:
It was with some nostalgia that I read the article about Woodbine Street in Bushwick ("Unity Under Fire Makes Theirs a Block Apart," Sept. 24) and about the people working to make it beautiful.
My family and I lived in that neighborhood  in the 1940's.
My feelings are better expressed in poetry:


Future Cab?
This Hondy Odyssey is part of a three-vehicle experiment by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission to see whether minivans and sport utility vehicles should join sedans among the city's nearly 12,000 yellow cabs.
The first riders  last week marveled at its headroom and legroom, while those on the sidewalks just marveled.
Article, page 43.


Palestinians Go on Alert Amid Doubt Over Future
Palestinian security forces in the Gaza Strip were placed on high alert today immediately after the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, a senior Palestinian security official said, signaling the uncertainty among the Palestinian leaders about the future of peace efforts.


Making Music as Business and Art
Once, Robert Tomaro and his Elysian Symphony Orchestra played the "On the Waterfront" film score in a pouring rain.
Another time, he rearranged Stravinsky's "Histoire du Soldat" to accompany a screening of Buster Keaton's "Cameraman."
"I am committed to creating a synthesis of musical styles, to bring the new generation into symphony music halls," said Mr.
Tomaro, whose eclectic background includes classical conducting and jazz guitar performance and composition.
"We should be on the edge and play in some funky places."


Thomas Takes On Challenge Of Raptors
The sound of squeaking sneakers and bouncing balls echoed in the almost-deserted Skydome.
From a far corner, a pair of intense eyes watched each move.
Isiah Thomas, vice president of basketball operations and part-owner of the Toronto Raptors, sat in an empty row of seats, hand resting on his chin, rarely  shifting his gaze from the court where the Raptors were practicing.
A cellular phone was in one hand.
A championship ring, one of two that Thomas earned as a player, glistened on the other hand.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House


Controversy Remains His Close Companion
DANIEL BARENBOIM does not suffer fools gladly.
When asked, near the end of a  long conversation recently, whether he had any particular thoughts about Anton Bruckner's Eighth Symphony or Bruckner's music generally, he sputtered: "I know  the New York Times Sunday section is very big, but ----. No, not in one sentence. I don't think so."
Fair enough.
Mr.
Barenboim's conductorial love of Bruckner's music is well known, and in fact he did go on to discuss the composer's achievement in a number of well-formed sentences.
Moreover, his splendid Teldec recording of the  Eighth Symphony with the Berlin Philharmonic, which has since appeared, eloquently shows that he has many pointed ideas about that work.


Around Newark, Many Vantage Points On Modern Life
A MAZE has developed here, and while Aljira: A Center for Contemporary Art is at its center, the trail begins with the Pepon Osorio installation at the Newark Museum.
It then proceeds to Aljira, which is entering its second decade with two group shows, "Modern Life" and "Aljira National I."
It is no great exaggeration to say that at any given moment, an Osorio work is on view somewhere in New Jersey, New York or Connecticut.
The example at the  Newark Museum is half a bedroom, furnished to reflect preoccupations and aspirations of a Hispanic youth, and half a jail cell, in which the boy's father may or may not be confined.
Although without the plastic flowers and religious kitsch that normally characterize the artist's work, the bedroom is nonetheless  a tour de force of ornament that ranges from posters, including one of Bruce Lee, to basketballs and a host of fists cast in what appears to be ceramic with  metallic finish.


Legal Lifeline For Asian Poor Gets Budget Ax
The roof leaks and the stench from a ground-floor fish market is often overpowering.
But the lack of amenities doesn't seem to faze the 1,500 or so poor people who get free help from MFY Legal Services' Chinatown office each year.
They make their way to the ramshackle warren of rooms at 223 Grand Street  with problems ranging from threats of eviction by a landlord to threats of abuse by a husband.
But the Chinatown office costs $420,000 annually to run, about the same amount MFY expects to lose this year from cutbacks in state and Federal money.
So the agency has decided it can no longer afford to keep it open past the end of the year.
Plans call for consolidating operations with the MFY's East Village office, at 41 Avenue A, some 10 blocks away.
MFY, with a $4 million annual budget, has two other offices, in East Harlem and Clinton.


Wise Up, Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
Coming off those great October games, enthusiastic crowds and spellbinding TV, thoughts about a return to baseball labor talks are especially sobering.
Sadly, I can envision most of the off-season coverage focusing, once again, on postures and details unless the parties suddenly decide to wise up.


Phyllis Graham, Matthew Stillman
Phyllis Elise Graham, a daughter of Patsy and Louis Graham of Nashville, and  Matthew Todd Stillman, a son of Maxine and Stuart Stillman of Woodbury, L.I., were married yesterday at the Richland Country Club in Nashville.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Breen performed the ceremony, and Rabbi Roger Ross participated.
Ms.
Graham, 32, is keeping her name.
She is the director of annual fund-raising for the New York University School of Law.
She graduated from the O'More College of Design.


Cityscape as Art
WHEN the curators at the Rotunda Gallery, Andrew S. Dolkart and Judith Saltzman, were casting about for exhibit ideas, they decided, Mr.
Dolkart recalled, that the gallery was "a spectacular contemporary space that seemed to  cry out for a contemporary architecture exhibit." The result: "New Architecture  in Brooklyn (1985-1995)," which opens Thursday with models, drawings, photographs and computer graphics of 16 major architectural works created in the last decade.
"We searched for projects that reflect the quality and diversity of contemporary architecture in the Borough of Brooklyn," Mr.
Dolkart said.
The Rotunda Gallery itself, designed by Smith-Miller &amp; Hawkinson and built in 1993, is among the projects included, as are lifeguard stations designed by Richard Dattner that are now being built on the beach at Coney Island, and the Brooklyn Law School and the recently completed Brooklyn Heights branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, both within walking distance of the gallery.


All Things Wet, and Sometimes Slimy


Amy E. Connors, David H. Bandler
Amy Eileen Connors, a daughter of Laverna and Thomas Connors of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to David Howard Bandler, a son of Sandra and James Bandler of  New York.
The Rev.
Thaddeus Grzelak, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the  Grand Prospect Hall in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Bandler, who graduated from Brooklyn College, is an administrative assistant at McFarland Dewey &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.
Mr.
Bandler, a graduate of Emerson College, is a freelance computer graphics and animation designer in Brooklyn.


Love and Politics
Loretta Young (above) copped an Oscar for her portrayal of a spunky Swedish servant who campaigns for a Congressional berth against the man she loves, Joseph Cotten, in THE FARMER'S DAUGHTER (1947).
H.C.
Potter directed this classy, bracing comedy drama - SUNDAY at NOON on CINEMAX.
The first-rate supporting cast includes Ethel Barrymore, Charles Bickford, Harry Davenport and  Rose Hobart.
But Ms.
Young pulls the whole picture taut, with an earthy glow and an impressive Swedish accent.
HOWARD THOMPSON


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE LORD OF THE LAST DAYS Visions of the Year 1000. By Homero Aridjis. Morrow, $23.


On Campus, Looks That Register
O.K. so maybe going to college these days IS filled with avoiding loan overload, figuring out how to earn a four-year degree in six years of less, deciding what to think about affirmative action and what to feel about safer sex.
Or maybe a lot of it is just about being there - and getting to class.
And  about the people you see and the people who see you.
Deciding what to wear may not rank at the top of many priority lists.
But every college has its distinctive style, its signature stuff.
Here, five students report on the things that fit in and stand out on their campuses.
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND Who is ragging on campus this fall?


V.A. Moves To Upgrade Services For Women
VERONICA REILLY expected a long career in the military before a routine dental visit three years ago disrupted her plans.
A former marine, she was stationed in Japan, when she was told her four wisdom teeth and another tooth needed to be pulled.
The procedure, performed by a military oral surgeon, led to problems that have left the 27-year-old Ms.
Reilly in constant pain.
Plagued by migraines, blackouts and depression, she was finally referred last spring to  the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Affairs Hospital here.
Although Castle Point Veterans Affairs Hospital in Beacon in Putnam County is closer to home for Ms.
Reilly, who lives in Florida, N.Y., the hospital here, with extensive mental-health services, is better equipped to care for her.She has also benefited from the hospital's recently begun initiative to become more  amenable to female veterans.


THE SOCIETY THAT PRETENDS TO LOVE CHILDREN
Roger Rosenblatt's "The Society That Pretends to Love Children" (Oct. 8) is a remarkably perceptive analysis that links Sunset Park children and families with millions in our country.
We wish, however, to draw your attention to a single sentence in the article: "In Sunset Park, bilingualism is promoted solely to get patronage jobs  for Spanish teachers." The sentence as written is a compressed and misleading expression of our opinion of bilingual education.
It in no way represents our feelings or thoughts on this issue.
SISTER MARY PAUL Director of Clinical Services


On Cornelia, Many Fleas, No Landlord
On the outside, 17-19 Cornelia Street looks just like the other red brick buildings that line the streets of this working-class, immigrant rich block of Ridgewood.
But the inside is another story.


5 Police Officers in Pittsburgh Facing Charges in Beating Death
A coroner's jury has recommended that five white officers who arrested a black man last month be charged with homicide because the man suffocated while in police custody.
The man, Jonny Gammage, died on Oct. 12 after the officers pulled him over in the Pittsburgh suburb of Brentwood.
Officers said they had to sit on Mr.
Gammage and beat him with flashlights to stop him from flailing after they stopped him for driving erratically.


Defining a Motor Voter
NO one knows for sure who will show up on Election Day, but the millions of Americans who have registered since the Federal "motor voter law" took effect in January are already reshaping the American electorate.
Voting rights advocates estimate that a record high of more than five million Americans have enrolled since the law took effect (swelling the rolls in New York for the first time in an off-year election since 1983).
The law requires states to let people register to vote by mail or when they apply for a  driver's license or for welfare benefits, or when they visit other government offices.
Now, for the first time, there's an inkling of who signed up to vote in time for Tuesday and who has yet to register for the Presidential election next  year.


After Bitter Debate on Gay Rights, Maine Will Vote in Referendum onDiscrimination
The only statewide civil rights referendum this year that affects homosexuals may be most striking for what it does not mention: homosexuality.
On Tuesday, after a rancorous debate, Maine will become the latest state, and the first in the East, to vote on a ballot initiative that would both nullify and prohibit local laws protecting homosexuals from discrimination.


How 2 Operators Had a Bad Fall
AUTUMN is a perilous season for tour operators.
Domenico Tours of Bayonne, N.J., founded in 1963, stopped operating on Oct. 19.
R.F.D.
Travel Corporation of Mission, Kan., begun in 1971, suspended operations last Sept. 26.
Both were major operators among the 600 belonging to the National Tour Association of America; both qualified for the American Society of Travel Agents' Tour Operator Program, which requires financial security and a pledge to deal with consumer complaints in 30 days.
"If a company is not going to make it, fall is when it all comes out," said Robert E. Whitley, president of another industry group, the United States Tour Operators Association -- to which neither company belonged at the time it failed.
"They have been using the cash that came in over the summer, and now the suppliers want their dollars, and no more cash is coming in."


Accent on Youth
Milos Forman's LOVES OF BLONDE (1965) sounds tabloidish.
No indeed.
Wry candor and sweet wisdom gave this comedy made in Czechoslovakia a fresh edge when it opened an early New York Film Festival (to hearty applause).
With an appealing Hana Brejchova as a shy, daydreamer in a small factory town, the import put the director on the international movie map.
Vladimir Pucholt as a smitten lad and the many non-professionals in the cast give the story a charming, lifelike flavor - TUESDAY at 8 P.M. on CHANNEL 13.
HOWARD THOMPSON


Rams Hit a Bump on the Road to Recovery
After five seasons of misery, Fordham football has undergone quite a turnaround.
The Rams, who lost all 11 games last season and won only once in each of the previous two years, finally appear to be building something.
They might not be using the Blocks of Granite from the Vince Lombardi era, but there are strong signs that Fordham has the right material to be a serious challenger for the Patriot League title within a year or two.


In Japan, Brutal Comics for Women
ANYONE who thinks of Japanese women as innocent, repressed or prim should pick up a copy of Amour magazine.
This is a comic book for women, the distaff equivalent of the comics that the mobs of pinstriped salarymen read on the train to work every morning.
Those are  notorious for depicting sexual violence, aptly symbolized by a comic called "Rape-Man" that was finally extinguished because it glorified rape.


QUICK BITE: Hoboken;  Humble Chiles Rellenos, Raised to New Heights
Pity the poor chile relleno, getter of little culinary respect.
Most of the time, the mexican stuffed pepper is consigned to the humdrum part of the menu with the tacos and burritos, and often deservedly so: the typical chile relleno  is a wilted pod filled with bland meat or a blob of jack cheese.
This is a shame, for in the right hands, the chile relleno can be a revelation.
Dalila Varela has the right hands.


Robert G. Sharp, Ramy B. Shalotsky
Ramy Brook Shalotsky, a daughter of Helene and Charles Shalotsky of Chatham,  N.J., was married last evening to Robert Guy Sharp, a son of Rachel and Martin Sharp of White Plains.
Rabbi William Horn performed the ceremony at Temple B'Nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Sharp, 27, is a media supervisor at FCB/Leber Katz, the New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College.
Her father is an associate director of product development in Piscataway, N.J., for the Colgate-Palmolive Company.
Her mother teaches the sixth grade at Kings Road School in Madison, N.J.


Cori L. Mason, Seth P. Berger
Cori Lynn Mason, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
I.
Ira Mason of New York, was married last evening to Seth Parker Berger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Berger of Aspen, Colo.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Plaza Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Berger, 26, is an associate at the G. A. Kraut Company, investor-relations counselors in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Lehigh University.
Her father, an internist, is on the staff of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Dr.
Mason also has a private practice in New York, and Mrs.
Mason is his office manager.


Jackie Collins
Q: What do you think of television?


More Than Pink Decor


Eat, Drink and Be Mellow
As the holidays heat up, the need to party grows ever more frantic.
Small dinner parties begin to sprout in the slender crack between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Invitations abound.
And before you know it, you, too, are bitten by the entertaining bug.
It is tempting to lay this phenomenon at winter's doorstep.
Cool breezes breed an appetite for human company and comfort; shorter days leave more evening hours to fill.
However, the seeming insanity of planning a dinner party  during a season already bloated with social and family obligations suggests that these events serve another purpose entirely.


Pop Briefs
BONNIE RAITT: 'ROAD TESTED' Capitol


Bern
Bern, the capital of Switzerland since 1848, retains much of the atmosphere of a small medieval town.
Many buildings from the 14th through the 16th centuries and a dozen gaudily painted fountains evoke Bern's vibrant history, as do the fluttering banners of Switzerland's cantons and medieval craft guilds hanging from burghers' homes.
From the Federal Terrace on the south side of the stately Swiss government buildings at the city center, the snowcapped peaks of the Bernese Alps are an imposing sight on clear days.
The squares and streets on the other side of the federal buildings are filled on Tuesdays and Saturdays by a colorful outdoor market.


Executive Suite
COMPANY MAN The Rise and Fall of Corporate Life.
By Anthony Sampson. 354 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $27.50.


Tuck In Perennials, Root Out the Annuals
NOW is the time for a few thoughts on putting the garden to bed for winter.
Actually, the plants can get ready quite responsibly by themselves.
But those of us who like to putter usually gain a sense of satisfaction from at least trying  to help.
The philosophy now is to let the events of the last few months dictate what should be done with the garden.
The Northeast's summertime drought was one of the most severe in many years.
The damage done may not yet be evident and next spring may have a few surprises.
Fortunately the rains have come, and with them  the lawns have revived, as promised.
But drought damage to some root systems, especially those of young woody plants and herbaceous perennials, may not be visible for quite some time.


California Immigrants Make Fast Economic Gains, Study Finds
Against the backdrop of California's immigration debate, a study released on  Friday shows that many foreign-born residents in the southern part of the state  are rapidly acclimating to life here.
They are generally learning English and escaping poverty at a quick pace, according to the report.
In the study, which tracked members of various ethnic groups over time, some  of the most dramatic results were seen among Hispanic immigrants who were between 5 and 14 years old when they arrived in Southern California in the 1970's.
Although only one-third of them could speak English proficiently in 1980, nearly 70 percent could do so 10 years later in 1990.


Croatian President Again Threatent Attack
The President of Croatia reiterated his threat today to retake by force the only portion of Croatia still held by Serbs if the American-led Balkan talks do  not result in an agreement for its return by the end of November.
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia warned that his army could attack the territory of Eastern Slavonia unless agreement is reached by Nov. 30.


Business Best Sellers
HARD COVER


In Poland, Walesa May Be the Comeback Kid
The mustache is now gray and trimmed.
The always generous chin has expanded.
And the usually flamboyant words have softened a little in the last few weeks as Lech Walesa has stormed around Poland trying to insure that he is re-elected President.
Several months ago, Mr.
Walesa was virtually written off, his stellar political career deemed over as his popularity ratings dipped into single digits.
His main opponent, a suave, smooth-talking former Communist, Aleksander  Kwasniewski, maintained far higher support.


Applying the Silber Standard to Boston U.
It is just after 10 A.M., and John R. Silber, the tough-talking president of  Boston University, is giving the incoming freshmen an earful.
"This is not Pinocchio's Pleasure Isle," he tells the class of 1999.
"At Boston University, we take a very hard line on both alcohol and drugs. No drugs  are allowed on this campus and you are not allowed to take alcohol into the dormitories. If you violate these rules, you will be subject to sanctions."


Pauling's Prizes
LINUS PAULING A Life in Science and Politics.
By Ted Goertzel and Ben Goertzel with the assistance of Mildred Goertzel and Victor Goertzel, with drawings by Gwen Goertzel. 300 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $27.50.


Costumes And Couture
Halloween night at the fashion collections in the tents at Bryant Park.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: As a frequent overnight traveler I typically fly with one carry-on bag.
I always place my bag underneath the seat in front of me to avoid  the awkward overhead bins.
Most important, a bag placed under a seat is easier to get when it's time to leave the plane.
But in reality a speedy exit is in no way determined by where you place your bag.
When the "fasten your seat belt" light goes off after the plane has landed, nearly all the passengers pop out of their seats.
They then proceed to fumble in the overhead bins, keeping passengers without overhead luggage trapped in their seats for up to half an hour.
I propose the following rule for all major airlines: Passengers without overhead luggage have the privilege of exiting first.


Child Care Politics Takes Strange Turn
To the Editor:
Re "Steps Taken on Welfare in Michigan" (news article, Nov. 1): It is dizzying to follow the strange course of child care in American politics.
In 1971 a coalition of labor unionists, children's advocates and feminists persuaded Congress to pass the first national child care legislation.


Angela Tung, Mark Landler
Angela Tung, a lawyer with the I.B.M. research division in Yorktown Heights,  N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark Landler, a business and financial news reporter at The New York Times.
The Rev.
Charles Beirne performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
Ms.
Tung, who is keeping her name, graduated from Swarthmore College.
She received a master's degree in English literature from the University of Michigan and her law degree from Harvard University.


Q and A
Lesbian Life in Greece


DIARY
RETAILING Half Empty, Half Full It's November, and the finish line looms, seven weeks away, for the holiday shopping season.
The nation's big retailers started by reporting their lowest monthly sales growth in more than four years, raising concerns about whether a grim Christmas looms.
Yet investors seemed willing to ignore the report.
Shares of Dayton Hudson, the Gap and some other retailers surged; Jeffrey Feiner, Salomon's retail analyst, reasoned that the early warning of weak sales  might allow retailers to get their inventories and attendant costs in hand.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16B


Julie S. Lipsett, David W. Singer
Julie S. Lipsett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman B. Lipsett of Boynton Beach, Fla., was married last evening in New York to David William Singer, a son of Arlene Singer of Parlin, N.J., and Richard Singer of Sunrise, Fla.
Rabbi William Lebeau, the dean of the Rabbinical School at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York, performed the ceremony at the Essex House.
The bride, 29, was until recently a team leader for the Center for Urban Community Services Inc. in New York.
Later this month she is to become the coordinator of the meal-delivery program of the Jewish Family and Vocational Services in Middlesex County, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the senior vice president and an owner of Giant Foods Inc. of Carlisle, Pa., a supermarket company.


The Road From Yunnanozoon to You
IT all used to seem so much clearer.
Life started out simple and grew complex.
Single-celled creatures blossomed into multi-celled creatures.
Then the profusion of flora and fauna burst forth.
Through the Darwinian engine of random mutation and natural selection, the nooks and crannies of the planet were filled with an overwhelming diversity of creatures -- one evolutionary experiment after another.
And after eons of tinkering, Homo sapiens, with its powerful brain and exquisitely arrayed nervous system, climbed its way from the muck.
One of the characteristics of our species is its ability to impose, in retrospect, such pleasing stories onto the mishmash of fossils we pry from the earth.
But in recent years, this nice, smooth tale of our inexorable rise has been assaulted by one inconvenient discovery after another, suggesting that life as we know it could be less an inevitability than a fluke.


Erin R. Apfel, Seth A. Katz
Erin Rochelle Apfel, an assistant district attorney in Queens County, was married last evening to Seth Alan Katz, an assistant district attorney in Bronx  County.
Rabbi Ronald Brown officiated at Temple Beth-El of Great Neck, L.I.


Suspect Says He Tried to Kill Rabin Before
Yigal Amir, the 27-year-old law student who was arrested for the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin tonight, was described by acquaintances as a militant critic of the Government who regularly joined protests against Mr.
Rabin's policies.
He told interrogators that he had carried out the killing on his own.


When Ships Come In, Bayonne Wants a Piece of the Action
Sooner or later, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is going to need more port.
Though there is still space at Ports Newark and Elizabeth and its ports in New York are underutilized, the agency is projecting steady growth  for shipping in the region.
So when one of the best-located shipping ports in the area became available,  the Port Authority responded.
Last week, it sent a letter to the Federal Government expressing its interest in acquiring the Military Ocean Terminal in Bayonne, a 437-acre base that juts two miles out into Upper New York Bay and was marked last spring for shutdown by the Pentagon.


UP AND COMING: Andy Lawrence;When Being Youngest Isn't All That Bad
HOW MANY ACTORS WILL Honestly admit that they're not crazy about sushi but love lizards (not to eat but to play with) and their mother's cooking (not to play with but to eat)?
And how many are able to walk that rare, thin line of polite openness while maintaining a high level of integrity, expressive but not tawdry, reserved but not secretive?
Do you have a girlfriend, dear?


Oct. 29-Nov. 4: The Mole's Ghost;The C.I.A. Admits Feeding Suspect Data to Washington
The legacy of Aldrich Ames, Moscow's mole inside the Central Intelligence Agency from 1985 to 1994, is a nightmare from which the C.I.A. cannot wake up.
On Halloween, the agency admitted it had given the White House and the Pentagon information -- or disinformation -- from Soviet double agents it knew were controlled by Moscow.
That may have led to decisions to spend billions on weapons systems being built to combat illusory threats (leaving less for real ones).


Coach Protests Swim Penalty
The Australian national team swimming coach, Don Talbot, called today for an  international protest after a 15-year-old American swimmer was placed on two years' probation Friday for testing positive to muscle-building steroids.
Jessica Foschi escaped a possible two-year ban from competition by United States Swimming, despite testing positive to the banned substance mesterolone.


From the Man Behind 'Magnum, P.I.,' 'Top Gun' Meets 'A Few Good Men'
Sure, David James Elliott says he's mighty impressed by all the high-tech gewgaws and military pyrotechnics that chew up much of the scenery of "JAG," the new NBC Saturday night action-adventury series in which he stars as a hunky Navy lawyer investigating nefarious doings around battleships, submarines, cockpits and distant foreign embassies.
"The hardware," he admits, "is kind of a co-star  in the show."
As Lieut.
Harmon Rabb of JAG - the Judge Advocate General's office - it is Mr.
Elliott's job to sound knowing on screen about the destructive capabilities  of everything from Tomcat fighter planes to Shadow torpedoes.
Yet Mr.
Elliott, clad in dress whites in his trailer on the universal Studios lot after finishing the filming of another scene, says that what astounded him most as he prepared for his role wasn't all the sate-of-the-art weaponry.
Rather, he continues, it was the intricacies of military protocol.


Dartmouth Puts a Dent Into Columbia's Hopes
Dartmouth 43, Columbia 27


Inside Cuban Prisons
To the Editor:
Representative Robert G. Torricelli (letter, Nov. 1) states that Amnesty International observers to Cuba were "denied permission to visit with prisoners." However, in our 1988 mission, we visited two prisons: Combinado del  Este in Havana, which we visited on two occasions, and Boniato in Santiago de Cuba.
We visited and interviewed more than 40 prisoners, many of whom we had asked to see.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA


College in Illinois Inherits a Business, and a Problem
Erick O. Schonstedt never attended Augustana College, but officials of the Rock Island, Ill., college expected that it would be remembered in his will.
Mr.
Schonstedt was a Swedish Lutheran, the college has a heavily Swedish Lutheran bent and Wendell L. Lund, his executor, was an Augustana trustee.
"Sure, we figured we'd get a bequest," said Thomas Tredway, president of Augustana.
But Dr.
Tredway did not expect that when Mr.
Schonstedt, an alumnus of the University of Minnesota, died two years ago, the college would get the Schonstedt Instrument Company, which he founded in 1953.


At Your Fingertips
Consider the hazards facing modern travelers: jet lag, airline bumping, ugly  fingernails.
For the last one, at least, there is some relief: the Pedipocket, a battery-powered manicure and pedicure device that can polish and trim nails.
It  costs $44.95, plus $5 shipping, from Home Care Products; (800) 426-3227.
JOSEPH SIANO


Even Before the Movies, the Shakers Had Technicolor
MENTION THE SHAKERS, and what comes to mind are images of austerely furnished rooms, with whitewashed walls, bleached floors and stark wood furniture.
But new research suggests that the Shakers probably lived in a Technicolor world.
A three-year study, the first scientific analysis of the surfaces of Shaker furniture and architecture, shows that members of the sect were much savvier about color than previously suspected.
And they used many vivid hues in their homes and workshops.
While it was well known that they whitewashed their walls,  we now discover that they brightened floors, furniture, pegboards, window frames and the exteriors of buildings with oranges, reds, pinks, yellows, blues and greens.
Baskets were the exception; they were left unpainted.


Manager's Loyalty To the Pirates Proves Speculators Wrong
With teams playing musical chairs and other games with managers and general managers the past couple of weeks, speculation has run rampant before the announcements about who will land where.
Sometimes the speculation is valid, other times not.
The forecast, for example, that Joe Torre would be the new Yankees manager was a safe call because the Yankees all but advertised his coming on their electronic sign board outside Yankee Stadium.
It was also a foregone conclusion, by the time they announced it, that Davey Johnson would get the Baltimore Orioles' job.


MY FATHER'S BLACK PRIDE
I was so moved by Marcus Bleecker's About Men column "My Father's Black Pride" (Oct. 15) that I sent it to my son in California.
His future children will also face the challenges of having a black mother and a white Jewish father.
He is also raising two black stepchildren who call him Daddy.
Like Bleecker's father, he sends them South to be with their black uncles and grandfather in the summertime.
I hope that they grow up with the same love and respect for their white father that Bleecker has for his, as well as pride in their black heritage.
In the mixing of races and cultures, we should bring forth stronger, more tolerant human beings, better able to cope with the problems of our fast-changing world.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NON FICTION
RACE, GENDER, AND POWER IN AMERICA The Legacy of the Hill-Thomas Hearings.
Edited by Anita Faye Hill and Emma Coleman Jordan.
Oxford University, $25.


Why Cotton? -- Through the Eyes of Mary Jones
Tucked amid hardy collard greens, tomatoes, carrots and beets in a small Operation Greenthumb garden in Bedford-Stuyvesant, cotton bolls were bursting open, ready for picking, last week.
The patch is the work of Mary Jones, a grandmother who has been gardening there for 15 years, and who has fond memories of a childhood trip to an uncle's cotton farm in North Carolina.
Her crop has prompted curiosity and amazement, and it has also stirred painful memories in a neighborhood where many families came to escape the cotton patches of the South's not-so-distant past.
M.C.
TO TEACH THE CHILDREN


Politically Correct? Perish the Thought!
HE is the co-author of several children's books, one of which, "My Brother Sam Is Dead," is usually getting banned somewhere on the contention it is too profane and excessively violent.
He thinks that public school education, particularly when it comes to teaching history, runs the gamut from deplorable to terrible.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MAKING MUMMIES


Shiner of Shoes (and Teller of News) Priced Out
For more than 70 years, as Flushing's English pubs and German beer halls gave way to kosher delis and Italian restaurants, then to Asian grocery stores and karaoke bars, Anthony Avena's shoeshine stall has clung tenaciously to the Long  Island Rail Road station at Main Street and Kissena Boulevard.
Every day except Wednesday and Sunday, from 6:30 in the morning to 5 in the afternoon, a mix of down-to-earth old-timers and snazzy business executives perch on leather chairs for a good polish and the latest gossip.
The shine costs $1.50; Mr.
Avena's firsthand accounts of Flushing's past and present are free.


In Korea, Protesters Condemn Corruption
Thousands of demonstrators demanding an investigation of President Kim Young  Sam over a slush fund scandal fought with the police in Seoul today.
More than 10,000 students and other protesters, some carrying iron bars and hurling bricks, fought running battles with the police.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NON FICTION
NONFICTION I AM SPOCK By Leonard Nimoy. Hyperion, $24.95.


Book on Philosopher's Life Stirs Scholarly Debate Over Her Legacy
One of the gossipy curiosities of 20th-century philosophy is that Hannah Arendt, the German-born Jewish philosopher remembered for her fierce and unforgiving attacks on totalitarianism, had a youthful fling in the 1920's with  Martin Heidegger.
Heidegger, the influential philosopher, later became a prominent Nazi and at  one time aspired to be Hitler's chief ideologue.


Anita Marie Hall, S. P. Angelopoulos
Anita Marie Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren T. Hall of Poughkeepsie,  N.Y., was married there yesterday to Spiros Peter Angelopoulos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Angelopoulos of Vasilikon, Greece.
The Rev.
Stephen Sarigianis officiated at the Kimisis Greek Orthodox Church.
Mrs.
Angelopoulos, 31, is an event planner at JFM Productions, fund-raising consultants in New York.
She graduated from Marist College.
Her father is the vice president of IHI, computer-systems consultants in Poughkeepsie.


Word Baker, Who Was Director Of 'The Fantasticks,' Dies at 72
Word Baker, the director who in 1960 set "The Fantasticks" spinning into theater history as the world's longest-running musical, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Paris, Tex.
He was 72.
Harvey Schmidt, the composer of the show, which is still running at the Sullivan Street Playhouse after 35 years, said the cause was complications of a  series of recent strokes.


House-Plant Killer? Expert Tips for Rehabilitation
I got carried away with fragrant geraniums this summer.
They got big and bushy basking in the sun on my rooftop tar beach in Brooklyn Heights.
The rosemary, the bay plant, my little coffee tree, the night-blooming cereus, the aloes, everybody loved it up there.


Aborigines in Focus
To the Editor:
In documenting the lack of serious drama in today's Australian film industry, Mr.
Shenon says that Fred Schepisi's "Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith" is the only major movie on the subject of Australia's aboriginal population.
Not quite.


Wine Auction Offers Rarities and a Tasting
ALTHOUGH bottles of 1918 Lanessan, 1937 Chateau Latour and 1947 Cantenac Brown from Bordeaux are not available at local stores, they can be purchased on  Long Island later this month.
So can 1970 D'Yquem, the world's greatest sauterne, and a 1978 Beringer Cabernet Sauvignon in a nine-liter bottle that contains as much wine as a whole case.
More than 200 lots of often rare and unusual wines will be auctioned at the sixth Autumn Evenings wine-and-food tasting at the State University at Stony Brook on Nov. 16.
The tasting and auction is the largest wine-centered event on  Long Island and the biggest nonprofit wine auction in the metropolitan region.


Fond Memories Of Estate's Big House
Unused Estate Object of Affection" [Oct. 8] on my grandfather's estate on Long Island had one minor flaw. My grandfather, F. A. Muschenheim, did act as manager and Edwardian host of the Hotel Astor in its heyday. But he was also its co-owner, with his elder stepbrother, my great-uncle William. When this arrangement eventually changed, my grandfather, to my knowledge, remained chairman of the board and resided in a private suite in the hotel between approximately 1946-56.
He died in December 1956 at Southampton Hospital.
He was an extremely colorful character, and with his passing it was felt that an era in hotel history had also passed, i.e., from personalized and glorified tavern to impersonal chain.
He was a member of the Tavern Club, as well as a compulsive host and party giver.
And it was to the other members of the Tavern Club that he gave one of his last and most flamboyant "picnics" at the Hampton Bays estate.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours pages last Sunday about a fund-raiser  for the National Actors Theater misstated the surname of the group's board president.
He is Winton M. Blount, not William.
Another Evening Hours caption, about a benefit for the Whitney Museum of American Art at an exhibition of paintings by Florine Stettheimer, misidentified one work.
It was "Portrait of My Teacher in Stuttgart, Fraulein Von Preiser," not a portrait of the artist's aunt.


Andreotti Now Faces A Trial for Murder
A judge today ordered Giulio Andreotti, who served as Prime Minister seven times, to stand trial on charges of complicity with the Mafia in the murder of a journalist 16 years ago.
Mr.
Andreotti, already on trial in Sicily for reported links with the Mafia,  was charged by magistrates with complicity in the 1979 shooting death of Mino Pecorelli in Rome.


ATM's Overseas
To the Editor: I would like to relate some of my experiences using a Cirrus ATM card while traveling in Europe.
I found it very easy to use my ATM card in June while visiting Rome, Florence and Venice.
In Rome, for example, I found two machines across the street from each other.
There were several locations in Florence and the same for Venice.
I  was never refused by a machine.
And as various articles have suggested, the exchange rate proved most attractive.


Battle Of the Budget
AS the days get shorter, the nights get colder and winter knocks loudly at the door, managing agents across the land are hunkered down with spreadsheets, crunching out numbers for their co-op clients' annual budgets.
Since many co-ops pay taxes on a calendar year basis, November has traditionally been the month when managing agents get serious about making their buildings' budgets final and when boards get very curious about how the agents are doing their jobs.


Politics Aside, Montclair Has First-Class Schools
To the Editor:
In giving such prominent treatment to the views of advocates for an elected school board in Montclair, your article "How to Pick the School Board?" (News and Topics, Oct. 22) presents a distorted picture of our public school system.


The Rabin Assassination
Israel has had to endure more than its share of political violence over the years.
But it faces a frightening new kind of experience with yesterday's assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
The country's democratically elected leader and the guiding hand of its historic peace agreement with the Palestinians was gunned down, apparently by a right-wing Jewish extremist, as he left a peace rally in Tel Aviv.
In the past, Arabs have been the killers of Jews.
Now, what had been unthinkable seems to have occurred, as a Jewish Israeli citizen is accused of striking down the nation's leader.
A country that has survived so many military threats from outside must now hold course through the most severe internal political strain that can confront  a democratic government.
Israel's basic values and the strength of its people will enable it to meet this test.
The continued pursuit of peace, with the Palestinians and all of Israel's Arab neighbors, must be Mr.
Rabin's monument.


Agent Solution
To the Sports Editor:
Scott Edelman's article "Colleges Can Take Action Against Agents" (The Times, Oct. 15) raises some important issues concerning unscrupulous agents who solicit and tender gifts to student-athletes and the effect of such conduct on their eligibility.
In focusing on the remedies available under various state statutes  to deter such conduct, he does not point out that already in place in the National Football League is a very effective mechanism.


Liberties;Sorry, Wrong Number
The President is calling columnists out of the blue to spill his guts about where he has gone wrong.
Each night I sit at home, right by the telephone.
You never know, he may get  the urge to raid the fridge and dial my number.
I won't need Caller ID, because  the identity of the caller is precisely the problem.


A Man's Best Friend
Henry Koster's film HARVY (1950) is one up on Broadway: it had James Stewart  - MONDAY at 9 P.M. and MONDAY/EARLY TUESDAY at 2:20 A.M. on the DISNEY CHANNEL.
In Mary Chase's Pulitzer Prize-winning lark about a tipler and his imagined giant rabbit pal (Harvey), Frank Fay scored as a gentle eccentric.
But Stewart's warmth added dimension.
The story was nicely expanded in a Hollywood frame.
And  the portly Josephine Hull, as his befuddled sister, was a priceless holdover from the stage.
For the record, Stewart did later repeat "Harvey" on long-go Broadway (opposite Helen Hayes).
The reviews were glowing.
HOWARD THOMPSON


Tuck In Perennials, Root Out the Annuals
NOW is the time for a few thoughts on putting the garden to bed for winter.
Actually, the plants can get ready quite responsibly by themselves.
But those of us who like to putter usually gain a sense of satisfaction from at least trying  to help.
The philosophy now is to let the events of the last few months dictate what should be done with the garden.
The Northeast's summertime drought was one of the most severe in many years.
The damage done may not yet be evident and next spring may have a few surprises.
Fortunately the rains have come, and with them  the lawns have revived, as promised.
But drought damage to some root systems, especially those of young woody plants and herbaceous perennials, may not be visible for quite some time.


3 Are Badly Burned as Mother Sets Self and Daughters On Fire
As her husband slept in the next room, a pregnant woman led her two daughters into the bathroom of a Queens apartment yesterday, locked the door, then doused  the children and herself with lighter fluid and lit a match, the police said.
Investigators were at a loss to explain what caused the woman, Sassadineer Jassal, 27, an Indian immigrant, to try to kill herself and her two daughters, 1 and 5 years old, in their first-floor apartment in Flushing.


Goddesses of the Theater, Hear Our Prayer
You're no exception to the rule,
She's irresistible, you fool,


Vibrant and Irreverent, Poet Reads at Caramoor
THE Hudson Valley Writers Center returned to its roots recently, sponsoring a live reading by the poet Rita Dove at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts here.
A large audience packed Caramoor's antique-studded Music Room to listen to Ms.
Dove, who just three days earlier had completed her term as Poet Laureate of the United States.
If anyone expected a staid figure to recite austere verses on the state of the nation, the effervescent -- and at times irreverent -- Ms.
Dove quickly puts such ideas to rest.
At 42, she is the youngest person and the first black American to be appointed to the office.
Vibrant in a brightly patterned shirt and black pants, she also wore a curly haircut, long fingernails painted different colors and spikey high-heeled shoes.


Natural Settings
The jellyfish's domelike, phosphorescent surface is perfectly rendered in moonstones interspersed with tiny diamonds; its curling gold tentacles, paved with amethysts, dangle below.
The thought of a wealthy woman, well dressed, sporting on her lapel a creature commonly regarded as a menace and a pest must have delighted Jean Schlumberger, the jewelry designer whose work constitutes a  magnificent exhibition, "Un Diamant Dans la Ville" ("A Diamond in the City"), currently on view at the Musee des Arts Decoratifs, in Paris.
While others applied the principles of modernism to the craft of precious stones -- streamlining the shapes, creating "abstract" settings -- Schlumberger resolutely pursued his own course, a serendipitous parade of flora, fauna and everyday objects.
Surprisingly, it is the sleek art-deco necklace from Cartier that now looks dated and conventional and Schlumberger's brooch of a giant ruby pierced by gold arrows that has proved to be not only timeless but subversive.
He was an unlikely revolutionary.
Born in 1907, in Alsace, to a well-to-do family of textile manufacturers, he defied his mother's warning that by becoming a jewelry designer, he would forfeit the right to dance with his clients.
When he worked, he wore a smock made for him by Balenciaga, the great couturier and a friend.
From 1956 until his retirement, in the late 70's, he was ensconced at Tiffany &amp; Co., in New York.


Grace Forlenza, Stephen Cosgriff
Grace Mary Forlenza, a daughter of Grace and Gerard A. Forlenza of Montclair, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Gerard Cosgriff, a son of Anne  Cosgriff of Hasbrouck Heights, N.J., and the late Edward F. Cosgriff.
The Rev.
William F. Eckert officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception.
Mrs.
Cosgriff, 35, is a commercial insurance underwriter at the Barkly Coverage Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.
The bride's father is an engineering and management consultant in Montclair and a former president of the industrial chemicals division of the American Cyanamid Company in Wayne, N.J.


College Presidents In the Spotlight
The idea of the college president as renaissance figure - well read, conversant in several languages and disciplines - is part of the academic tradition.
But in the 1990's, running a college or university is no genteel job.
College presidents cannot afford to be merely phiosopher-kings.
The media, Congress, alumni, trustees and students all take a vested interest in what could once remain behind closed doors.
Some presidents, like Francis L. Lawrence at Rutgers University in New Jersey, have found that one off-the-cuff comment is enough to make people try to topple you from the top of the ivory tower.
Other presidents, like Peter Diamandopoulos at Adelphi University in Long Island, and Leroy Keith Jr., formerly of Howard University in Washington, have found that living like a king  on the college dollar is enough to make irate faculty or a board of trustees threaten to drag you from the tower.
Even without gaffes, college presidents are increasingly embattled.
Those who fill the position must be scholars, ambassadors and managers, able to handle issues like diversity, faculty benefits, tenure and increasing the endowment and the enrollment.
More and more, boards prize presidents who can run the college like a business, yet keep sight  of the academic mission.


Creature Comfort
THE VOICE OF the elderly woman is tender, but her words are surprisingly cruel.
"Does it taste good?" she asks my son, whose thumb is lodged in his mouth, as it has been for much of his 4 1/2 years.
We are riding the crosstown bus, Gabriel and I, and while this is our first thumb-related encounter of the day, it will probably not be our last.
The woman presses on.
"You're a big boy," she chides.
"You don't need to do that." She leans over and playfully tugs at Gabriel's thumb, to dislodge it from its mooring.


Christine Alcuri, Allen Flissler
Christine Marie Alcuri, the daughter of Margaret and Joseph Alcuri of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Allen Craig Flissler, the son of Gerard and  Myrna Flissler, also of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Francis Gillen, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bride, is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Cantor Bernard Fitch will take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is a marketing representative in Astoria, Queens, with New York Life/Sanus, a health insurance company.
She graduated from Pace University.


OCT. 29-Nov. 4;E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Celebrities And Other Sideshows
DOWNTOWN -- Last year, Tanya Sarne, the British designer of Ghost clothing, gave her blowout post-fashion-show party in a former synagogue.
This year, for Halloween, she filled the four empty floors of the dilapidated Gentlemen's Club, a building that closed years ago, in the deserted financial district with a hot  British deejay, Jeremy Healy, and supermodels, almost-supermodels, actors, scores of admirers and performers from Coney Island's Sideshows by the Seashore.


Movie High Notes
You've seen themovie. Now hear - really hear - the score.
Film music from Hollywood's Golden Age is the focus of PBS's "Great Performance" on WEDNESDAY at 9:30 P.M. on CHANNELS 13 and 49, when MUSIC FOR THE MOVIES: THE HOLLYWOOD SOUND extols the virtues of what is often a maligned art.


Aiding Fashion's Future
Raising $3.9 million for scholarships at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Nov. 1.


A C.I.A. Grain of Salt
To the Editor:
Maureen Dowd (column, Nov. 2) marvels at the revelations of the incompetence  and corruption of the Central Intelligence Agency as if they were something new.
Forty years ago, when I was part of a team of intelligence analysts at the National Security Agency dealing with Eastern Europe, we were given explicit instructions to disregard any information supplied by the C.I.A. if it was at variance with any credible source, including, explicitly, The New York Times.


Classroom Journal: Am I Really Ready for This?;A college freshman finds in independent living a 'revelation.'
I THOUGHT THE HARDEST PART ABOUT MOVing away from home for college would be sharing a bathroom with the three strangers who would be my roommates.
Instead, what I've found in the first few months of my freshman year at Harvard University is that the difficulty lies in becoming totally independent,  from buying my own toothpaste to weighing the comparative merits of used textbooks versus new ones.
My entire support system -- family, friends who have  known me for years, high school teachers to whom I looked for advice, my Jewish  youth group -- is back in Bethesda, Md., close enough for occasional phone calls, of course, but no longer in my everyday life.


QUIZ
The United Nations recently celebrated the 50th anniversary of its founding.
How much do you know about the work and the workings of this venerable institute?
1.
The United Nations has six major divisions with specific areas of responsibility.
Give the name of the body that:


Oct. 29-Nov. 4: Deep Pockets;Dow Chemical Loses In a Breast Implant Suit
Plaintiffs' lawyers, in the nature of their work, keep an eye out for the deepest pockets available, and when a Nevada jury last week ordered the Dow Chemical Company to pay $14.1 million in compensatory and punitive damages to a  woman who said she was injured by silicone breast implants, they counted it a major victory.
Since the start of the legal imbroglio over the devices, the lawyers have tried to drag in Dow Chemical, and the Nevada case marked the first time that it had been held solely liable in a case involving implants made by Dow Corning, in which it held a 50 percent stake.


Sri Lankan Army Drives on Tamil Rebels
After 12 years of an ethnic conflict that has exhausted this island nation, a major offensive by the Sri Lankan armed forces has reversed the tide of the war  in less than three weeks and brought the old colonial city of Jaffna, headquarters for the rebel Tamil Tigers, to the verge of being overrun.
At dusk today, Sri Lanka commanders reported that 25,000 troops were less than three miles from the outskirts of Jaffna, moving forward slowly along roads and village pathways that have been extensively booby-trapped and mined.


The Mayor's Soft Stance
In announcing a new city labor pact with the teachers, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made one thing quite clear: the city's teachers, and most likely all unionized workers, will not have to bear the brunt of the painful cuts he is making in the city's budget.
The teachers yesterday were guaranteed their jobs for three more years, a promise that few private-sector employees have been made.
Though the teachers will have to wait two years for a raise, they were assured of an 11 percent increase if they teach for five years, and they will not have to work any harder or spend any more time in the classroom to get it.


Tokyo Auto Show Explores New Frontiers
THESE are trying times for Japan's car makers, with a strong yen crimping their exports and an economic slump depressing their sales at home.
But the 31st Tokyo Motor Show, which is being held here until Wednesday, shows that Toyota, Nissan and company have not lost their inventiveness, their sense of whimsy or their love for nonsensical car names.


Flocks of Birds Force Closings Of 3 Airports
Great flocks of migratory birds overwhelmed the radar systems at three Midwestern airports on Thursday night, forcing them to shut down.
Experts at the Federal Aviation Administration said that they could not recall a similar failure.
There were no accidents but some flights were delayed.


A Good Day for a Hunt, Even for Five Foxes (Fleet of Foot)
The morning began, auspiciously enough, with a pair of foxes resting in a patch of wild rose.
One dashed across a road and the other down a hole, but that was enough to make a successful opening day for the Amwell Valley Hounds fox-hunting club last Sunday.
The club, one of five in New Jersey, gathered on the hilly 70-acre farm of Gordon Smith to begin a season that will run until February.
As it turned out, the two red foxes were only a harbinger.
The riders found three more, including a gray fox, the likes of which had not been seen in five
years.


Carolyn Robbins And James Levine
Dr.
Carolyn Gail Robbins and James Robert Levine are to be married today at Temple Emanuel in Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Wayne Franklin is to officiate.
The bride is a neonatologist at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I., and an assistant professor of pediatrics at the State University at Stony  Brook, L.I.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from George Washington University.


For Schwab, the Vision Thing May Not Be Enough
YOU wouldn't know it from the placid look on Charles Schwab's face in his office here, but up and down Wall Street all the gloves are coming off to get him.
For proof, just ask Doug Lennick, an executive at American Express.
"Absolutely" the financial services giant considers itself a direct competitor of Schwab, he said.
"And tell them I said so."
Of course, Schwab, as one of the first and most successful discount brokers,  has long had its rivals.
And some are heavyweights, like Fidelity Investments.
But now Schwab is knocking heads with bruisers like American Express, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch, and these rivals possess strengths that Schwab's current competition does not, from huge research staffs to access to public offerings to other lures for the advisers and clients using Schwab.


For Quebec, the Neverendum
SOME sagas in the Americas, though ripe with drama, just never seem to reach  a satisfying conclusion.
Brazil is perpetually on the verge of economic superpowerhood.
Mexico is forever about to become a real democracy.
But they never make the climactic change, and the sagas continue.
So, too, that of Quebec, which has been fighting for its cultural identity ever since the British defeated the French on the Plains of Abraham in 1759.
Britain acknowledged the separate cultural identity of the people of Quebec by letting them keep their language and religion, and much of the Canadian history  that has followed has revolved around the struggle of French and English Canada  to adjust to each other.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 5, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


One Man's Muted Landscapes And Those of 14 Other Artists
ONE of the landscape exhibitions under review is the solo by Larry Horowitz at Nardin Galleries in Somers; the other is an anthology on view in the Gallery  at Hastings-on-Hudson.
The displays have their individual merits, but it is when taken in tandem that they make their strongest impact.
Mr.
Horowitz has a decade of solos to his credit, in places as far apart as Manhattan and Texas and Jerusalem.
He obtained his bachelor of fine arts degree  at Purchase College, where he counted among his teachers Paul Resika, Nicolas Marsicano and Tal Streeter.
But to judge from the 50 works at Nardin, all of them produced during the last 20 or so years, the artist's formative influence has been Wolf Kahn, in whose studio he served as an assistant from 1978 to 1985.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.


Round the Globe Above 103d Street
CAFE ST.
JOHN ++ (212) 932-8420; 1018 Amsterdam Avenue, at 110th Street; (c) American Express


Cancer Treatment Center Starts a Blood Drive
It had been 10 years since Don Decker donated blood, but on Wednesday he was  preparing to roll up his sleeve.
He was one of about 30 people who signed up to  give blood at the Center for Cancer and Hematologic Disease in Cherry Hill.
It's a place he is familiar with; his wife, Jeanne, who has had cancer for 13 years,  sometimes has treatment there.
"There's not a lot I can do," he said.
But he can give blood: "It's good for  Jeanne, good for doctors, good for South Jersey."


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Mitsubishi 3000GT VR-4 Spyder;  Razzle-Dazzle From the Top Down
IT is unseemly, I guess, for a man of my years to giggle.
But when I get behind the wheel of the Mitsubishi 3000GT Spyder, I just can't help it.
The mirth is contagious, too, because the sports coupe's shenanigans with its retractable hardtop -- whirring, gaping, lifting, folding, lowering and latching -- make it a sensation whenever you push the button in public, something else I can't help but do.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SPEAKING OF RACE


IN PERSON


Appearances];Hope Springs Nocturnal
THESE ARE THE DAYS OF MIRACLE AND WONDER, TO quote from a Paul Simon song.
We're hurtling toward the millennium and some of us are getting crow's-feet.
We  feel something must be out there -- a serum, a lotion, a cream -- that we can put on at night and wake up looking younger.
At the same time, we're not going to throw away money on a jarful of dreams.
Lately, preparations have appeared that promise to nourish the skin with vitamins not in the usual way of ingestion and metabolizing, but directly through the epidermis.
The vitamins are supposed to act as antioxidants that will neutralize free radicals.
Free radicals are molecules that have lost an electron and go banging around until they they can steal an electron back from other molecules.
This process causes metal to rust and skin to age.
Free radicals occur in skin cells from sun damage, pollution and just plain metabolism.
Antioxidants donate electrons to free radicals before those microscopic marauders can wreak their havoc.


Vittoria Mezzetti And C. H. Feeley
Vittoria Catherina Mezzetti, a daughter of Britt and Carlo Mezzetti of Drobak, Norway, was married on Friday to Christopher Hugh Feeley, a son of Mary  and Stanton Feeley of Chatham, N.J.
Msgr.
James T. Mahoney officiated at St.
Peter's Basilica in Rome.
Mrs.
Feeley, 28, is a student at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
Her father is a chemical engineer for Golton Service, an engineering company in Oslo.


Princeton Removes Penn Grip On Title
Princeton deposed Pennsylvania today as the monarch of the Ivy League and took a giant stride toward the championship that the Tigers last won outright in 1964.
The 22-9 victory over the Quakers was the eighth straight for unbeaten Princeton, which last achieved such a record 30 years ago.
The Tigers are 5-0 in the Ivy League, one game ahead of Cornell with games left against Yale and Dartmouth.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
A fine quartet of films on television this week owe their beginnings to the Broadway stage.
The screen version of YOU CAN'T TAKE IT WITH YOU (1938), the Kaufman-Hart Pulitzer Prize winner, was right up the alley of Frank Capra.
Hollywood had a ready-made cast for this amusing piece of Americana about a stuffy rich clan and an eccentric one: James Stewart, Jean Arthur, Lionel Barrymore and Edward Arnold, Spring Bylington and a picaresque group - Wednesday at 2 P.M. on Showtime.


New Teacher Pact Could Prove Costly to Children
At first blush, the tentative agreement on a teachers' contract announced yesterday appears to reaffirm, as Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew put it, "our commitment to kids."
For one thing, the contract would relieve teachers of the requirement that they patrol hallways and monitor bathrooms, freeing them to meet with students independently or in small groups outside class.


Julie A. Kime, Michael D. Traina
Julie Ann Kime, the daughter of Marcia and John Kime of River Vale, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Derek Traina, a son of Margaret and Dr.
Richard P.  Traina of Worcester, Mass.
Msgr.
John F. McDermott performed the ceremony at the Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Traina, 28, teaches the fifth grade at the Bancroft School in Wilmington, Del.
She graduated from Lehigh University, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
Her father is an owner of Cam Electronics, a distribution company in the Bronx.


At a Crossroads, Rifts Pull at Orthodox Churches
With his flowing robes, beard and sculptured staff, Patriarch Bartholomew I looks much like an ancient prophet.
Indeed, his throne in Istanbul reaches back  almost to biblical times.
But the leader of the world's Orthodox Christians definitely thinks of himself as a man of this moment.
Just recently, he did as modern heads of organizations do: he called a meeting of chief executives, in this case the Primates of the 15 independent Eastern Orthodox churches.
They represent more than 170 million faithful, most of them in countries newly freed from Communism.


3 Men Drown Trying to Enter U.S. Illegally
Three farm workers drowned early Friday in the Tijuana River while trying to  cross into the United States from Mexico, the authorities said.
An agent for the United States Border Patrol in the unincorporated San Ysidro area saw eight people head into the river channel about midnight, said Ann Summers, a spokeswoman for the Border Patrol's San Diego sector.


Unidentified Body Found in Suitcase
The body of an unidentified man was discovered stuffed inside a suitcase early yesterday outside a Queens cemetery, the police said.
A passer-by found the suitcase outside Calvary Cemetery, Officer Kathleen Kelly, a police spokeswoman, said.
The discovery was reported at 8:30 A.M.


Artifacts of St. Francis on Display in Assisi
Artifacts that belonged to St.
Francis of Assisi are now on display in the basilica that bears his name in the Italian city of Assisi.
In the past only scholars and clerics had access to these objects, which were kept in the so-called secret sacristy in the lower church.
Ten of the objects are now on permanent exhibit in a room reached through the lower basilica.
The relics on view are the original text of the Papal Bull with which Pope Onorio III approved the Rule of the Order (1223); St.
Francis' pale ash-gray tunic and cowl; his cingulum (girdle); leather sandals used by the saint after he received the stigmata; a small chalice with paten (plate for the Eucharist) used by St.
Francis and his followers; an ivory horn given to St.
Francis by the Sultan of Egypt that he used to assemble his followers; a white flannel underskirt used by St.
Francis during his final illness; a sheepskin parchment with the Benediction of Brother Leone on one side and the Laud to the Creator on the other, written in St.
Francis' own hand, and two veils that belonged to the  Blessed Jacopa dei Settesoli, whose presence was requested by the saint at the time of his death.


Troubled Waters
SONGDOGS By Colum McCann. 212 pp.
New York: Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


Too Much Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
The tough litigator, Anne K. Bingaman, who heads the Justice Department's antitrust division ("At Justice, the Taming of a Whirlwind," Oct. 22) provides additional reasons for increasing disenchantment with government by the average  citizen.


A Diet of Symphonies; Von Stade in Benefit
IT promises to be an orchestral week, with symphonic activity every single day.
At 3 this afternoon, James Humphreville conducts the Danbury Symphony in a  free concert at Western Connecticut State University.
The all-Prokofiev program  lists the March and Scherzo from "Love for Three Oranges," the Suite from "Lt. Kije" and his Fifth Symphony.
The Yale Symphony under Martin Katz performs at 8 P.M. tomorrow in Woolsey Hall in New Haven, although admittedly in a backup role, accompanying Frederica  von Stade in a benefit program for Friends of Music at Yale and the Neighborhood Music School.
The performance will take the mezzo from arias by Mozart, Rossini  and Bizet to songs from "Showboat" and "West Side Story." Ms. von Stade's loyalty to Yale dates from her student days at the Norfolk Festival, where she also sang in the Litchfield Chorus.
For regular concert or patron tickets, call  624-5189.


Andrea Scott and Warren Grundfest
Andrea Kay Scott, a consultant on bioethics, and Dr.
Warren Scott Grundfest,  a researcher on medical uses for lasers, are to be married today in Pasadena, Calif.
Judge Alfred L. Margolis, who retired from the Superior Court of Los Angeles, is to officiate at the Ritz-Carlton Huntington Hotel.
Ms.
Scott, who is keeping her name, is the executive director of the Bioethitech Institute in Sierra Madre, Calif., which develops guidelines on ethical conduct in biomedical research and new medical products.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in anthropology from Yale University and a law degree from the University of Virginia.


Gallery Owner's Specialty: Con Art
In the rarefied realm of Manhattan art dealers, Farah Damji made a stunning debut.
In 1993, at age 26, she opened her first gallery; four more followed.
She said her shows drew the likes of Carolina Herrera, Peter Jennings and Kelly Klein.
A commanding presence, Ms.
Damji exuded artistic confidence and beguiling charm.
Born in Uganda and reared in England, she claimed an intriguing pedigree: a mother said to be a Jordanian princess, her father, an Indian businessman.


Islanders' Goalies Don't Make The Grade
Mike Milbury has to be wondering when -- or even if -- either of his goaltenders will start making the big stop at the right time.
One thing is nearly certain, however: He's ready to give someone else a try,  probably as soon as Tuesday night's game.


Fan Fights Back
To the Sports Editor:
The sad but seemingly inevitable forced departure of Buck Showalter from the  Yankees should cause even the most diehard fan to question his loyalty and support.
Showalter, who was arguably the most talented manager in New York since the era of McCarthy, McGraw and Huggins, is better off without the headaches of  working for George Steinbrenner.
He will survive and thrive elsewhere.
The Yankees and their fans, however, are doomed to another long period of mediocrity.


The Undemocratic G.O.P. Primary
New York State's G.O.P. leaders have a minimalist view about the Republican Presidential primary in March.
They want only one candidate with a full slate of delegates on the ballot.
That candidate is Bob Dole.
There will be no other choices -- no Pat Buchanan, Phil Gramm, Lamar Alexander.
A lawsuit has now been  filed in Federal court to stop this charade.
The outcome may not be known for months.
What is already clear is that the G.O.P.'s refusal to allow a truly open, democratic primary is becoming a national embarrassment.
The main culprits here are Senator Alfonse D'Amato and Gov.
George Pataki, who are supporting Mr.
Dole and, despite heavy criticism from Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and other important Republicans, have done nothing to make it easier for Mr.
Dole's competitors to get on the ballot.
If Colin Powell decides to enter the Presidential race as a Republican, New York's closed-door policy will  look even tawdrier than it does now, not least because it would deny room on the ballot for a candidate with a strong position who also happens to have been born in New York State.


No, but I Heard the Soundtrack
I put together this collection of songs to accompany my novel, 'Where Love Goes,' so readers could have the experience of hearing some of the music I listen to when I write.
And out of my lifelong belief that almost any experience goes better with music." -- Joyce Maynard
TO: Murray Lawrence, Marketing Director FROM: Ed Branden, Publicity Coordinator
Murray:


Forging Links With the Past at Long Pond
In the shadow of the Ramapo Mountains in Passaic County, Long Pond Ironworks  provided the American colonies with one of their most basic needs -- iron -- as  they broke away from British rule.
During the Revolutionary War, Long Pond's charcoal-burning furnaces furnished the iron for stoves, axes and ammunition for George Washington's troops.
Iron from Long Pond also helped make the chain blockade strung across the Hudson River at West Point to block British ships.
In 1853, Peter Cooper and Abram S. Hewitt bought the ironworks and installed  high-output furnaces that were to supply iron for Union guns in the Civil War.
But the advent of furnaces burning anthracite coal limited Long Pond's days.
Iron manufacturers found it economical to set up their plants near coal mines, and Long Pond put out its fires in 1882.


Tasting a Pint
To the Editor: Caroline Seebohm's comment in her article "The Lure of an Irish Time Warp" (Aug. 20), that Guinness in West Cork tastes "entirely different in its home country from the weakened stuff (even on draft) sent abroad" is inaccurate.
The Guinness draft product exported to the United States is exactly the same  product that is sold in Ireland.
In fact, the pint Ms.
Seebohm recommends in Cork might be from the same batch as a pint had in New York, Chicago or Los Angeles.
The product is brewed at St.
James' Gate Brewery in Dublin.
WILLIAM J. LYNCH Guinness Import Company Stamford, Conn.


Indochine Again


With No Money From Schools, Athletes Turn to Booster Clubs for Help
NICOLE GASKILL is hoping that her skills as an all-county field hockey player will be rewarded with a college scholarship.
But it is thanks to the Bulldog Brigade, the Lindenhurst School District booster club, that college scouts will  be able to gauge her talents.
With interscholastic athletics and extracurricular activities not included in the district's contingency budget until voters approved a $350,000 proposition on Oct. 30, members of athletics teams had to pay to play.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4;A Name, an Idol and an Election


A Portrait of Perseverance and Longstanding Friendships
HE rises each weekday at 3 A.M.
Stealthily, like a burglar in his own house,  he moves between the bedroom and bathroom, shaving and laying out his dress suit for his commuting trip later to New York City.
By 4:15, regardless of weather, he puts on a pair of shorts and tiptoes out the front door.
His neighborhood in Cedarhurst is dark and silent, as are the streets of Hewlett and Woodmere, as he runs through them, the tap-tap of his running shoes the only sound on the asphalt.


Speedway Helps Aid A Town's Recovery
In the days following Aug. 24, 1992, it would have been hard to imagine why anyone in Homestead, Fla., would ever again want to see something heading toward them at 200 miles an hour.
Hurricane Andrew had roared through that city -- and  most of the rest of southern Dade County -- on that day with winds up to 198 m.p.h., carrying away with it 8,000 businesses, 55,000 jobs and 47,000 homes from the area south of Miami.
Shortly before 9 A.M. on Oct. 16, another whirlwind started building momentum on a 344-acre patch of Homestead's east side.
This time, city officials were glad to see it.
The source of the turbulence, a race car, was safely contained within the concrete walls of Homestead Motorsports Complex, the city-owned $61 million speedway that opens this weekend.


Johnson's Catch at :39 Rescues the Trojans
Southern Cal 31, Stanford 30 Keyshawn Johnson caught an 8-yard touchdown pass from Kyle Wachholtz with 39 seconds remaining yesterday to lift Southern California to a 31-30 victory over  visiting Stanford and within one victory of a Rose Bowl berth.


Huskers Defended
To the Sports Editor:
I am a lifelong Nebraska fan and read Ira Berkow's "Huskers Hardly Shun the Easy Way Out" (Oct. 26).
I believe Coach Tom Osborne is sincere in saying he is  trying to help Lawrence Phillips and that his decision to reinstate the running  back is not motivated by baser ambitions.
Osborne is making a tough decison because: 1) Nebraska does not need Phillips to win (Ahman Green is more than talented enough to fill the void), and more importantly, 2) it was obvious that  reinstatement would lead to distracting and disruptive reactions from the public.


Commercial Property: Communication in the Workplace;Companies Using Coffee Bars to Get Ideas Brewing
IT was space that nobody seemed to want.
There it sat, amid Comedy Central's  otherwise efficiently designed offices at 1775 Broadway, at 57th Street: A few hundred square feet on the ninth floor, right in front of a conference room, and next to the internal staircase that leads to and from the main reception area a  floor above.
It functioned as kind of a secondary reception area, not because Comedy Central needed one, but because no one could think of anything better to do there.


Maine G.O.P. Picks Gramm In Straw Poll
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas finished first in Maine's Republican Presidential straw poll tonight, winning a dubious prize that reflects grass-roots organizing but not necessarily the sentiments of the party's voters.
Senator Gramm captured 602 votes, or 42 percent of the ballots cast, while the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, the front-runner for the Republican Presidential nomination, placed third behind Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, who won 303 votes, or 21 percent.
Senator Dole, who has made a strategic decision not to compete in straw polls and did not appear before the nearly 2,000 delegates here, received 144 votes, or 10 percent.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4: Cover-Up Charges;U.S. Indicts Daiwa Bank And Tells It to Close
Should Daiwa Bank Ltd. be punished for tardiness in reporting vast trading losses, or is this just a case of the victim being blamed?
Federal officials last week were in no mood to give the huge Japanese bank the benefit of the doubt.
The American bank regulators told Daiwa to close its American operations by Feb. 2, 1996, as a Federal grand jury indicted it on conspiracy and fraud charges.
The criminal charges allege that Daiwa illegally covered up trading losses totaling $1.1 billion at its New York branch last summer.
If convicted, Daiwa could face fines of $1.3 billion, at a time when financial institutions in Japan are under pressure from shaky loans and a slow economy.


Pop Briefs
LISA LOEB AND NINE STORIES: 'TAILS' Geffen


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
It had to come to this: I guess you thought New Jersey deserved a break, so the next logical choice had to be North Dakota.
But if New Yorkers would take a  second, they might see that they could use some North Dakota in their lives.
Consider: the terrific temperature extremes would allow them to wear the sheerest of evening clothes in the summer and designer fur jumpsuits in winter.


'The Lads Who Are Here Are All Kicking'
What was college like for some of America's earliest undergraduates?
A cache of letters in the archives at Williams College gives us a glimpse of  academic life 200 years ago -- some of it curious (a course in Enfield Philosophy) and some (writing home for more money) all too familiar.


INSIDE


Doctors Seek Clue to Deaths in Nicaragua
Doctors are struggling to identify a mysterious disease in the dirt-poor backlands of northwestern Nicaragua whose victims die suffocated by their own blood.
According to the World Health Organization, 18 people have died and more than 1,000 suspected cases have been reported in the epidemic, which first appeared in the farming village of Achuapa in rugged hills about 50 miles northwest of Managua, the capital.


THE DEATH OF RABIN
A Soldier-Statesman


Treading a Political Fault Line In New Jersey's 15th District
No contest speaks so plainly about the New Jersey Democratic Party's struggle to rebuild than its fight to hold the 15th Assembly District in Tuesday's elections.
For generations, the 15th was a Democratic redoubt, anchored at the south on  the banks of the Delaware River by Trenton's working-class, unionized black and  white neighborhoods, and on the north by the cultivated liberalism of Princeton.


Taking the Leap, er, Plunge
What better post-wedding entertainment than a water-skiing show?
Couples who  take up Cypress Gardens on its offer of a free wedding on Feb. 29, 1996, can get just that.


Cozumel Recovers From Roxanne
Visitors to the Mexican resort island of Cozumel will find little evidence of damage from last month's Hurricane Roxanne.
Cozumel tourist authorities estimate that the island, which took a direct hit from Hurricane Roxanne on Oct. 10, sustained about $3 million in storm damage.
There were no deaths reported on the island.


Illinois Man, on Death Row for 11 Years, Set Free After Retrial
A man who spent 11 years on death row for the rape and murder of a 10-year-old girl in 1983 was acquitted by a judge on Friday in a second retrial, ending a case that had been closely watched by civil rights groups.
In two previous jury trials, the man, Rolando Cruz, had been convicted of abducting the girl, Jeanine Nicarico, from her home in the Chicago suburb of Naperville, raping her and bludgeoning her to death.
The convictions were overturned by the Illinois Supreme Court because of trial errors.


A Hard Hand for Evil
FIGHTING TERRORISM How Democracies Can Defeat Domestic and International Terrorists.
By Benjamin Netanyahu. 152 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.


Painting as Fast and Furiously as He Can
NIKKO'S NOT LEAVING the house.
Nikko's leaving the house only when he has to.
He'll leave to get more glue.
He'll leave to take his 90-year-old great-aunt for their weekly lunch.
He'll leave to pick up his girlfriend's 5-year-old son from school.
But otherwise, Nikko is home.
It's six weeks before his first major one-man show at the Dillon Gallery in SoHo, and since March, since the Ross Bleckner Show at the Guggenheim That Changed Nikko's Life, the 31-year-old artist has been painting nonstop.
But now  his work is divided: there's pre-Bleckner Sedgwick and post.


Bookshelf
KASHTANKA.
By Anton Chekhov.
Adapted from a translation by Ronald Meyer.
Illustrated by Gennady Spirin.
Gulliver/Harcourt Brace. $16. (Ages 5 and up) The story of the faithful dog who gets lost, ends up in a small circus and then is spotted by her master and his family, who are in the audience one night, is beautifully captured by a Russian artist.


MONDERU-SAN'S LAST CAMPAIGN
EARLIER THIS YEAR, Walter F. Mondale stayed at a famous traditional inn in the ancient Japanese capital of Kyoto.
As is customary, Mondale and his wife, Joan, were each given a yukata, or light kimono, to wear while they stayed in the inn.
So Mondale disrobed and packed his bulky frame into the yukata, carefully tucking the right side over the left.
He walked into the banquet room with the former Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, and his wife, Kayoko -- and the Japanese began to laugh.


Plays That Have Pleased Before
SOMETIMES theatergoers look for adventure; sometimes for reassurance.
In its  pursuit of new plays and new-fangled ways of doing old ones, while resuscitating the rare and the unheralded, regional theaters tend to bypass the successful, literate, civilized, plays of the recent past.
This week in Stamford, two small companies are reacquainting theatergoers with the best of the tried and the true.


Tong Leader's Guilt Stirs Fears of Backlash
When Paul Lai, a prominent Chinatown civic leader, pleaded guilty to murder-conspiracy and racketeering last week, local Chinese leaders and advocates expressed shock and disbelief, and then fear: that politicians would use Mr.
Lai's activities to distance themselves from the community and further diminish its weak political clout.
"This came at a time when we are working very hard to have more representation in government," said Robin Mui, the production manager of Sing Tao Daily.
"We don't need this backlash."


A Shirelle, From Passaic High To the Rock Hall of Fame
NAME Shirley Alston Reeves, former lead singer of the Shirelles, one of the first girl groups.
The Shirelles are to be inducted into the Rock-and-Roll Hall  of Fame in January.
HOME Hillside.
AGE "Behave yourself." (Hint: she was in high school in 1958.)


The Coffee Bars Just Keep on Coming
SOME of us thought the coffee bar phenomenon would soon peak and, like so many other culinary fads, quietly fade away.
Some of us were wrong.
Since 1993 the appeal of exotic and specialty coffees has confounded those who thought the high price of commercial real estate would collide with the relatively low foot-traffic rate and prices at coffee bars, most of which are in prime center-of-town locations.
Of the 13 coffee bars previously cited in this space, only two have succumbed to market pressures.
The others seem to be thriving, along with the following new hangouts.


Looking at Sheepshead Bay, Officials Have Faulty Vision
To the Editor:
The Oct. 22 articles about Sheepshead Bay raise questions about our local officials.
John Nikas, chairman of Community Board 15, extols the virtues of specialty shops that malls can't duplicate ("New Language, and New Life, for Avenue U").
But isn't he the same person who favors the Loehmann's megastore in  the heart of the special zoning district for small specialty shops?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review of the Crossroads Theater Company's production of "The Piano Lesson" last Sunday omitted two words in a sentence describing the plot.
The sentence should have read, "Berniece, whose husband died violently, won't play the piano because she believes that those portraits in wood come alive at night."


Let the High-Wire Act Begin
Henry B. Schacht spent more than three decades making diesel engines, and he  has the scars to prove it.
As chairman of the Cummins Engine Company, Mr.
Schacht beat back Japanese competitors in the mid-1980's by cutting prices 30 percent and enduring losses for four consecutive years.
After that, he fought off two hostile takeovers, eventually turning to a Japanese company and others for "patient money" before finally being vindicated by soaring profits in 1992.
All that looks easy, though, compared with Mr.
Schacht's new assignment.
Three weeks ago, he was lured out of semi-retirement to head the AT&amp;T Corporation's $20 billion telecommunications equipment business and oversee its  spinoff into a separately owned company.
This is a far cry from building diesel  engines, and it could turn out to be a lot harder.


One County's Transit Decongestant
Chester P. Mattson has a vision.
The way he sees it, roadway congestion, commuting time, employment distribution, daytime population (and what he has discovered about these things in the last few years) make the vision not only desirable but also inescapable.
Mr.
Mattson, Bergen County's director of planning and economic development, wants to build a $1 billion transit system that would include trolleys, trains and ferries, use existing rail lines, and provide frequent service for the growing number of intra-county commuters, perhaps as early as the year 2000.
That's what he told the County Board of Freeholders at a formal presentation last Wednesday.


William O'Donnell, Patricia Dean
Patricia Linn Dean, the daughter of Mrs.
George A. Dean Jr. of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Mr.
Dean, was married yesterday to William Christopher O'Donnell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. O'Donnell of Northport,  L.I.
The Rev.
Kurt von Roeschlaub performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Port Washington.
The Rev.
Brian McKeon, a Roman Catholic priest, participated.
Mrs.
O'Donnell, 29, is a Medicare marketing representative at Oxford Health Plans in Melville, L.I.
She graduated from the School of American Ballet and was a soloist with the Pennsylvania Ballet in Philadelphia from 1985 to 1992.
Her father was a partner in Eaton &amp; Van Winkle, a New York law firm.


Charity Alone Can't Provide for the Poor
To the Editor:
Marvin Olasky, quoted in Peter Steinfels's Oct. 28 Beliefs column, argues that private charity can make up for the cutbacks in Federal aid for the needy and that 19th-century charity workers successfully met the needs of the poor.
He is wrong on both counts.


School Districts Make Contract Gains
CONFRONTED with balky taxpayer groups and citizens reluctant to accept teacher salary increases greater than their own, many school districts have come to Spartan terms in agreements with teachers, support staff and other union members.
With the Yonkers Federation of Teachers, which has been working without a contract since June 1994 but voted not to strike last Wednesday night, the status of labor negotiations with teachers in other districts is compelling.


Buy a Cellular Phone? Never! Well, O.K., Maybe
YOU see," my 12-year-old son said triumphantly when I walked in the door two hours late. "If you'd had a cellular phone . . .
"
Now my son, Nicholas, is never shy about pleading for the latest gadget, the  higher-tech the better.
He scours the ads for electronic goodies we absolutely must have -- preferably today.
But he had a point this time, and he knew it.


How Many Canadas?
Like my fellow inhabitants of the R.O.C., or Rest of Canada, I sat glued to the TV on Monday night, gnawing my cuticles and watching an election that would  decide the future of my country but in which I had no vote.
The result was a close squeaker, and we've all been squeaking ever since.
The morning after, the R.O.C. had no cuticles, and Quebec had a deeply split  society.
The pro-separation side was also divided within itself thanks to the bitter speech of then Premier Jacques Parizeau, who blamed the the "no" victory  on the "ethnic" vote and promised "revenge."


Jan M. Gura, Alan J. Pickman
Jan M. Gura, the director of special projects for "Great Performances," the public television series produced by Thirteen/WNET in New York, and Dr.
Alan J.  Pickman, a psychologist in New York, were married last evening in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Henry M. Weiner performed the ceremony at the mansion known as Estherwood.
Ms.
Gura, 34, who is keeping her name, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Gloria Antebi Gura of Aberdeen, N.J., and the late Leon Gura.


Helping Assure Happy Summers
Auction and dinner-dance for the Fresh Air Fund, Nov. 2.


Who Will Care for the Soles of Flushing?


The Great White Way, Now Appearing on 7th
A man walks up to a traffic agent and says, "Excuse me, sir, where's 43d Street and Broadway?" The agent replies, "At 43d and Seventh." That's what the Department of Transportation, in effect, is telling us with its new sign at 43d  Street, on the west side of Times Square.
This spot, if you check a map, is actually Seventh Avenue; Broadway curves east just to the north.
Are you as confused as the D.O.T. yet?


The View From: Enviro-Lab II;All Things Wet, and Sometimes Slimy
ABOARD the Enviro-Lab II, teachers and students would study the stripes on sea robins, the eyes on flounders and the spots on skates.
In doing that, they'd use and revise what has now become a book.
It's all part of Project Oceanology, based at Avery Point in Groton, whose director, Howard M. Weiss, is the author of "Marine Animals of Southern New England and New York." The book, offering "identification keys to common nearshore and shallow water macrofauna," has just been published by the state's  Department of Environmental Protection.


Broken Hearts Left Backstage
NOW that grunge, hip-hop, gangsta rap and G-funk represent the big-time surfacing of underground music and the the crumbling of the color barrier on the record charts, the MTV generation may say it's quaint to recall the birth of Motown.
That was in 1959, when crossover music meant the homogenization of black soul for white sensibilities.
Still, the sacrificial symbols of the gritty Fats Domino sound and the anguished growl of Big Mama Thornton as the facilitators for the honeyed tones of Pat Boone and the breakthrough of Elvis Presley define a chapter of dishonor  in pop music history for which the makers of popular taste remain accountable.


F.Y.I.
Tall, Taller, Tallest


How to Intern And Not Be Exploited
As a young person who has gone through five internships, I read "From White House to Poor House, Interns at Work" with great interest.
Despite the glamor and prestige that comes with working at such places as Rolling Stone, the White  House and Annie Liebowitz's studio, young people should be careful when they choose an internship.
Yes, internships can lead to paid summer jobs, good recommendations, great connections and even full-time employment, but with every successful internship  there are internships that go awry.
Some companies and places recruit interns not to educate them but to exploit them.
My friend who worked at a popular fashion magazine last year spent her three months walking the editor's dog, cleaning the editorial assistants' desks and making cappuccino.


Exposures
PASSIVE INTRUDER By Michael Upchurch. 369 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $23.
SUSAN, age 24, is a receptionist at a Seattle newspaper.
Walker, 39, is one  of the staff photographers.
One day he notices her idly sketching and suggests that he come by her apartment to pose for her.
She accepts and, not so surprisingly, they end up in bed.
That takes care of the first four pages of Michael Upchurch's cryptic new novel.
Then comes the kind of sentence that makes "Passive Intruder" a grab bag of surprises: "He kept on posing and she didn't get tired of it, so they set a wedding date for September."


Javits Convention Center Books Giant Multimedia Expo for '96
The nation's largest association of companies in the interactive multimedia industry will hold a major trade show next September at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, the first new major show at the center in three years, industry officials said yesterday.
The announcement reflects the growing importance of New York City as a national center in the multimedia field, which is a segment of the computer industry that takes animation, video and music and combines them into material for CD-ROM's, on-line applications and virtual reality, among other things.


Packing It In
Like a lot of things, it started with the kids.
But these days, the urban backpack army has no enlistment restrictions, age or otherwise, and the recruits, like the packs they carry, come in all sizes and shapes.
For the metropolitan portage, briefcases and handbags are the flagging totes of tradition; backpacks are for the ergonomically correct.
Some people select packs for haute fashion rather than high transport, while others remain true to the trail-breaking originals.
Whichever, the veterans do know how to turn their backs on people in the elevator without committing battery.
But what inquiring minds really want to know is, What's in there anyway?
Crystal, 10, fifth grader Pack: 12 pounds


Teachers' Union Reaches Accord That Protects Jobs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the leaders of New York City's teachers union announced a tentative agreement yesterday on a contract that would increase wages and benefits by 13 percent over five years and offer an unusual written commitment protecting union members from layoffs through 1998.


Realty Dreads and the American Dream
Reflections on real-estate realities, from Richard Ford's "Independence Day," published by Alfred A. Knopf:
What the Markhams were in the market for -- as I told them -- was absolutely  clear and they were dead right to want it: a modest three-bedroom with charm and maybe a few nice touches, though in keeping with the scaled-back, education-first ethic they'd opted for.
A house with hardwood floors, crown moldings, a small carved mantel, plain banisters, mullioned windows, perhaps a window seat.
A Cape or a converted saltbox set back on a small chunk of land bordering some curmudgeonly old farmer's cornfield or else a little pond or stream.
Pre-war, or just after.
Slightly out of the way.
A lawn with maybe a healthy maple tree, some mature plantings, an attached garage possibly needing improvement.
Assumable note or owner-finance, something they could live with.
Nothing ostentatious: a sensible home for the recast nuclear family commencing life's third quartile with a kid on board.
Something in the 148K area, up to three thousand square feet, close to a middle school, with a walk to the grocery.


Free Courses May Carry A High Price Tag for Employees
Michelle Cooley, an administrator at Boston University, got a rude shock when she opened her pay envelope in August.
She was expecting her regular monthly take-home check of $1,927.
Instead, she got only about $1,000; taxes had eaten up $900.
The reason for this sudden increase in taxation: Ms.
Cooley, 26, is taking graduate-level business classes, paid for by her employer, and last year Congress decided that such tuition reimbursement is now taxable income.


Britain's Second City Sandblasts Its Image
GREATER Manchester has Britain's second-largest urban population -- 2.5 million people living under 10 local authorities -- but the city is often glossed over by guidebooks, if not completely ignored.
The oversight may have something to do with the city's image as the Pittsburgh of England, a vestige of the Industrial Revolution straight out of Dickens, who might have modeled Coketown in "Hard Times" on the city. (That dubious honor belongs instead to Preston, Lancashire, although Dickens is believed to have drawn his inspiration  for Tiny Tim in "A Christmas Carol" and the Cheeryble brothers in "Nicholas Nickleby" from Mancunians.)
Just as Pittsburgh has come up in the world in recent years, so has Manchester.
The city has not overcome its image so much as learned how to capitalize on it.
Factory equipment has been turned into museum exhibits; once-dilapidated warehouses are now hotels and galleries.
Gems of Victorian architecture, like the 1871 Barton Arcade and the 1877 Town Hall, have begun showing their true faces as a century's dirt has been sandblasted away.
In the process, a certain rough-edged urban charm has emerged.


All About Men
THE WOMEN (1939), Metro's mini-masterpiece of malice, opened a window of fresh air on Clare Booth's upper-crust catfest (about men) from Broadway, with an even better cast and some new hilarity - SATURDAY at 9 P.M. on CHANNEL 13.
The tonic effect es marvelous, with Norma Shearer, Joan Crawford and Rosalind Russell (above, with Paulette Goddard and Mary Boland) and a super sorority.
In  this fine adaptation by Anita Loos and Jane Murfin, the barbed dialogue is often devastating.
George Cukor piloted the glittery purring, Manhattan to Reno  and back.
How is anybody's guess.
Howard Thompson


No Headline
I have always believed that the majority of the people want peace and are ready to take a chance for peace.
And you, by coming to this rally, prove . . .  that the people truly want peace and oppose violence." -- YITZHAK RABIN at a peace rally in Tel Aviv before his assassination. [16A:5.]


Recipes Put a New Face on All Those Leftover Pumpkins
HALLOWEEN may be over, but pumpkins aren't.
In the country, they are still stacked up in piles outside markets or scattered over empty cornfields, waiting  to be picked.


It's a Soul War Salvo . . . With Frankie Crocker!
FRANKIE CROCKER is known for his way with words, especially when talking about himself.
But getting Mr.
Crocker, who just returned to WBLS (107.5 FM) as  program director, to disclose his plans for boosting the station's ratings, getting him to discuss exactly how he intends to reclaim the audience that rival WRKS (98.7 FM) snared away in recent months . . . well let's just say that pulling teeth from the maw of a pitbull might be easier.
"We'll be planning our work, then working our plan," says Mr.
Crocker, whose  self-aggrandizing on-air patter made him one of New York's best known radio personalities in the 1970's.
"I really can't say how we'll do it."


MY FATHER'S BLACK PRIDE
I am the grandmother of two African-American boys of parentage exactly like Marcus Bleecker's.
I hope that his failure to mention his mother was an oversight and that he has the respect for black women that his father had in loving and marrying his mother.
I hope, too, that he has been able to recognize  his mother's contribution to him as being more than genetic.


The Great Stone Face?
To the Editor:
As a member of the Damfinos, the International Buster Keaton Society, I would like to reply to Joseph McBride's review of "Buster Keaton: Cut to the Chase," by Marion Meade (Oct. 8).
Ms.
Meade's book is based on fundamental misconceptions.
Unfortunately, Mr.
McBride falls into the trap of accepting without quesion allegations that Buster Keaton was physically and emotionally abused by his father, Joe.


Beverly Weitzner, Daniel D. Bartfeld
Beverly Lynn Weitzner, the daughter of Sylvia Schonberg of New York and Martin Weitzner of New Orleans, was married last evening to Daniel Davis Bartfeld, the son of Ruth and Charles Bartfeld of Bethesda, Md.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The couple graduated from the University of Michigan, she cum laude and he summa cum laude.


The Best Medicine
Billy Crystal, Whoopi Goldberg and Robin Wiliams again play hosts for one of  television's important comedy and charity events.
COMIC RELIEF VII is a live show, performed this year in Los Angeles, that is intended to benefit homeless people in 23 American cities - SATURDAY at 9 P.M. on HBO.
Documentary segments - including videotaped interviews with homeless families, many of them average people caught in hard times - will be interspersed with monologues and sketches.
Paula Poundstone, Dennis Miller, Paul Rodriguez, Alicia Silverstone and Shelly Long are among the comedians and others expected to participate.
For viewers who want to help, a toll-free phone  number will appear on screen throughout the program.


Michelle Barger, Scott B. Bergman
Michelle Shari Barger, the public relations coordinator for the entertainment division of the National Basketball Association in Secaucus, N.J., was married last evening to Scott Benjamin Bergman, a management consultant at Price Waterhouse in New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, N.J.
The couple graduated from the University of Michigan.


Britain Detains Algerian in French Bombings
The British police today detained an Algerian Islamic militant in London who  is suspected of directing the wave of terrorist bombings that began in France in July, the French police said.
The suspect, Abdelkader Benouif, was arrested by "anti-terrorist branch detectives who have been working with the security services this afternoon at 3  P.M. in central London," a British police spokesman said by telephone.
Another suspect, who was not identified, was also arrested, the police said.


Ita R. Gross, Steven B. Berkow
Ita Rachelle Gross, the daughter of Annette and Sam Gross of New York, is to  be married today to Steven Bruce Berkow, a son of Betty and Larry Berkow of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Allen Schwartz is to officiate at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 32, graduated from New York University.
She received a master's degree in art history from Hunter College and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in American art history at the Graduate School of the City University of New York.
Her father is a diamond merchant in New York.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Beyond the Sin Label
To the Editor:
"Not for Do-Gooders: The Sex, Drugs and Rock 'n' Roll Fund" (Oct. 15) may offer some provocative investment possibilities for readers, but it doesn't portray fairly the role of distilled spirits in modern society.
The spirits industry regularly faces a barrage of attacks from those who claim our products  are a "sin."


For Insurance, Home Offices Can Be Out in the Cold
ABOUT 20 million people work from home.
If the value of all their computers,  printers, telephones and even fax paper were added up, it would probably total the annual revenues of several Fortune 500 companies.
And if a thief were to steal all of it, or if a tornado were to dump it all over Kansas, the experts say, there would be enough insurance coverage to replace maybe just the fax paper.
Of all the misconceptions about the glories of working from home, the costliest is that a traditional homeowner insurance policy also covers a home office.
Hardly any do.
And homeowners usually don't find out until they file claims and have them rejected.


Hammerstein's Gamble
ONE hundred years ago, the crossing of Broadway and Seventh Avenue was a drabble of cheap hotels, some doubling as brothels, and a collection of dealers  in harnesses and carriages.
It took the name of a similar quarter in London, Longacre Square, and it was a muddy endpoint to the dazzle of the Gay White Way  that bathed Broadway in a glitter of theaters and restaurants from Union Square up to, but not including, 42d Street.
But on Nov. 25, 1895, the square's future was transformed with the magic twinkle of the grand, three-hall Olympia Theater, on the east side of Broadway between 44th and 45th Streets.
The opening capped more than a century of theater's sprint up Broadway.


Death Toll in Philippines Typhoon Near 500


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
GOODNIGHT SILKY SULLIVAN By Laurie Alberts. University of Missouri, paper, $16.95.


Photos in Book on Shipwreck Upset Families of the Victims
A marine explorer's decision to include pictures of the underwater remains of a crewman killed in the Edmund Fitzgerald shipwreck in a 20th anniversary book and video has some family members of victims fuming.
The explorer, Fred Shannon, is releasing the book and video next week to mark the sinking of the 729-foot ore carrier during a gale on Lake Superior on Nov. 10, 1975.
Twenty-nine men died in the sinking, and some of their family members  say Mr.
Shannon's project intrudes on their memory.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
BLACK BRIDGE A Mystery of Venice. By Edward Sklepowich. Scribner, $21.


Pop Briefs
DAVE DOUGLAS: 'CONSTELLATIONS' Hat Art


Conspiracy Theory
I'M A SCREENWRITER WORKING AT Warner Bros.," writes Brian Helgeland of Malibu, Calif. (and I'm leaving the "Bros." unchanged to "Brothers," contrary to Times style, as a favor to Ed Bleier of that firm, who should now stop nagging me about it), "on an original idea of my own [sic] entitled Conspiracy Theory. . . .
I'm wondering if you've heard a particular Conspiracy Theory that has stuck  with you over the years.
I'm looking for the odd, the outrageous and the humorous."
He came to the right place.
"Humpty Dumpty Was Pushed!" was a bumper sticker  on my car in the 80's, and I am thinking of putting in a special fax line to receive Vincent Foster material from the narrowed-eyes crowd that knows it has a
softie in me. (They never did find the bullet, you know, no matter how Mike Wallace pooh-poohs it all on "60 Minutes.")


Ethel Chamberlain, 86, Who Led Women of the Salvation Army
Ethel T. Chamberlain, who dedicated her life to the Salvation Army and served as national president of its women's organizations from 1974 to 1977, died on Wednesday at a Salvation Army retirement home in Asbury Park, N.J.
She was 86.
From the time she attended an open air meeting as a 9-year-old in Malone, N.Y., Mrs.
Chamberlain was devoted to the Salvation Army and its principles of service to others.
She entered its training school in the Bronx at the age of 17 and spent her entire career with the religious and philanthropic organization.


Outside Southern Counties, Prices Are Often Lower
OUTSIDE southern Florida, many parts of the state offer housing that Northerners find attractive, often at a lower price than in Dade, Broward or Palm Beach Counties, and in a more relaxed environment as well.
But there is also dynamic growth, and the center of it at present is the Orlando area.
Jacksonville is another growth center, and by some accounts it has become one of the better locations for young people seeking starter homes.


Gay Travel Newsletter Rates Tours and Hotels
Out &amp; About, a newsletter about gay travel, has published its first cruise and tour roundup in the October issue.
The newsletter includes a listing of travel agencies and a rating of the gay-friendliness of national hotel chains.
The issue lists 40 agencies, each with its price ranges for tours, average group size, breakdown of clientele and usual destinations.
Listed companies include Men On Vacation, a San Diego concern that specializes in reasonably priced group tours to foreign destinations; Eco-Explorations, a lesbian-owned scuba and sea kayak outfitter; Gay 'n' Gray Partners in Travel for men over 40;  and Travel Keys, which runs tours of antiques fairs and flea markets in Europe.


The Lake District
To the Editor: For newcomers to this beautiful corner of England, it serves neither economy nor comfort to sleep cheaply and dine expensively.
Ms.
Spano could have joined the Youth Hostels Association, which, including her membership for one year, would have provided more comfortable if somewhat less Spartan conditions, and breakfast and dinner for $25 a day.
Or she could have used one of the many bed-and-breakfast hotels throughout Keswick, Borrowdale and Buttermere for very little more than her average cost of $39 a day.
A little prior research, by purchasing a copy of A. Wainright's guide "The Central Fells" (Michael Joseph, London), available from larger New York City bookstores, would have counseled her on wearing two pairs of socks in her boots  to avoid blisters and on buying Bartholomew's one-inch map (easier to follow than the Ordnance Survey Map).
Mr.
Wainright's walking guides are bibles to the  fell walkers and offer incisive information along with easy-to-follow routes and drawings and would have saved Ms.
Spano that four-hour slog along the busy shore road of Lake Derwent Water in favor of a relaxing and scenic trip on the lake steamer from Keswick to Ashness Bridge for Watendlath.
En route the boat stops at High Brandlehow, once the home of Sir Hugh Walpole, which I mention only because as she enjoyed her tea, scones, jam and thick clotted Devon cream in the tea shop she apparently did not notice a plaque: "This is the home of Judith Paris, heroine of the novels of Hugh Walpole."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an instruction is omitted in some copies today for the diagramless puzzle on page 90 of The Times Magazine.
The instruction is, "1-Across in this week's diagramless puzzle begins in the 13th square of the top row."


Elizabeth Goulian And Jeffrey Kahle
Elizabeth Jean Goulian, a daughter of Jean Marie Goulian of Tucson, Ariz., and Dicran Goulian of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Lewis Kahle, the son of Melinda Smith Jerauld of Boston and the late Julian Kahle Jr.
The Rev.
Dr.
Arthur Caliandro officiated at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Kahle, 33, is a senior manager in the promotion department at The New York Times.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief of plastic surgery at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


BEST SELLERS: November 5, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


Restructuring of Medicare and Medicaid Will Affect the Low-IncomeElderly Twice
Doris Brisson lives on the outskirts of poverty in Mesquite, Tex.
She is 66 years old and gets Social Security payments of $512 a month, food stamps worth $20 a month and she barely makes the rent on a one-room apartment that she says  gives cozy a bad name.
When it comes to her health care, Mrs.
Brisson relies not only on Medicare, the medical program for people over 65, but also on Medicaid, which covers many  of the nation's impoverished.


MARKET TIMING
Monday


Parties Wage Crucial Battle In Erie County
Last November, cold and blue-collar Erie County joined the upstate stampede that crushed then-Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and, so the logic went, the hopes for Democrats outside of New York City.
Now, if the polls are to be trusted, a most unlikely Democrat in these political times -- an eight-year incumbent who raised local taxes 67 percent and who was abandoned by his own party this fall -- looks like he will run away with a third term as Erie County Executive this Tuesday.


Serious On-Screen Fun For Children Young and Old
What do the software people know about teaching and learning?
Well for one thing, they know, and have long known, that software can be an ideal tool for practice and drill.
After all, even many schools use software packages to drill students for standardized math tests.
And software marketers -- like the door-to-door salesmen of old -- have used the fears and insecurities of parents to sell software that is good for you.


Pigeons Beware: Your Predator Is Back, in Force
New York City has no official bird, and its most populous species is a tossup among pigeons, sparrows and starlings -- all immigrants.
But a native New Yorker has returned to rule the urban roost: the peregrine falcon, the fabled hunter prized in the sport of falconry and idolized as nature's most magnificent flying machine.
Though the city is hardly a wildlife refuge, it is proving to be a crucial element in the effort to rescue peregrines from extinction.
By the 1960's, falcons had vanished here and across most of the nation, victims of the pesticide DDT, now banned.
Two upstate ornithologists, Heinz Meng and Tom J. Cade, bred captive falcons and reintroduced hundreds to the wild, where they nest on high cliff ledges, often near water.


Alisa White and Joseph Holland
ALISA WHITE, a correspondent for "American Journal," a television newsmagazine, is athletic, spiritual, ladylike and often jet-lagged.
She covered the O. J. Simpson trial for the program, which is syndicated, commuting between  New York and Los Angeles for the last year.
She never eats desserts.
And when she has a problem, she often fasts and meditates until she feels clearer about it.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4;An Island Keeps Rolling Along
What would Mark Twain think?
He knew that flimsy, manmade things like state borders are like matchsticks to the mighty, wandering Mississippi.
Yet humans, refusing to bow down to nature, keep trying to have the last word.
The river, of course, keeps redrawing the fragile map as it smashes along.
And in its many meanderings over the centuries, it shoved a seven-mile strip called Stack Island, once the domain of Mississippi, right into Louisiana.


American Airports Tighten Security
IF you haven't been to an airport in the last month or so, prepare for a surprise when you go.
Check-in lines are likely to be longer than usual, and once there you'll be asked for a Government-issued photo identification, such as a driver's license.
You may also be asked if you packed your own bag or were given anything to take aboard -- the sort of questions normally asked of travelers boarding international flights.
And if you make the mistake of leaving your car unattended near the terminal, even for a few minutes, don't be surprised if one of the ubiquitous tow trucks swoops down and hauls it off to a compound where the retrieval fee can exceed that of two seats on the 50-yard line.


Quebec Vote Bares Latent Ethnic Anger
The Quebec separatist manifesto speaks glowingly of ethnic pluralism and diversity.
It pledges "particular" respect for the rights of Quebec's minorities, and refers to Quebec's English-speakers as "part of the founding people of the new Quebec."
It is part of the discourse of a nationalism based on territory, meant to differentiate Quebec separatists from ethnic nationalists abroad, in places like the former Yugoslavia or the former Soviet Union.


More Domestic Airports Forbid Smoking
Airports throughout the United States and Canada are increasingly becoming smoke-free, according to a new survey by an airport trade association.
Airports Council International-North America, based in Washington, said that  of the 59 airports that responded to its latest survey, 18 had banned smoking.
The results of the survey were released last month.
In a survey conducted in 1993, only 5 had adopted such a policy.
Among other airports responding to the new survey, 37 had established designated smoking areas, and 4 airports had no policy on smoking.


Beans and Ostrich in a Tuscan Setting
OSTRICH?" an interested diner asked. "Does it taste like chicken?"
"More like juicy tender beef" replied the waiter at Tuscany, an unexpectedly  exciting new spot in Rockville Centre.


After One Too Many Hits, Brown Turns to a Brace
When Giants quarterback Dave Brown hyperextended his knee last week after 245-pound Washington linebacker Ken Harvey smashed into it, he must have seen his career momentarily flash before his eyes.
Brown was in a great deal of pain  but decided to fight on and returned after the hit.
He's a tough guy, no question.
Now, to protect that left knee, Brown will also wear a rugged-looking black and blue brace, and he said he intended to wear it for the rest of his career.


Internships Are Also Offered Abroad
The article on internships spoke highly of the benefits of the practical work experiences students derive through internship programs.
In addition to domestic internships, like the ones featured in the article, students at Marymount College have an opportunity to participate in unique internships abroad.
This summer, Elise King, a recent graduate of Marymount's food and nutrition program, had a fully sponsored internship in Germany at Coca-Cola's food laboratory.
Four other Marymount students went to London as part of a 12-week program fully sponsored by Texaco and Chase Manhattan Bank.


Oct. 29-Nov. 4;Hail to the Chief Self-Doubter
Bill Clinton has never been the strong, silent type, but as President he may  have taken public musing on his own foibles to new heights.
The latest example came last week, in a telephone conversation he initiated with the conservative columnist Ben Wattenberg.
Mr.
Clinton called to cop a plea to some missteps, and pledge that he had repented of them.


Civility, Before the Civil War


JUDGE HAYDEN'S FAMILY VALUES
I applaud Jan Hoffman's very real and insightful article on Judge Katharine Sweeney Hayden of Essex County (N.J.) Superior Court ("Judge Hayden's Family Values," Oct. 15).
Hoffman captured a "moving target" who allowed the public to see the difficulty inherent in family matters in a most human and caring way.
Family judges are often targets of criticism from unhappy litigants.
Many of my colleagues were delighted that your writer could observe and communicate the stressors for judges within this area of the law and retain a sense of the judge as a whole person throughout.


East Carolina Stops Army
Army, hoping to further legitimize itself as a formidable Division I-A team today against favored East Carolina, did just that in the first half.
The Cadets controlled the ball for 20 of the first 30 minutes as they built a 10-7 lead.
But Army could not contain the Pirates' outstanding quarterback, Marcus Crandell, all day.
Crandell was 26 of 39 for 283 yards and 3 touchdowns and became East Carolina's career passing leader in the Pirates' 31-25 victory before a crowd of 31,743 at Michie Stadium.
Army (3-4-1), which rarely has turned the ball over this season, committed four turnovers.
Two of those miscues led to scores by East Carolina (6-3) in the second half.
"There's no question that the turnovers determined the outcome," Army Coach Bob Sutton said.


Wallflower
Katharine Hepburn is at her youthful peak, perfectly cast as a wistful, smalltown wallflower in George Stevens's ALICE ADAMS (1935) - MONDAY at 1 P.M. on AMC.
With its perceptive detail by the director and his three screenwriters,  Booth Tarkington's bittersweet slice of Americana (which won the novelist a Pulitzer Prize) flows seamlessly, with Fred MacMurray (above, with Miss Hepburn), Fred Stone, Ann Shoemaker and Frank Albertson in key roles.
A priceless highlight is the hilariously awkward family dinner scene, with Hattie  McDaniel as a blundering server.
HOWARD THOMPSON


Millar Wins at Horse Show
The 112th National Horse Show, an event born in Manhattan along with the Metropolitan Opera in 1883, ended a controversial seven-year out-of-town tryout  at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight with the last-ever $50,000 Budweiser Grand Prix of New Jersey.
And what a treacherous spectacle it was: New Jersey's Anne Kursinski, the National's leading rider going into the ring, wound up taking an airborne somersault into the sawdust when her horse, Eros, crashed through a fence and put them both on the sideline.


Leaders Lay Politics Aside To Mourn Death of Rabin
Across the political spectrum, whether they embrace Israel's peace talks with the Palestinians or deplore them, horrified leaders of American Jewish groups bowed their heads last night in mourning for the assassinated Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
For many, the shock was magnified beyond measure by the fact that the killer  was a Jew.


Manners in the Air
To the Editor: In their letters (Aug. 20) Kathryn Pirrotta Caballero and Lorraine Mesagna find that changing diapers in the air is their sacred right.
Have they ever thought of traveling by car?
Or better yet, staying home until the child is old enough to behave properly?
Don't they know that motherhood implies giving up certain things, albeit temporarily?
Traveling by plane with a  very small child, unless it's an emergency, should be one of them.
Obviously, they only consider their convenience, without regard to the comfort of other passengers or the welfare of the child; I can't imagine anybody subjecting a small child to being cooped up for hours in the unhealthy air of a plane.


Democrat From Texas Is to Leave Congress
Representative Ronald D. Coleman said on Saturday that he would not seek an eighth term, becoming the 11th Democrat and third Texan to announce plans to leave Congress since the Republicans took control in January.
Mr.
Coleman, 53, whose district includes most of El Paso, accused the Republican-dominated Congress of declaring war "on working families, seniors, the disabled, veterans and children."


Steelers Have the Final Say In Overtime at Soldier Field
Wild, weird, wonderful -- it was a threefold offering of that and much more for the Pittsburgh Steelers here this afternoon.
They looked beaten more than once, trailed often, looked hopeless, looked defenseless, looked happy, looked sad.
The Steelers and the Chicago Bears played this tense game using every inch of the Soldier Field turf and every second of the regular game clock -- and even that was not enough.


3 Accused of Race-War Shootings Face Trial
Three friends talked about "how good life would be" without blacks, then drove around with a shotgun and shot three black men in an attempt to start a race war, the prosecution will contend when the three go on trial on Monday.
One of the shooting victims died.


Sports of The Times;Foley Was 21 Seconds From the Starting Job
WITH his right arm supported by one of the Jets' medics, Glenn Foley was walking slowly and painfully toward the X-ray room near the locker room.
"Why now?" he was mumbling.


Investigators Describe a Determined Killer Whose Target Was Peres as Well as Rabin
At 7:45 P.M.
Saturday night, investigators say, Yigal Amir, the confessed killer of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, left this suburban town north of Tel Aviv aboard a southbound bus, carrying a pistol that he had loaded at home.
Near City Hall in Tel Aviv, Mr.
Amir, 25, moved among the 100,000 people in the crowd that gathered for a peace demonstration addressed by Mr.
Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.
After inspecting the area, he stood in a parking  lot, where he semed to onlookers -- and to security forces, by some accounts --  to be a waiting driver.


Teacher Pact Makes Mayor (Surprise!) a Union Man
IN the Blue Room of City Hall on Saturday, the Mayor of New York demonstrated how much control he really does exercise over the school system, despite his complaints to the contrary.
He did so by producing a new five-year contract with the United Federation of Teachers, a generous pact that gives union members an 11 percent increase over five years and demands no major work-rule or productivity concessions in return.
The agreement was worked out by the Mayor's labor commissioner, analyzed by the  Mayor's budget director and concluded with virtually no contribution from the Board of Education's labor negotiators.
No wonder the Mayor found it "historic."


Walesa Comes From Behind To Win Spot In Runoff Vote
Fighting for a second term as President, Lech Walesa staged a remarkable comeback in the first round of the election today, gaining enough votes to face  a former Communist in a runoff, surveys of voters leaving the polls showed.
Mr.
Walesa, who trailed so badly several months ago that many Poles were writing his political obituary, was just behind Aleksander Kwasniewski, the surveys indicated.
The Polish state television reported Mr.
Kwasniewski with 34  percent of the vote and Mr.
Walesa with 33.2 percent.


Our Building's a Co-op in Spirit as Well as Name;They Love the Tuba
To the Editor:
As a lawyer representing 95 co-op buildings, and as president of my own co-op for six years, I must reluctantly agree with some of the findings of your excellent "In Flat Market, Co-op Life Has Steep Ups and Downs" (front page, Oct. 30).
Of course, my clients are counseled to avoid pettiness and autocracy.


Dagwood, Meet The Mailman
Among the many missions of the Postal Service, aside from getting the mail delivered, is selling stamps -- some of them, ideally, to be bought but not used.
To this end, the post office has become something of an expert on creating stamps that will be, in its preferred phrase, "retained" by the customer.
So far, pop culture stamps have been the hottest around (note those honoring Elvis  and Marilyn).
Now, the Postal Service is offering a blend of humor, nostalgia and mayhem: a sheet of 20 stamps honoring color comic strips that originated between 1895 and  1945.


Zanzibar Journal;Where Life Has No Spice, a $1 Billion Pick-Me-Up
It may still look like nothing more than a palm- and mangrove-fringed bay lapped by cobalt blue waters.
Yet on paper, the southern end of this legendary spice island is ready to transform this sleepy, impoverished land into a world economic center.
The plans could make the island of Zanzibar into a Hong Kong or Singapore, officials here say.
By 1998, they say, they expect investments of more than $1 billion and the building and dredging of a new port as an export-processing zone, with new roads, new warehouses, two new luxury hotels, two new golf courses and the creation of more than 80,000 jobs.


Some Arabs Deplore Killing; Others Rejoice
The assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel on Saturday underscored the political fault lines across the Middle East.
While most Arab leaders condemned his killing, radical Palestinian groups rejoiced.
In neighboring Jordan, King Hussein, who signed a peace deal with Mr.
Rabin ending decades of conflict, said the Prime Minister's death was a "great personal blow."


Corrections
The Keep in Mind section of the Home Video column on Friday misidentified the singer of the title song in the film "Goldfinger." She is Shirley Bassey, not Eartha Kitt.


Our Building's a Co-op in Spirit as Well as Name;Better Than Landlords
To the Editor:
Your series on New York City's housing co-ops (Oct. 30-Nov. 1) shows an unfair negative bias.


Taking In the Sites;Lightning And Thunder On the Web
There is no weather in cyberspace, but the meteorologically curious business  traveler can be drenched in weather information on the World Wide Web.
Weather data range from capsule forecasts for every major city on the planet to satellite photos of the planet.
For a quick view of the weather where you are or where you're going, start with Intellicast On-line weather service, which is run by WSI.
The home page is  standard fare with hot buttons for its three sections: United States weather, weather around the world and ski reports.


Chrysler Workers Vote to End 4-Day Strike
Workers at the Chrysler Corporation's main windshield plant voted overwhelmingly today to end a four-day strike that had threatened to disrupt the company's car and truck building operations.
The United Automobile Workers union said it had agreed to stop the walkout in return for a company commitment, worth at least $35 million, to preserve jobs at the McGraw Glass Division plant in Detroit.
Negotiators had reached a tentative  agreement on Saturday.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Joseph Lindmayer, a physicist and chairman of  the Quantex Corporation of Rockville, Md., misstated the length of his marriage  to Katalin Komlossy Lindmayer.
They were married in 1994.
The obituary also omitted the name of Mr.
Lindmayer's first wife, the mother of his two children.
She was Klara Lindmayer, who died in 1982.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday


'Late Show' Talking To Outside Agencies
Worldwide Pants, which produces the "Late Show With David Letterman," and CBS, which broadcasts it, are talking to agencies about handling creative projects for the show, which has recently slipped in the ratings.
Though the billings were not disclosed, advertising executives familiar with the discussions said they could reach as much as $10 million.
Kenneth Lerer, a spokesman for Worldwide Pants, said on Friday that talks were under way with three agencies in New York, though he declined to identify them.
Jim Byrne, a spokesman for CBS, described the talks as "preliminary conversations," adding, "nothing is definitive." CBS now handles advertising and promotion for the "Late Show" in-house, though the network often uses outside agencies on creative projects for shows like "CBS This Morning."


Seeking Role, School Board Stalled Pact
It was after 10 A.M. on Saturday and Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew had a problem: Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had scheduled a 10 A.M. news conference at City Hall to announce a tentative agreement on a new teachers' contract, and Dr.
Crew was to stand triumphantly alongside the Mayor and the union president, Sandra Feldman.
But as the hour came and went, the new Chancellor was stuck in downtown Brooklyn, answering questions at an emergency meeting that the Board of Education had convened to review the contract.
"The Chancellor had indicated there was a press conference and he'd like to go," said one board official, who  insisted on anonymity.
"People were like, 'That's life. You can't go until until we get through this -- until we are sure this is what we are going to do.' "


Chicago Journal;Closing Arguments for a Legal Showman
Some of the protesters and poets who sailed on William Kunstler's ark of left-wing causes over the years, threw their old comrade and friend a farewell party here today, a few miles from the legal battle that helped transform him from a liberal lawyer into a radical advocate.
The gravel-voiced legal showman died at age 76 in Manhattan on Sept. 4, but today his spirit lived as big and as bold as ever in the stories and hearts of the people he touched directly and indirectly, including James Gills, a black schoolteacher in suburban Chicago, who never met Mr.
Kunstler.


It's Monday, So It Must Be Women
As escapist sitcom heroines go, I'll always choose a champagne-swilling, man-hungry romance novelist or a vain, tart-tongued book publisher over one more mousy former housewife looking for her identity.
It's a mark of what's right and wrong with "High Society" that it cautiously gives us all three.
Intermittently  funny and promising, the season's first replacement series wants to be outrageous and sophisticated but is too timid to say anything rude.
The second episode will be shown tonight at 9:30 on CBS, as part of its all-girl ghetto of comedies. (It joins "The Nanny," "Can't Hurry Love" and the once-outrageous "Murphy Brown" in a Monday lineup that should be called "At least it's not football.")


No Headline
As a human being you see something like this and you wonder: Where are we going?
You know that Rabin was doing his best for peace.
Now there is a lot of doubt about what will happen next." -- YEHUDA ISSACHAROV, in Jersualem. [A1:2.]


In the West Bank and Gaza, Mixed Feelings
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip expressed mixed feelings today about the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, with some remembering him as the man who cracked down on their uprising against the Israeli authorities and others saying he was a visionary who recently moved with determination to make peace with Arabs .
"The whole Middle East lost a great man," said Issa Albucheide, a marble supplier from Bethlehem, echoing the sentiments of family members.
"He was a
very good man. He did something nobody else could do: He made peace with the Arabs."


Intruder Startles Wife of Canada's Premier
Prime Minister Jean Chretien's wife, Aline, came face-to-face with an intruder who was standing at their bedroom door with an open jackknife early today.
Mr.
Chretien said he and his wife locked themselves in their room until the Royal Canadian Mounted Police arrived minutes later and arrested the man.


Gramm Wins Maine's G.O.P. Straw Poll
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas finished first in Maine's Republican Presidential straw poll tonight, winning a dubious prize that reflects grass-roots organizing but not necessarily the sentiments of the party's voters.
Senator Gramm captured 602 votes, or 42 percent of the ballots cast, while the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, the front-runner for the Republican Presidential nomination, placed third behind Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, who won 303 votes, or 21 percent.
Senator Dole, who has made a strategic decision not to compete in straw polls and did not appear before the nearly 2,000 delegates here, received 144 votes, or 10 percent.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Understated Solos, Duets And Debuts End a Season San Francisco Ballet City Center


Super Bowl Rings? Panthers Stun 49ers
Panthers 13, 49ers 7 Call it what you want -- shocking, stunning or inconceivable -- but you had better believe it.
The Carolina Panthers became the first expansion team to win  four games and defeat a defending Super Bowl champion in its first season, beating the host San Francisco 49ers by 13-7 yesterday.


Why Powell Puzzles White House
For the Clinton White House, where it is as red hot a topic as everywhere else in Washington, the prospect of Gen.
Colin L. Powell as a Republican Presidential candidate is both a dream and a nightmare.
The retired Army general could be the Democrats' best friend if he divided the Republican field and yet was denied the nomination after a bitter internecine fight, allowing Mr.
Clinton to paint the Republicans as extremists unworthy of leadership.
Or General Powell might win the nomination but prompt a  right-wing, third-party candidacy by someone like Patrick J. Buchanan that would split the vote in Mr.
Clinton's favor.


A Gambling Study Seems Likely
Some political leaders, including President Clinton, think the Federal Government ought to take a look at the costs and benefits of gambling.
And some don't, including Representative Frank LoBiondo, a Republican whose district includes Atlantic City.
He has described a bill to establish a commission on gambling as "a power grab by the Federal Government."


Showalter Visits Arizona
Buck Showalter paid a visit tonight to the expansion Arizona Diamondbacks, the third team he had talked to in three days.
He attended the Houston Rockets-Phoenix Suns basketball game as the guest of  Jerry Colangelo, president of the Suns and managing general partner of the Diamondbacks, who begin play in 1998.


Bronx Girl, 13, Is Fatally Shot in Apartment Laundry Room
A Bronx girl's trip to a dingy basement to fetch a load of freshly washed laundry for her mother cost her her life yesterday, the police said.
The girl, Deena Taylor, a 13-year-old ninth grader, went down to the laundry  room in the apartment building where she lived with her parents and brother just before noon, said Adriana Resto, a police officer in the 44th Precinct who is also the girl's cousin.


Testing His Wings


Jews Say Their Values Were Torn by a Bullet


Merrimon Cuninggim, Educator And Foundation Director, 84
Merrimon Cuninggim, an ordained Methodist minister who brought a finely honed sense of ethics -- and a wicked backhand -- to his work as an educator and foundation official, died on Wednesday at his home in Cockeysville, Md.
He was 84.
In a career in which he taught religion at four colleges, served as president of Salem College in Winston-Salem, N.C., from 1976 to 1979 and held a series of  philanthropic posts, Mr.
Cuninggim twice made major ethical stands.


Bowe Hits the Canvas But Stands in the End
George Foreman might have claimed that Evander Holyfield was on the verge of  having a heart attack in the ring against Riddick Bowe on Saturday night, but Holyfield was enjoying breakfast at his hotel at 7 o'clock this morning.
"I feel fine," Holyfield said as he sat in a booth at a coffee shop, even though he looked as if someone had punched him in the face -- which is exactly what happened, of course, about 65 times with jabs alone, by unofficial count.
Welts covered Holyfield's brow and his eyes were mere slits.


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
A.D.A.M.
Software Inc., Atlanta, an initial public offering of 2 million shares.
Robinson-Humphrey.


A Callas Entr'acte: Woman, Not Myth
Zoe Caldwell has played a number of strong, often doomed women, from Cleopatra and Medea to Jean Brodie, Emma Hamilton and Lillian Hellman.
Yet she has probably never played a strong, doomed woman who is as zestfully entertaining as the Maria Callas that Terrence McNally has imagined in "Master Class," which opened last night at the Golden Theater.
For Ms.
Caldwell, the role of the preeminent diva of the second half of this  century allows her to give what could be one of the funniest, most moving and gaudiest performances of this season and, perhaps, of her career.
For Mr.
McNally, the play demonstrates his ability to create rich, vivid, satisfying theater from material that sounds as if it should be no more than a sketch.


N.H.L.'s New Game: Beating The Devils
Had Jacques Lemaire chosen to make a vivid impression on his slumping Devils, he could have done it on the overnight flight that took them from Southern California to Northern New Jersey after a dreadful week in the West.
Instead of merely refueling the aircraft during a 30-minute stop in Salina, Kan., he could have ordered the defending Stanley Cup champions onto the runway  in their sneakers to practice under the full moon.


To The Polls
The ballots may say "District Attorney" and "County Executive," but voters around the region are nevertheless likely to feel the rumblings of national political forces at work on Election Day.
Articles, page B4.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in Business Day on Oct. 27 about the financial results of the Xerox Corporation referred to one figure incorrectly.
Xerox's property and casualty insurance company, Talegen Holdings Inc., lost $20 million in the third quarter; it did not take a charge of that amount.
The article also  misstated the ownership of Talegen.
It remains a unit of Xerox.


Edward R. Egan, Police Officer Who Inspired Movie, Dies at 65
Edward R. Egan, the New York detective turned film star whose smashing of a heroin-smuggling ring was the basis of the Academy Award-winning thriller "The French Connection," died on Saturday at the University of Miami Hospital.
He was 65 and had lived in Fort Lauderdale since 1988.
The cause was colon cancer, said his longtime companion, Cheryl Kyle-Little.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about company cafeterias misidentified the company that manages the cafeteria at Mount Sinai Hospital.
It is Aramark, not Marriott International.


Our Building's a Co-op in Spirit as Well as Name;Tightwad Board
To the Editor:
Re "In Flat Market, Co-op Life Has Steep Ups and Downs" (Oct. 30): The examples of co-op board behavior cited were, I suspect, more deviant than most.


Finding On-Line Distractions, Employers Strive to Keep Workers in Line
From her Silicon Valley office, a 30-year-old graphic designer frequently uses her company's Internet access to look for a new job, perusing the listings  on the World Wide Web as she would the newspaper classified ads.
She then clicks her way from one favorite home page to another, including a brief stop to check  out surfing conditions in nearby Santa Cruz.
Surfing the Net, it seems, can make the desktop computer anything but an employee productivity tool.


I.B.M.'s Robotic Army of Computer-Chip Soldiers
Most owners of personal computers know the type of microprocessor that acts as the electronic brain inside their desktop or notebook machines.
But do they know what kind of chip is in their dishwashers or new telephone-answering machines?
Not likely.
Yet as the semiconductor industry continues its explosive growth, a surge that the industry estimates will see worldwide sales jump 79 percent, to $261 billion in 1998 from $146 billion this year, these hidden chips have become robotic foot soldiers of the digital revolution.


Our Building's a Co-op in Spirit as Well as Name;There's Legal Recourse
To the Editor:
The series on New York City co-ops (Oct. 30-Nov. 1) confirms our greatest fear as lawyers specializing in housing discrimination -- that illegal discrimination is rampant in New York City, and people believe there is no redress.


Shift at Glamour: High-Top Sneakers and the Bottom Line
Mary Berner, the 36-year-old former publisher of TV Guide who takes over the  helm of Glamour today, does not exactly fit the expected image of a publisher of two of the leading magazines in America.
At TV Guide she made her managers wear red high-top sneakers to monthly meetings -- "a bonding experience," she called it.
She once dressed as an Indian and rode a horse into a meeting in Arizona.
She even conducted a session for her 11 managers at her parents' home in Illinois and turned the event into a pajama  party.


Disney and ABC Set Vote Date
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and the Walt Disney Company have each set a tentative date of Jan. 4 for shareholders' votes on Disney's proposed $19 billion buyout of the huge media company.
The date is subject to Securities and Exchange Commission approval of a joint proxy statement and prospectus that provides details of the deal.


Patents;A Minnesota company says it can help you talk and share data via modem at the same time.
ENGINEERS at a Minnesota company say their patents for modem technology will  make it possible for two computer users to share data over a phone line while talking at the same time.
"Basically what this does is take the person's voice and digitize it," said Jeff Davis, the engineering manager of modem products at Multi-Tech Systems of Mounds View, Minn.
"It multiplexes the digitized voice with the computer digital data and sends both over one phone line at the same time." The modems eliminate  the need for a dedicated phone line and a doubled phone bill for those who want  to talk while they are transmitting.


Accused Marines' Kin Incredulous
To their families, the lives of Rodrico Harp, 21, and Kendrick Ledet, 20, were stories of youthful setbacks and hard-won success: two small-town Georgia youths who found manhood and honor in the United States Marines.
For Mr.
Ledet the military was the way out of Waycross, Ga., a town of 20,000 some 200 miles southeast of here.


Turkey's Premier Wins Vote of Confidence
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller's Government easily won a vote of confidence in Parliament today, halting six weeks of political turmoil that has forced her to  call early elections.
The 450-member Parliament voted 243 to 171 in favor of the new Government.
The other lawmakers were absent.
The new coalition, which was approved by the President last week, was expected to win today's vote easily.


New Church, Same Volume
The rosary ladies are back.
Two former nuns, Joan Sudwoj and Cynthia Balconi, were barred last spring from two Catholic churches near Pittsburgh because of their loud prayers.
On Saturday, they disrupted a service at St.
Margaret Mary Church in Moon Township, 10 miles west of Pittsburgh.


Jets Lose Both the Game and Their Glimmer of Hope
If you thought the Jets' muddled quarterback situation could not get worse, think again.
Today, in a 20-7 loss to the New England Patriots, it went from bad to good to very good to awful, and the awful part was not the doing of Glenn Foley, the Jets' bright light of the day.
Instead, it was his season-ending injury on the Jets' last scrimmage play of the game, a dislocated right shoulder for a right-handed passer.
Boomer Esiason, the Jets' nominal starter, was the No. 3 quarterback again, partly to continue recovery from post-concussion syndrome and partly because the Jets seem to be looking at other options.
So Bubby Brister made his fourth straight start and achieved little.


Hours to Vote Tomorrow
There will be elections tomorrow in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York, from 6 A.M. to 8  P.M. in Connecticut and from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey.
In New York City, voters will cast ballots for local judicial posts and for district attorney in the Bronx and on Staten Island.
In Queens, the incumbent District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, is unopposed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13


Story of the Weekend: Riley's Coup
Pat Riley's team opened the season by holding its opponent to 71 points.
Riley's All-Star center blocked five shots.
And one of Riley's players was ejected for throwing an elbow.
Sound familiar?


Chrissie Hynde, Acoustic, With Strings
Chrissie Hynde doesn't want complete respect.
Just a little respect is enough.
When she performed an acoustic set with her band the Pretenders on Saturday night at Symphony Space, she went the way of many aging rock stars and  rearranged her songs to incorporate less noise and more strings.
But to counter  the classical sheen that the Duke String Quartet brought to the concert, she had the ensemble scruffily groomed and dressed down in T-shirts and jeans.
Furthermore, as the quartet scraped away virtuously on the right side of the stage, a skinny man who was introduced as Wif sat on a stool on the far left, occasionally rattling a tambourine, fulfilling a function anyone with a sense of rhythm could perform.
It is this contrast between the primitive and the sophisticated that has marked the Pretenders' career.
The band originally rose from England's punk scene 17 years ago (with Ms. Hynde transplanted from Ohio), but soon proved that it had far more depth and ambition than its peers.
As Ms.
Hynde became a mother  of two and one of rock's pillars of strength and survival, two of her bandmates  died of drug overdoses.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Lessons on Love, Learned Too Late Dan Penn and Spooner Oldham Bottom Line


Europe Online Dealt a Blow As 3d Partner Abandons Ship
The heated contest to put Europeans on line -- and thus generate enormous profits -- grew more chaotic this week, when one of Germany's largest publishers announced that it was scrapping plans to invest in the Continent's premier home-grown on-line service.
Axel Springer A. G., publisher of the mass circulation newspaper Bild Zeitung, became the third major publisher to abandon the fledgling alliance when it announced last week that it would not take a 10 percent stake in Europe Online S. A. Springer's announcement left the industry buzzing about whether Europe Online was short of funds, had management problems and was about to self-destruct.


Ethel Chamberlain, Women's Leader, 86
Ethel T. Chamberlain, who dedicated her life to the Salvation Army and served as national president of its women's organizations from 1974 to 1977, died on Wednesday at a Salvation Army retirement home in Asbury Park, N.J.
She was 86.


Georgians Vote for President and Parliament
Georgians, their country riddled by ethnic strife, voted in large numbers today for a Parliament and a President who they hope will lead them to peace and prosperity.
"I think that this day will decide the fate of Georgia," Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the leading contender, said after he cast his ballot at a polling  station in central Tbilisi.


National Politics Is Rumbling Through Local Races, Even for DistrictAttorney
The ballots may say "District Attorney" and "County Executive," but voters around the region tomorrow are likely to feel the rumblings of national political forces at work deep below the surface.


CHRONICLE
When ANDREW LITTON, the music director of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, and  ANDRE WATTS, the pianist, appear together at a concert in Carnegie Hall on Nov.  14, , it will mark another chapter in a long-running friendship.
"I first heard him play when I was 8 or 9," Mr.
Litton said from Dallas the other day.
"I flipped out at his intensity and commitment."


A Friend of the Devil Is the 2-Point Conversion
When the National Football League was considering putting in the 2-point conversion several years ago, Giants Coach Dan Reeves opposed it.
After the Giants missed three of those conversions in their 30-28 loss to the Seattle Seahawks today, he was probably thinking that he would write his Congressman about getting rid of the play.
Reeves was sensitive about the subject after the game, even though the questioner was not challenging him about the 2-point attempts.
"I didn't want it from the start," he said.
"So I had to deal with it since it's been in existence."


A Moment of Disbelief and Uncertainty
Israelis moved today in a daze of disbelief, and they struggled for words that might do justice to what was etched in their faces.
An artisan in the Jewish quarter of Jerusalem's Old City said he felt as if he had been orphaned.
A barber on a pedestrian mall said his pain was as searing as an ulcer.
A student in an outlying neighborhood said he was living out a horror show.


Recalling a Peacemaker, Hard Crust and All
You could see the evolution taking place before your eyes.
Before he became Prime Minister in 1992, many around the world knew Yitzhak Rabin mainly as the gruff old soldier who had promised as Defense Minister to "break the bones" of stone-throwing Palestinian protesters.


Movie Theaters
Attending a movie in New York City often requires plenty of advance planning  as the city has far fewer movie screens per person than most other large cities.
Besides beeing scarce, the screens are spread out; over 60 percent of the city's screens are in theaters of one to three screens, compared to 49 percent nationwide.
Recently the multiplex boom has come to New York with the success of the 12-screen Sony theater on the Upper West Side and planned multiplexes un Union Square and 42d Street.
The number of movie screens has increased about 12  percent in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Movies cost more in Manhattan than anywhere alse in the country, though the price of seeing a movie in one of  the other New York City boroughs is comparable to other cities.


Browns Fans Suffer Loss And Brace for One More
Art Modell wasn't the only no-show. His Cleveland Browns didn't show up, either.
Chris Chandler threw for two touchdowns and ran for another and the rookie Rodney Thomas ran for a season-high 108 yards as the Houston Oilers beat the Browns, 37-10, before a Cleveland Municipal Stadium crowd bracing for more bad news Monday.


Two Yeas, Two Nays in New Jersey
Support has grown for the broad principle that Congress and the state legislatures should not impose expensive requirements on lower levels of government without providing the funds to pay for them.
Now a proposed amendment to the New Jersey Constitution outlawing such "unfunded mandates" is on the ballot on Election Day, and it has gained widespread bipartisan backing.
The measure is well intended but flawed.
It would remove basic decisions from elected officials and hamstring the state's ability to protect the environment and act on other public-policy questions.
We recommend that voters reject it.


They're Not Candidates, They're the Issue
Tune in to the final, furious round of campaigning before Tuesday's off-year  elections around the country and it sounds like Speaker Newt Gingrich is up for  re-election, not the local candidates.


TV Coverage
The funeral of Yitzhak Rabin begins at 7 A.M.
Eastern time today.
Following are the plans of major television networks to cover it:
ABC: Live coverage begins at 6:30 A.M. with Peter Jennings and Charlie Gibson in Jerusalem, continuing as warranted.
CBS: Live coverage begins at 7 A.M. with a special edition of "CBS This Morning," with Dan Rather in Jerusalem, continuing at least through any remarks  made by President Clinton.


Wall St. Firms Fall Victim To Costly Telephone Scam
Wall Streeters have a penchant for practical jokes.
So when word filtered into the brokerage community last month that calls to a prank telephone number were leaving unsuspecting callers in stitches, the number was quickly passed around for the benefit of the curious.
But not for the benefit of their employers.
The phone number, apparently linked to a voice-activated recording designed to keep callers on the line, was part of a pay-per-call service in Hong Kong that works like a "900" number in the United States.
The automatic minimum charge: up to $65 a call.


Adopted Daughter Of an Entire Regiment
The Metropolitan Opera's "Fille du Regiment" -- now worn and seedy with the years -- returned on Saturday night.
Nothing intrinsic compels this revival; we  accept it more readily in the form of an excuse.
For what more convenient way to return Luciano Pavarotti to the production he helped inaugurate 24 years ago?
What better opportunity to test June Anderson's coloratura skills in the role of Marie?
This little whiff of nostalgia can be further explained by remembering the nature of the beast.
"La Fille" is an excuse by nature.
Some may consider it ground zero for all the musical comedy that has followed, but the reason opera companies and their stars have laboriously propped up its comedic anachronisms for a century and a half is more basic: a genial songfulness that opera will not do without.


Lobo's Emotional Stop on a New Journey
The game had been decided long before the ball was sent back in Rebecca Lobo's direction.
The United States national women's team, two games into its journey toward Atlanta, had withstood the early initiative of the defending national champion Connecticut Huskies.
A roster with five former national players of the year was too deep, too strong and too experienced.
Connecticut, which had been within 4 points after 15 challenging minutes, was trailing by 23 when Lobo took a shot, and Kara Wolters blocked it, and Lobo laughed to herself as she ran to the other end.


Nigerian Writer's Trial Mocked Justice
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 1 report of the death sentence of the Nigerian writer Ken Saro-Wiwa omits the gross irregularities during his trial.
The tribunal that convicted him was hand-picked by the Government; key prosecution witnesses stated in sworn affidavits that they were bribed to give evidence against him; he was denied confidential visits with his lawyer.
PEN regards Mr.
Saro-Wiwa as a gifted writer and an ardent, but never violent champion of minority rights.
He should be released unconditionally.


Early Second-Guessers on Vietnam
ONCE UPON A DISTANT WAR Young War Correspondents and the Early Vietnam Battles By William Prochnau Illustrated. 546 pages.
Times Books/Random House. $27.50.


Claims of Homeless Abuse Lead to Program Revisions
Battered by accusations of strong-arm tactics, the Grand Central Partnership  has revamped its field program for the homeless and reduced its size after a major loss of financial support.
The program's workers, ostensibly hired to guide the homeless to shelter and  services, served instead as quasi-security guards at up to 80 locations, mostly  cash machine lobbies in Manhattan.
Scores of the field workers were themselves untrained homeless people paid $10 a day.


Elective Surgery For Those CBS M.D.'s
Contrary to initial prognoses, the patient has survived and may actually thrive.
Victim of a monumental scheduling blunder by CBS, "Chicago Hope" made its debut last season directly against NBC's "E.R.," which quickly became a blockbuster hit.
The days of "Chicago Hope," created by David E. Kelley ("Picket Fences"), definitely looked numbered.
But the show's executive producer, John Tinker, has made some changes.
The first major step was to move "Chicago Hope" from Thursdays to Mondays at  10, the slot vacated by "Northern Exposure." True, this puts the series up against "Monday Night Football" on ABC, but "Chicago Hope" has been holding its  own, regularly getting at least a 20 percent share of the prime-time audience.
That is often better than the preceding CBS shows, including "Murphy Brown." And the ratings give every indication of getting stronger.


Discrimination's Wrong
To the Editor:
Re "Gay Rights Don't Equal Civil Rights" (letter, Oct. 27) by Ken Masugi, senior fellow of the Center for Public Affairs of Ashland University:


Parking Rules
Because of Election Day, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


The software industry will decide if its future lies in quality or quantity.
SOFTKEY INTERNATIONAL INC. announced a hostile takeover bid last week, seeking to disrupt the Learning Company's proposed merger with Broderbund Software and bringing to a boil a long-simmering industry debate over the pricing and distribution of consumer software.
Broderbund and its would-be partner, the Learning Company, typify a business  model based on high-priced, high-quality educational titles.
Softkey takes a low-price approach in which, the company concedes, the quality of the software can be secondary to the quantity of sales.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Singer's Metamorphosis, When Emotion Informs a Song Tom Andersen Eighty Eight's


Kodak to Cite New Evidence in Trade Case
When the Eastman Kodak Company contended in the spring that the Fuji Photo Film Company was working with Japanese trade and antitrust authorities to restrict access to Japan's markets, it produced evidence dating back many years.
Now Kodak plans to present Federal authorities with what it calls new evidence showing that the restrictions are continuing.
Kodak is expected to file its new documentation today with the United States  special trade representative's office in Washington.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE SOCCER


Property Taxes Went Up 4%
Property taxpayers were asked to pay $11.75 billion in 1995 to support New Jersey's local governments and schools, which is $451 million more than in 1994, according to tax records examined by The Associated Press.
The growth rate for property tax for 1995 was 4 percent.
In 1994, the first  year of the Whitman administration, property tax revenues increased 5 percent, according to the analysis.


Wallachs's Parent Files For Chapter 11 Protection
Wallachs clothing stores, a New York institution for more than 100 years, is  conducting a "going out of business" sale at its 12 stores in New York, New Jersey and New Hampshire.
Also joining in the sale are Roots, F. R. Tripler and  other retail stores that, with Wallachs, make up the 19-state chain of 50 stores owned and operated by the Hastings Group.
As recently as three years ago, before demand plummeted for the tailored suits and other clothing in which it specialized, the group owned almost 200 stores.


Giants Let the Seahawks, and Playoff Hopes, Slip Away
There is no such thing as a sure thing when it comes to field-goal kicking.
Especially when the kick is to win the game.
Cross the fingers, pray and hope for the best.
In practice, Brad Daluiso kicks field goals of more than 50 yards as easily as people change channels with their remote.
He has kicked game-winners three times before for the Giants.
Today, against the Seattle Seahawks, Daluiso faced  this harrowing situation: The Giants were trailing by 30-28.
Five seconds left.
No timeouts.
The kick was from 48 yards.
But even though it seemed dire, with Daluiso, you will normally take those odds.


At Center of Yonkers Storm: A Rights Leader
For more than a decade, this hodgepodge of city and suburb has garnered more  than its share of national attention for a seething desegregation war that has included die-hard resistance as well as moments of uncommon reconciliation.
Last week, Yonkers was in the spotlight again, this time because of an uncustomary fight within the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People about the wisdom of busing.
At the center of the latest storm was Kenneth Jenkins, the 34-year-old president of the Yonkers branch of the N.A.A.C.P. and the man long viewed as the fiery leader the organization needed in waging its battle for integration.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues was up 8.17 points, or 0.05 percent, at 18,036.97.
On Friday, the market was closed in observance of the Culture Day national holiday.


The Peace Talks' Future: Testing Time for the Israelis
The assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin comes just as the tangible  consequences of the peace accords are beginning to be felt by many Palestinians  and Israelis -- dividing up towns, fields and roads that can actually be seen from places like Tel Aviv or Jerusalem or Ramallah.
The treaty signed by Mr.
Rabin and Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, in September meant handing over territory that Israel had ruled for 28 years as its main buffer against the outside world.
For the Palestinians, it meant obtaining
just the first pieces of a place they hope to call the heart of their own country.


Arafat Absence From Funeral Underscores a Fragile Peace
When Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is buried with full military honors on Monday at Mount Herzl cemetery in Jerusalem, the most conspicuous absentee from  the panoply of world leaders in attendance is expected to be Yasir Arafat.
Palestinian officials said today that Mr.
Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, while having expressed his condolences, had decided not to join figures like President Clinton and King Hussein of Jordan because he wished to avoid inflaming passions on what would be one of the most emotional days in Israel's history.


Strife-Torn Pequots Re-elect Chairman


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin misstated the year President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt was assassinated.
It was 1981, not 1984.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Bias Suspects in Court Today
Two Bergen County men will be arraigned today in Superior Court on charges of desecrating Jewish graves on Halloween.
In the Passaic Junction Cemetery, one tombstone was inscribed with the words  "Hitler is God" while swastikas and other anti-Semitic slogans were spray-painted on others.


Abroad at Home;'On God's Orders'
For months the Israeli right had poured hate on Prime Minister Rabin.
Leaders of the Jewish settler movement said he was a traitor for agreeing to withdraw from parts of the West Bank -- which God, they said, had given to Israel.
Extremist rabbis called him a murderer for making peace with the Palestinians and said it would be morally in order to kill him.
At one right-wing political rally, a poster portrayed Mr.
Rabin with a hooked nose dripping blood: a cartoon that could have come from the Nazi paper Der Sturmer.
At another, he was shown in an SS uniform.


Unabom Manifesto Brings New Theories
The publication of the manifesto in the Unabom case has produced no breakthrough, but it has led investigators to alter their portrait of the suspect in the serial bombings.
Investigators and academics, who previously thought the suspect might be a terrorist with a political agenda, now say the 35,000-word manuscript that was published in September suggests a man with the profile of a serial killer.


Flagstar Gives Nod To Lowe &amp; Partners
Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York has been awarded a second assignment from the Flagstar Companies and is introducing the second phase of a campaign for Mercedes-Benz of North America.
Flagstar named Lowe, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to handle  the creative portion of the account of its Denny's chain of family restaurants, which had been handled for the last seven years by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.
The media portion of the account, also at D.M.B.&amp; B., is being placed in review.
The billings were estimated at $30 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Budget Bills' Nooks and Crannies While huge programs like Medicare and Medicaid have been the focus of the Congressional budget debate, many smaller provisions have been added to the budget bills for the benefit of special interests -- some coal companies, which  would be relieved of their legal obligation to help finance health benefits for  retired coal miners, as well as oil companies, ski-resort operators, restaurants and even football coaches.


Gallo Stepping Up Its Mid-Priced Effort
The E &amp; J Gallo Winery, the nation's largest wine marketer, is making an aggressive effort to increase its share of the so-called mid-priced category by  introducing a line of varietals like chardonnay and pinot noir under the name of Turning Leaf Vineyards.
Television commercials by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco, a unit of  True North Communications that joined the Gallo agency roster last year, carry the theme "There's a turning leaf on the label and changing ideas about wine in  the bottle." The spots are running nationally as well as in local markets.


Our Building's a Co-op in Spirit as Well as Name
To the Editor:
"In Flat Market, Co-op Life Has Steep Ups and Downs" (front page, Oct. 30) portrays a world in which co-op shareholders are governed by self-serving, unreasonable, vindictive boards of directors.


Wider Impact Is Foreseen for Bill to Ban Type of Abortion
Public health officials and doctors who perform abortions say the bill passed by the House of Representatives last week that would ban a type of late-term abortion is so broadly written and ill defined that it could affect many more doctors than originally thought.
Indeed, they say, it could criminalize almost any doctor who performs abortions in the second trimester, or after 12 weeks of gestation, and might force doctors to turn to less-safe methods to avoid the possibility of prosecution.
Some also say that it would shrink the pool of doctors who perform  second-trimester abortions.


U.S. Plans Bill and Note Sales This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government's quarterly refunding tentatively scheduled this week includes the auctions of 3- and 10-year notes, beginning tomorrow for the 3-year maturity and Wednesday for the 10-year maturity.
On Thursday, a tentative auction of one-year bills is also scheduled.
The auctions of both the notes and the one-year bills may be postponed, because they are contingent on an agreement being reached on a Federal budget and a raising of the Federal debt ceiling.


Jews Shouldn't Meet With Farrakhan;Who Led '63 March
To the Editor:
As director of public affairs and information for the Boston National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the New England N.A.A.C.P. contingent to the 1963 March on Washington, I was intrigued by Charlton Heston's Oct. 20 letter "on Louis Farrakhan's march on Washington."


Assailing Foe, Molinari Tells of a Death Threat
In an attack on William L. Murphy in the Staten Island district attorney's race, a spokesman for his opponent, Guy V. Molinari, said yesterday that a man sentenced to weekends in jail for car theft had threatened Mr.
Molinari's life.
The spokesman, Ed Burke, said that Mr.
Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, had been given 24-hour protection by the New York Police Department after learning that "a hit" had been ordered on his life.


Now, for Some Pizza and a Hot Shower . . .


A Kind of Sexual Revolution;At Some Nursing Homes, Intimacy Is a Matter of Policy
They met last New Year's Eve.
He was tall with an easy manner.
She was petite with a girlish smile.
He asked her to dance and held her close.
"I didn't push him away," she said.
"I've been around awhile. I've pushed a lot of men away."
It was a modern romance, at once pure and complicated.
First, there was his wife.
He was still married, although separated.
Then, there was his walker.


Reinventing the Neon Jungle
Times Square has long been a magnet for the good, the bad, the ugly, the zany and the downright weird.
No, not the people, but the overhead signs -- a vast, chaotic tableau of visual media of every variety.
The roll-call of giant commercial displays over the years includes winking penguins, smoke-puffing billboards, ersatz waterfalls, even a Mona Lisa rendered at 250 times the size of the original.
Often, Times Square has been a showcase for the cutting-edge technology of its day.
So it seems fitting that the Internet, the media of the moment, has recently secured a beachhead of sorts amid the neon of Times Square.


Essay;Memories of Yitzhak Rabin
At a dinner in the Israeli Embassy in Washington early this year, Yitzhak Rabin took issue with a column of mine opposing the use of U.S. troops on the Golan.
As usual between us, he minced no words, zinging me as being duped and manipulated by press agents for the opposition coalition in Israel.
Stung, I responded more vigorously than I would to any other chief of government.
The man sitting at the table between us -- Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who never breaches protocol -- blanched at the seeming heatedness of the exchange.


A Haunting Parallel
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt, like Prime Minster Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, was assassinated for his efforts to bring peace to the Middle East.
HIS ROLE IN BUILDING PEACE


No Change In Knicks' Defensive Personality
Midway through the third quarter Saturday night, the Milwaukee swingman Glenn Robinson was trying to break free from an offensive funk by relying on his many  physical tools.
He has "hops," a huge vertical leap in playground vernacular, a  range on his jump shot that is long and accurate and a knack for knowing when to make his defender bite on a head-and-shoulder fake.
He also had Anthony Mason on his hip, Charles Oakley on his elbow and, as he  dribbled hard to the basket in frustration, Patrick Ewing in perfect position to make the block, spiking the ball hard to the floor.


ASSASSINATION IN ISRAEL
More on the Gunman


In America;Asleep At the Revolution
Marian Wright Edelman was seething.
"I have been so frustrated trying to get the message out," she said.
"It is immoral what is going on in Washington today. The country is sleeping through this revolution."


INSIDE
Face-Off in Poland


The Death of Rabin: An On-Line Report
A special report on the Rabin assassination with news updates, as well as articles and photos from the archives of The New York Times, is available to computer users on
Clyde Haberman, former Jerusalem bureau chief of The Times, will answer questions from the public about the Middle East outlook in a live interview on


12,000 Fake Dalis Under a U.S. Gavel


In 128 Words, a Question on State Borrowing
Few things are more complicated than government borrowing practices, but on Tuesday voters will be asked to decide, on the basis of reading a 128-word question, whether to support a constitutional amendment that would significantly change how New York State pays its debts.
To supporters of the amendment, the issue is simple enough.
They say New York has had an egregious history of gimmicky borrowing that has resulted in the lowest bond rating of any state.
The proposed amendment, which would restrict borrowing by quasi-governmental agencies and cap debt not approved by voters, will enforce fiscal discipline, they say.


Dolphins Beat The Chargers
Dan Marino, a senior in high school when the Miami Dolphins last won in San Diego, made sure that long losing streak wouldn't continue.
Marino threw for at least 50 yards on the Dolphins' first three scoring drives and 291 yards over all as the Dolphins beat the Chargers, 24-14, tonight.


For New Leader Shouldering the Job, Huge Task and an Uneasy Mandate
After Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's historic handshake with Yasir Arafat of  the Palestine Liberation Organization in September 1993, some Israelis suggested that next Mr.
Rabin might actually shake hands with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.
The point of the joke was the celebrated rivalry of the two men who took turns leading the Labor Party through the 1970's and 1980's and who finally joined forces to achieve the historic breakthrough in Israeli-Palestinian relations.


A Stunned Israel Mourns and Honors Its Fallen Leader
Stunned Israelis by the hundreds of thousands paid final respects today to their fallen leader, Yitzhak Rabin, lighting candles on the square where he was  slain, praying at the Western Wall, and filing through the afternoon and into the night past his simple soldier's coffin, wrapped in an Israeli flag.
Tributes and condolences flowed in from across Israel and around the world for the warrior-turned-peacemaker, who was assassinated by a 25-year-old right-wing Israeli Saturday night in Tel Aviv as he left a rally organized by supporters of his search for peace with the Palestinians.


Death of a Landmark


Savings Bond Rates Fall
With interest rates falling, buyers of United States savings bonds in the next six months will be earning less.
The Treasury Department said last week that interest rates on short-term bonds issued from November through April would be 4.75 percent, down from 5.25 percent, and for long-term bonds, 5.16 percent instead of 6.31 percent.


Hospitals Consider Partnership
Two hospitals with roots in Newark are trying to decide if they want to spend the future together.
Newark Beth Israel Medical Center and St.
Barnabas Medical  Center have both named representatives to a committee to consider options for affiliation, said Lester A. Lieberman, chairman of the Beth Israel board.
Newark Beth Israel, founded in 1901 and the only hospital in New Jersey that  performs heart and lung transplants, has 607 beds and about 3,300 employees.
St.
Barnabas Medical Center, founded in Newark in 1865 and now based in Livingston,  has 620 beds and 3,000 workers.


'Enough of Blood and Tears'
An excerpt from Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's speech at the White House on Sept. 13, 1993.
This signing of the Israeli-Palestinian declaration of principle here today -- it's not so easy -- neither for myself as a soldier in Israel's war nor for the people of Israel, not to the Jewish people in the diaspora, who are watching us now with great hope mixed with apprehension.
It is certainly not easy for the families of the victims of the war's violence, terror, whose pain will never heal, for the many thousands who defended our lives in their own and have even sacrificed their lives for our own.
For them this ceremony has come too late.


Israeli Stocks Show 3% Drop
Israeli stocks closed sharply lower today following Saturday night's assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, but traders said they had expected an even stronger reaction.
The benchmark Mishtanim index of the top 100 shares fell 6.32 points, or 3.32 percent, to 183.87, on a moderate turnover of 96.2 million shekels, or nearly $32 million, against 62.5 million on Thursday, the last day of trading before the Israeli weekend.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Polyphonic Sounds From a Polyphonic Tradition I Muvrini Florence Gould Hall


Jews Shouldn't Meet With Farrakhan
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg (Op-Ed, Oct. 31) suggests that Louis Farrakhan's recent overtures to Jewish leaders signal a possible readiness of the Nation of Islam minister "to change his behavior." That is naive.
Mr.
Goldberg fails to understand that Mr.
Farrakhan's message of hatred against whites, Jews, gays and Christians is integral to the Nation of Islam's bigoted ideology.


CHRONICLE
It was to have been a joyous New York evening: Americans for Peace Now had planned a gala dinner and tribute to ABBA EBAN, the Israeli statesman, on Wednesday at the Essex House.
Instead, the organization will hold a memorial to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who was assassinated Saturday as he left a rally in Tel Aviv, and Mr.
Eban, 80, will deliver a eulogy.
Peace Now was established in 1978 by reserve officers in the Israeli defense forces to foster peace between Israelis and Arabs and was a sponsor of the rally.


Italian Ex-Leader Facing New Charges, Over a 1979 Slaying
Former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti, already on trial for collusion with the Mafia, has now been ordered to face a second trial on charges of complicity  in the 1979 slaying of an Italian journalist.
In a ruling issued late Saturday night, a judge said he had found sufficient  evidence to prosecute Mr.
Andreotti and four other men -- including three reputed Mafia members -- for the killing of Carmine (Mino) Pecorelli, editor of  a journal that repeatedly probed into the dirty secrets of Italian politics.
The trial is to open Feb. 2.


The Late-Night-Lead Turnabout
For most of the two years since he defected from NBC to CBS, David Letterman  has routinely beat Jay Leno and "The Tonight Show" in the nightly ratings.
But in the last three months, an enormous swing has taken place: now "Tonight" routinely beats "Late Show With David Letterman."
This reversal of fortune has stunned many in television, but in a sense it is only the latest twist of show business fate for two performers whose careers have been as entwined by circumstance and coincidence as lives in a Dickens novel.
As Mr.
Letterman begins a week of shows tonight on Mr.
Leno's home turf in Los Angeles, installments of the story just keep pouring forth.


Bridge
There has sometimes been argument about the rightful owner of the title Grand Old Man of bridge, but there has never been any argument about the Grand Old Lady.
That title long belonged to Ethel Keohane of Wellesley Hills, Mass., who died last month at the age of 94.
Mrs.
Keohane began playing competitive bridge in 1939, soon outstripping her  husband, Bill, from whom she had learned the game.
Ten years later, she was a life master, when that title was more meaningful.


Northwestern's One Slip Taints a Rose Bowl Run
A low pass from center got by the punter and rolled 36 yards backward to the  Northwestern 1-yard line.
Miami of Ohio took over there, and as the final gun sounded Chad Seitz kicked a 20-yard field goal to give the Redskins a 30-28 victory.
That botched punt on Sept. 16 may remain as the only stain on Northwestern's  astounding season, which continued Saturday with a 21-10 victory over Penn State, the defending Big Ten champion.
It is an indelible stain, however.


Safe Chromium Doses
To the Editor:
You report (Health page, Oct. 25) on laboratory findings obtained at 6,200 times the level that would result from using an oral supplement of chromium picolinate.
In contrast to the implications of this study, the safety of chromium is so well established that the Environmental Protection Agency's suggested limit for intake is 350 times the amount usually included in dietary supplements.


Small Items in Budget Bills Yield Big Benefits for Special Interests
While huge programs like Medicare and Medicaid have been the focus of the Congressional budget debate, many smaller provisions have been added to the budget bills for the benefit of interests like oil companies, ski resort operators, restaurants, football coaches and some coal companies.
These small items are being debated as urgently as the larger Republican plan to balance the budget as negotiators from the House and the Senate try to thrash out a compromise.
With time for debate strictly limited in the Senate and with few amendments allowed on the House floor, the budget bill has become a vehicle  for all sorts of proposals only tangentially related to the goal of saving money.


A Winning Bargain on U.N. Dues
The United Nations put on a swell party to mark its 50th birthday last month.
Unfortunately, the organizers let the assembled world leaders leave town without seriously addressing the two related challenges clouding the U.N.'s immediate future.
No consensus was forged on structural reforms and no serious proposals were made to induce the United States Congress to pay America's legally obligated back dues.
Even as the celebrations proceeded, the Clinton Administration needlessly undercut its own entreaties to Congress on the dues issue by asserting a constitutionally dubious right to send American troops into perilous international peace enforcement situations without Congressional consent.


New York Ballot Proposal Makes Debt Loopholes Even Bigger
To the Editor:
New Yorkers will go to the polls Nov. 7 and be asked to vote on constitutional changes to the way the state borrows money.
Contrary to "Yes for  New York Debt Reform" (editorial, Nov. 1), Ballot Proposal No. 3 offers no improvements to state debt practices.
Indeed, it makes matters worse.


Meggett Finds No House of Mirth
David Meggett had been looking forward to his trip to Giants Stadium for several weeks.
The last time he had set foot here was last February.
He was a New York Giant then.
Now he is a New England Patriot.


Draft Charter For Bosnia Bars Leader Of the Serbs
A draft Bosnian constitution handed to the parties at peace talks here would  bar the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, from any elective office and apparently open the way for his arrest by the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague.
The draft, made available to reporters despite a plea from American officials to respect the secrecy of the negotiations, says any eligible voter may seek a seat in a proposed nine-member Bosnian presidency or 36-member parliament "except a person under indictment, or convicted by, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia."


Transactions
WEEKEND


Bomber Is Called Killer Who Is Not on a Political Mission
Seven weeks after a manuscript by the serial bomber known as the Unabomber was published, investigators say they have been deluged with thousands of leads  from the public, but are no closer to solving the baffling 17-year-long string of bombings.
But the authorities are revising important assumptions about the background and motives of the criminal whose 16 bombs have killed 3 people and injured 22 others.
Interviews with investigators and academics who are closely following the case suggest that the 35,000-word manuscript is the work of a man whose profile more closely fits that of a serial murderer rather than a domestic terrorist with a political agenda.


Mayoral Race in Yonkers Rekindles an Old Feud
When Terence M. Zaleski was elected Mayor in 1991, he took on broad governing powers that his predecessors had not possessed since World War II.
But for all the authority a revision in the Yonkers charter gave him, critics in both major political parties say city government has often seemed mired in partisan conflict during his four years in office.
The debate over where the fault lies has shaped the mayoral race here in the state's fourth-largest city.


Help Wanted: Wizards On the World Wide Web
The surging popularity of the Internet's World Wide Web -- with an estimated  100,000 sites active now, and hundreds more registered each day -- has created a seemingly voracious demand for people who can create and manage Web operations.
"Webmasters at big companies generally enjoy responsibility, authority, and respectable remuneration," according to a survey in the current issue of the trade publication Web Week.


State Leaders May Make History
The State Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, will find out this week if he gets to keep his job, but he doesn't have much cause to worry.
He isn't facing the voters tomorrow.
Only Assembly candidates are on the ballot. (Reminder: Polls are open from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.)


Ex-Genentech Chief Gets Post in Britain
G.
Kirk Raab, the ousted former president and chief executive of Genentech Inc., has been appointed chairman of Oxford Glycosystems P.L.C., a British biotechnology company.
Mr.
Raab, credited with building Genentech into the world's second-largest biotechnology company, was removed from the company in July after the board discovered he had solicited a $2 million personal loan from Roche Holdings A.G.  of Switzerland.


Newt Gingrich, Copycat
Newt Gingrich likes to call himself a revolutionary.
But in disappointing testimony last week before the House Committee on Reform and Oversight, the Speaker revealed himself to be a reactionary on the central ethics issue of campaign finance reform.
He is dedicated to preserving the corrupt fund-raising  perfected by the Democrats and the stalling tactics used by former Speaker Thomas Foley to kill reform.
Mr.
Gingrich's testimony was aimed at stopping the  bipartisan momentum building in both his chamber and the Senate for prompt action on promising bills.
Five months after he shook hands with President Clinton in New Hampshire on creating a commission on campaign reform, Mr.
Gingrich stated that, yes, he does want a commission.
But it is too late in the political calendar for a commission to do any good.
It makes much more sense to focus on improving the existing legislation.


Mourning Rabin On Line
Condolences and poems about Israel were sent across the Internet on Sunday, hours after the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
More than 3,000 other people sent their condolences via modem to a new Internet location set up four hours after Rabin's death.


The blending of agent and editor is another sign of the diminishing role of the  house.
WHEN John Grisham's literary agent, Jay Garon, died in August, speculation about who Mr.
Garon's successor would be settled on David Gernert, Mr.
Grisham's(R) editor and Doubleday's editor in chief.
So, few were surprised when Mr.
Gernert announced last week that he was leaving Doubleday to set up a new kind of agency -- both representing authors and being midwife to other projects, from film scripts to CD-ROM's -- with Mr.
Grisham as his first client.


Advertisers want to aim on-line pitches at women, and not just for 'virtual Tupperware parties.'
IN the war between the sexes, some feminists assert that a woman needs a man  as much as a fish needs a bicycle.
In the war between advertisers and consumers, one increasingly important issue is how much -- if at all -- a woman needs a modem.
A conference scheduled for this week in Washington will focus on the challenges that confront advertisers interested in aiming on-line sales pitches  at women.
The conference, "How to Market to Women on Line," will feature panels  with and presentations by advertisers, publishers, researchers, operators of World Wide Web sites and executives of the principal on-line services.


Another City Faces Cuts At Its Papers
A recent morning: Robert J. Hall, publisher of Knight-Ridder Inc.'s two Philadelphia daily newspapers, is discussing his latest cost-cutting plan with a visiting reporter.
His papers' reporters will no longer be able to call directory assistance, he says: "They have this incredible thing called a phone directory."
Two hours later: Maxwell E. P. King, editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, the respected broadsheet, sputters when a visitor describes the publisher's plan.
"We're not cutting directory assistance for reporters," he says.
Reporters on deadline often need to get telephone numbers quickly.


Cordiant Plans A Refinancing
Cordiant P.L.C., which owns agencies including Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising  Worldwide and Bates Worldwide, is planning to raise about $200 million to reduce debt in a refinancing that sells new shares to investors.
Separately, Saatchi &amp;  Saatchi announced a promotion of a top executive.
Under terms of a rights offering announced on Friday, which had been expected, existing shareholders are being offered the right to buy one new Cordiant share at the reduced price of 95 cents for each share they now own.
Proceeds will be used to reduce the company's debt, estimated at $206 million to $218 million, and to resume paying a dividend next year, the first since April 1990.


American Officials Warmly Remember Rabin as a Friend They Came to Trust Deeply
For American Presidents and Secretaries of State, Yitzhak Rabin was the Israeli leader they could most trust, a man whose web of personal friendships was forged more than a quarter century ago when he was Israel's Ambassador in Washington and whose affinity to the United States had its roots in his father's sojourn as a tailor in the Midwest.
Despite his taciturn nature and his discomfort with self-revelation, Mr.
Rabin was nevertheless a leader American officials counted on and the American Jewish community felt comfortable with.


Corrections
A chart in some New Jersey copies on Thursday analyzing commercials for the two candidates for County Executive in Hudson County, N.J., reversed the names of the production companies.
The ad for Bill Macchi, the Republican candidate, was produced by Murray &amp; Weitzner of Princeton; the one for Robert Janiszewski,  the Democrat, was by Vision Media of North Bergen, N.J.


U.S. Reporter Held in Bosnia Said to Be Well
An American journalist held captive by the Bosnian Serbs is in good physical  condition but has been mentally exhausted from several days of questioning, officials working for his release said today.
The news came after the journalist, David Rohde, 28, a correspondent for The  Christian Science Monitor, was allowed to telephone his parents on Saturday night from a room near his cell in the Bosnian Serb town of Bijeljina, in the far northeast near the Serbian border.
A representative from the International Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to visit Mr.
Rohde during the call, said  an editor with his paper.


Pedestrian Struck, Kidnapped
A man deliberately drove his car into a pedestrian yesterday, and kidnapped her briefly before trying to evade the police through three towns in Bergen County, the authorities said.
The driver struck the woman, 42, along Church Hill Road, and dragged her into the car.
She either was pushed or jumped out nearby, and was treated for a broken leg and head injuries at Hackensack Hospital, the police said.


Giants' Basic Instincts Falter in Time of Need
After nine games, one gets the feeling Dan Reeves would like nothing more than to be back at training camp.
For starters, the Giants would be 0-0 instead of the 3-6 predicament they find themselves in after their heartbreaking 30-28 loss at Seattle.


New Method Of Small Cuts Adapted for Heart Bypass
WHEN Dr.
Valavanur A. Subramanian ran a scalpel along Edward Dowling's left fourth rib to make a three-inch incision from near the nipple to the breast bone one day last month, the operating room at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan was eerily silent.
The operation on Mr.
Dowling, a 66-year-old piano tuner, involved a new procedure known as minimally invasive direct coronary bypass surgery.
Instead of stopping the heart and having a heart-lung machine take over its duties, Dr.
Subramanian's team performed a delicate operation on the organ as it continued to beat.


24 Midshipmen Face Discipline for Drugs
The United States Naval Academy said two dozen midshipmen had been implicated in the sale or use of drugs, a setback for an institution that has been struggling to repair its reputation after scandals over sexual harassment and cheating on examinations.
Five midshipmen suspected of peddling drugs to their classmates in Annapolis, Md., face possible courts-martial, while as many as 19 others could be dismissed for using drugs that include LSD and marijuana.


United Biscuits Sells Keebler for $500 Million
The struggling Keebler Company's cookie and cracker operations, the nation's  second largest after Nabisco's, were sold today for $500 million by United Biscuits P.L.C., the British food company that acquired Keebler 21 years ago in  a costly and ultimately futile effort to break into the tough American snack market.
The new owner of Keebler's baking business, which has more than $1 billion a  year in sales, will be Inflo Holdings, a joint venture set up by Flowers Industries, a fast-growing baking concern based in Thomasville, Ga., and Invus Group Ltd., the New York City-based arm of Artal Luxembourg S.A., a private investment firm.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stock prices were slightly lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 15.75 points, at 18,021.22.
On Monday, the Nikkei edged up 8.17 points.


King Says He Didn't Fake Expenses
During a second day of tense cross-examination, the boxing promoter Don King  repeatedly blamed his accountant for falsification of $350,000 in expenses in order to cheat an insurance company after a fight was canceled in 1991.
With Mike Tyson snoozing among the spectators at Federal District Court in Manhattan, King clashed again and again with the prosecutor, Paul Gardephe, over the minute details of his business, Don King Productions.


Trying to Design Brand New Drugs By Supercomputer
THE goggle-wearing scientists sat staring at a movie screen as 3-D images danced before their eyes.
One munched on popcorn, another on a candy bar.
Unmindful of movie theater etiquette, they chattered excitedly among themselves.
"What if we put a carbon atom here?" one suggested.
"How about an oxygen there?" said another.
This was not Friday night at the movies.
Nor were the scientists watching videos of those wildly popular 3-D movies of the 1950's.
Rather, the subject of  their rapt attention was a molecule they had created that might someday become a potent weapon against a currently incurable disease.


Suffolk Lawmakers Stall on Chief's Budget
Averting an embarrassing battle the day before elections, the Republican-controlled Suffolk County Legislature today postponed final action on County Executive Robert J. Gaffney's budget, the basis of his campaign promise to cut both property and sales taxes next year.
Mr.
Gaffney, a Republican who is seeking a second four-year term, based his tax-cut promises on revenue projections that have been questioned not only by his Democratic opponent, Tony Bullock, the Town Supervisor of East Hampton, but  also by the County Legislature's Office of Budget Review and by prominent Republican legislators.


Autodesk's Shares Fall on Profit Outlook
Shares of Autodesk Inc. fell 8.5 percent today after the software company warned Wall Street that its fiscal- third-quarter earnings and revenues would come in significantly below expectations.
The disappointment indicates that Autodesk is having continuing problems gaining acceptance of the newest version of its computer-aided Autocad design program, the Release 13, which was introduced in November 1994.


Family Business (Extended);In Italy, New Generation of Leaders Looks Abroad
Paolo Barilla was born an heir to Europe's biggest pasta empire.
But from his childhood Soap Box Derby days, his passion was always racing cars, not ravioli.
So, though his grandfather founded Barilla S.p.A. in 1877 and Paolo's brothers were lured into the $2 billion company by their father, Paolo built a career driving at tracks like Le Mans in France and Monza in Italy, and for the  Toyota Motor Corporation in Japan.


MARQUETTE TO BUY MAKER OF MEDICAL DEVICES
Marquette Electronics Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire the E for M Corporation of Torrance, Calif., for $12 a share, or $89 million.
Two big investors in E for M, who hold a combined 30 percent of the company, have already agreed to tender their shares, said Marquette, which is based in Milwaukee.
E for M's stock rose $2.375, or 26 percent, to $11.625 a share, in Nasdaq trading.
Marquette's stock rose $1, to $18.75, in Nasdaq trading.
Marquette said the combined company would have annual sales of more than $500 million.
Both companies make cardiology monitoring and information-systems products.


British Airways Says Profit Rose by 13.2%
British Airways P.L.C. said yesterday that profit rose 13.2 percent in its second fiscal quarter, ended Sept. 30.
The company said it earned L222 million ($351 million) compared with net income of L196 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenues rose to L2.13 billion ($3.36 billion) from L2.02 billion.
"Demand for passenger and cargo services continues to be strong, but yields  remain under pressure," the chairman, Sir Colin Marshall, said.
The yield represents profit from flying one passenger one kilometer.
Yield fell four-tenths of a percent in the quarter.
(AP)


Stocks Down in Quiet Trading, With Dow Off 11.56
The stock market fell yesterday in quiet trading, ending a three-session advance to record highs.
Technology stocks, which had surged recently, were in the forefront of the retreat, after Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company removed Microsoft from its list of recommended stocks.


TWO COMPUTER COMPANIES TO MERGE IN STOCK DEAL
Two companies that specialize in "real time" computing -- the Concurrent Computer Corporation and the Harris Computer Systems Corporation -- said yesterday that they would merge in a stock deal.
Harris Computer's shareholders  would receive 9.56 shares of Concurrent for each share they own.
There are about 2 million shares of Harris Computer outstanding.
Shares of Concurrent, based in  Oceanport, N.J., fell 3.125 cents, to $1.50, and shares of Harris Computer climbed 37.5 cents, to $13.125.
After the merger Concurrent's shareowners will hold 61 percent of the combined company.
The two companies, which are expected to have combined revenues of $170 million, produce computers for specialized needs -- like military or commercial simulations -- that require quick response  and reliability.


Pete's Brewing Is Priced
An initial offering of three million common shares of the Pete's Brewing Company was priced yesterday at $18 each through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The company had expected the shares to be offered at $15 each.
The company, based in Palo Alto, Calif., is the brewer of Pete's Wicked beers and ales.
Proceeds from the offering will be used for capital expenditures, debt repayment, working capital and other general purposes.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Meave Epps Leakey;The New Leader of a Fossil-Hunting Dynasty
TWO families have met in Africa in this century, one seeking the origins of the other, in the course of which both have emerged from obscurity.
They are the Leakey family, the now celebrated dynasty of fossil hunters, and the early hominids, the ancestors and close relatives of modern humans about whom almost nothing was known before the Leakeys began finding their bones, stone tools and  footprints.
The Leakey and hominid family trees have become so entwined that it seemed appropriate, perhaps even inevitable, that the most recent announcement of a major fossil find should herald not only the discovery of a new hominid species, but also the accession of a new Leakey to leadership of the family's continuing  search for human origins.


Goodbye to a Grandfather: We Are So Cold and So Sad
The granddaughter of Yitzhak Rabin, Noa Ben-Artzi Philosof, 17, spoke at his  funeral.
Her remarks were translated and transcribed by The New York Times.


Jerusalem Is Milestone for Arab Leaders
It took a funeral to lure the leaders of Egypt and Jordan back to Jerusalem.
Until this morning, no Arab leader but President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt had  publicly set foot in the city -- so treasured by Islam -- since its eastern quarter was conquered by Israel in 1967.
But as others gathered here to mourn the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, neither President Hosni Mubarak nor King Hussein saw reason any longer to stay away.


CHRONICLE
JACK RUDIN is giving a talk this afternoon, not as a builder, but as a satisfied patient.
Mr.
Rudin, the real estate developer and philanthropist, will address 60 medical students at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons.
"I was invited by Herbert Pardes, dean of the school, to talk about the hip replacement I had in July, and he asked if I could bring my surgeons, too," Mr.
Rudin said yesterday.


French Survey Sex In 20th-Century Art
Major French art exhibitions frequently travel to the United States, but the  new show at the Georges Pompidou Center, "Feminine/Masculine: The Sex of Art," is unlikely to be among them.
Put bluntly, it is about sex, specifically sex in  20th-century art.
And while its purpose is not to shock, it offers enough evidence of artistic fascination with sex for Robert Mapplethorpe's photographs to pass almost unnoticed.
It is a big show because it is a big subject, with some 500 works of art -- paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs and videos -- that variously portray sexual organs and sexual relations reverentially, symbolically, mechanically, poetically, erotically, triumphantly, violently and explicitly.
As it happens, the French word "sexe" means both gender and sex (as well as the organs themselves), but there is no question that "sex in art" is what this show is really about.


Gingrich Aiding Historian
Speaker Newt Gingrich says he is looking for a job on Capitol Hill for Prof.
Christina Jeffrey, whom he appointed as House historian early this year but quickly dismissed after accusations that she was anti-Semitic.
In September, Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, said that the allegations against Professor Jeffrey were "unfounded and unfair."


Art Tatum's Work Next to Chopin's, and Why Not?
From Gospel to Gershwin," at the Brooklyn Philharmonic last weekend, asked two questions. What, if anything, keeps black and European music apart? What happens when the two pursue each other?
It was another of the orchestra's theme parties: a weekend of concerts and talk given to specific subjects and aimed in general at reviving this near-moribund organization.
At an orchestra concert on Friday, repeated Saturday, the Brooklyn players and their conductor, Gunther Schuller, observed some serious flirtations between the two cultures.
Sunday afternoon was a kind of graduation ceremony: Art Tatum and Duke Ellington strenuously divested of lingering low-culture associations and seated next to Brahms and Mozart.


NPC INTERNATIONAL EXECUTIVES BID FOR COMPANY
A group of executives at NPC International Inc., offered yesterday to buy the restaurant company for $9 a share, or $221.4 million.
NPC's stock soared $2, to  $8.25, in Nasdaq trading.
The board of NPC, the largest Pizza Hut franchisee, said it was considering the offer from the management team led by O. Gene Bicknell, the company's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Bicknell already owns  62 percent of the 24.6 million shares outstanding.
Also in the group are James K. Schwartz, president and chief operating officer, and Troy D. Cook, vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
NPC, based in Pittsburg, Kan., operates 372 Pizza Hut restaurants in 11 states.
It also operates Skipper's and  Tony Roma's restaurants.


The Death of Rabin: An On-Line Report
A special report on the Rabin assassination, including articles and photos from the archives of The New York Times, is available to computer users on


Competition and Cutbacks Hurt Foreign Doctors in U.S.
At Woodhull Hospital in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, Dr.
Yusuf Afacan takes care of  poor patients sick with AIDS, drawing their blood, juggling their medications, finding them homes.
After graduating from medical school in his native Turkey, Dr.
Afacan did a residency in New Jersey and a fellowship in infectious diseases at the University of Rochester.
He landed his job in Brooklyn through a program that allows foreign-born and foreign-trained doctors to remain in the United States if they practice in underserved areas.
Four of the five senior doctors at his clinic are also foreign graduates -- the others from Belgium, Haiti and Pakistan.


M.P.'s, Always for Sale, Now Publicly Traded
Under the governing Conservatives, unabashed promoters of free enterprise that they are, members of Parliament have increasingly -- and legally -- taken to selling their access, expertise and influence to anyone needing lobbying.
But faced with growing public criticism that Conservative members view their  jobs mostly as an opportunity to cash in, the House of Commons adopted an ethics package tonight that for the first time requires legislators to disclose their earnings from outside sources.


Liz Claiborne Names Two New Agencies
Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had named two agencies, Gotham Inc. and Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, to handle separate portions of its account.
Gotham, based in New York, was awarded the creative portion of the Liz Claiborne and Elisabeth apparel and accessories account.
Gotham, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, was given that assignment after a two-month review that had been narrowed to Gotham and three other finalists, all based in  New York: Angotti, Thomas, Hedge; Margeotes/Fertitta &amp; Partners, and Wells Rich  Greene BDDP, part of BDDP Worldwide.


Colangelo Talks to Showalter About a Job in Arizona
The Arizona Diamondbacks don't play a game until 1998, but they're ready to hire a manager today -- if his name is Buck Showalter.
"I'm very impressed with Buck," Jerry Colangelo, principal owner of the expansion baseball team, said yesterday.
"I'd feel very comfortable getting our  franchise off the ground with Buck."


Washington Talk;Avalanche of Acrimony Impedes Budget Debate
Speaker Newt Gingrich and Vice President Al Gore got into a shouting match last week at the White House, accusing each other of making dastardly attacks that poisoned the political atmosphere.
In doing so, they provided the most dramatic evidence yet that when it comes  to the budget, the level of debate is getting in the way of serious discussion of the issues.
The oral brawl on Wednesday, which left some bystanders wondering whether punches would be thrown, began when President Clinton changed the meeting's subject from Bosnia to the national debt and asked where everyone stood.


Intruder Is Charged With Attempted Murder of Canada's Premier
A knife-wielding intruder was charged today with trying to murder Prime Minister Jean Chretien at his official Ottawa residence early Sunday, raising questions about the Canadian leader's security arrangements.
Andre Dallaire, 34, a convenience store clerk from the Montreal suburb of Longueuil, could face life in prison, which means 25 years before consideration  of parole.


Election Day Choices
Here is a summary of our recommendations for noteworthy local races and ballot proposals in today's elections.
Poll hours in New York State are from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. and in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Staten Island DISTRICT ATTORNEY William Murphy


Patterns
The Bryant Park Question


Voters Can Take Charge Today
One by one, more than 3.9 million people have a chance to make headlines today by defying official predictions about how many registered voters will bother to go to the polls.
Secretary of State Lonna R. Hooks predicted yesterday that 48 percent would make it.
Party leaders were less optimistic, particularly  with rain in the forecast.
Those who vote will be deciding who fills 80 Assembly seats, what happens with four statewide ballot questions and who wins various local races.
Polls will be open from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Recognizing a parade as a 'marketing tool,' the Super Bowl's organizers jump on  the bandwagon.
THERE are Thanksgiving parades sponsored by department stores and the parade  that Barbra Streisand implored no one to rain on.
There is the Easter Parade on  Fifth Avenue, which is more of a promenade, and the big parade led by those 76 trombones in "The Music Man." Now the organizers of the Super Bowl, the annual American midwinter festival of sports and commerce, are clambering aboard the bandwagon with a parade of their own, which they hope to squeeze onto the crowded calendar of Super Bowl weekend events.
And in keeping with a philosophy that has put everything from the players' shoes to the halftime show up for sale to the highest bidder, the Super Bowl parade will offer sponsorship opportunities, too.


Today's Elections: What's at Stake
Voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut go to the polls today for a variety of races and referendums.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York, from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. in Connecticut and from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey.
Following are summaries of some crucial races.
Staten Island District Attorney


Nets Aren't Desperate, Yet, With the Emphasis on Yet
To call Tuesday night's home opener against the Portland Trail Blazers a "must win" for the Nets is silly considering there are 80 more games left on their schedule.
But the Nets understand that another poor showing like the one they endured in Toronto Friday night could do ample damage to their psyche as well as their fan support.
"We have to get the monkey off our back," Coach Butch Beard said.
"To do that, we have to come out and be physical. If we play hard, we can expect the crowd to be behind us. If we don't, I expect them to be the way they normally are."


Out of N.Y.P.D., Into 'N.Y.P.D. Blue'
If life were a mediocre movie script, Bill Clark would be miserable.
Imagine this scenario: a former New York City police detective, brought out to Hollywood to put the seal of authenticity on a television cop show, finds himself butting heads with shallow filmland "creative" types.
He tries in vain to shield himself from oceans of sunshine and insincere small talk.
He pines for the real excitement, the real sense of purpose, the real pursuit of justice he left behind on the streets.


World News Briefs;Nephew of Nobel Winner Seized in Guatemala
Rigoberta Menchu, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1992, pleaded with kidnappers today to release her 22-month-old nephew, who was snatched from his mother's arms by unidentified gunmen over the weekend.
Ms.
Menchu said the kidnappers had made no contact with her family to demand  a ransom for the return of Juan Carlos Velasquez Menchu, who was kidnapped outside her home in central Guatemala City on Saturday as her sister Cristina arrived to attend a family gathering.


Reader's Digest and PBS Agree To Television Programming Deal
Reader's Digest, the magazine of the middlebrow, and the Public Broadcasting  Service, often considered the television programmer to the elite, announced yesterday that they were joining forces to produce, acquire and distribute new television programs throughout the world.
With a $75 million investment from the Reader's Digest Association Inc. over  five years, programs will be developed based on material from the company's magazines and books, as well as from the ideas of independent producers or public television stations.
The programs will in turn be adapted to books, videotapes, audio books, CD-ROM's and other new media products, the two companies said, and will be distributed through Reader's Digest's worldwide publishing and direct-mail marketing network.


World Leaders At the Funeral
The international leaders past and present who traveled to Jerusalem for the  funeral of Yitzhak Rabin yesterday included the following:
Prime Minister Paul Keating of Australia.


Gasoline Price Drops
The average pump price of gasoline dropped almost 1.5 cents a gallon in the last two weeks as retailers passed on wholesale price drops.
The average price,  including all grades and taxes, was $1.159 cents a gallon on Friday, according to the Lundberg Survey of 10,000 stations nationwide.
That was down 1.42 cents from the survey on Oct. 20, continuing a decline that started in summer.
"This is way, way, way down," the survey publisher, Trilby Lundberg, said on Sunday.
"It's nearly 13 cents lower than it was in early June, when it peaked."


Let the Voting Begin


The Forecast Is for a Bitter Winter at a Neighborhood Women's Shelter
IT is always colder in the East End than in the rest of the city.
The wind whips off the Hudson River in a frenzy, and the vacant lots do nothing to buffer its sting.
Women who sell their bodies for crack usually dull the chill with nicotine until the customers and cigarettes run out.
Then they teeter on absurdly high heels into Our Lady of Comfort.
The three-story row house on Ann Street is old, and as battered as some of the women who have slept on its lumpy beds.
But then, Our Lady of Comfort never  pretended to offer anything but kindness and shelter: warm radiators in the middle of the night, brewed coffee in the morning, hot lunch.
And in its neighborhood -- if you can call an emptied grid of boarded-up houses and bricked-over factories a neighborhood -- Our Lady of Comfort has been a needed and appreciated sanctuary ever since Terry Orzechowski opened it 15 years ago.


Democrats See Ploy on S.I. In Molinari Death Threat
On the last day of this off-year election campaign, Democratic officials in Staten Island, where the Republican Borough President, Guy V. Molinari, is trying to unseat incumbent District Attorney, William L. Murphy, said they suspected that Mr.
Molinari was trying to turn the race in his favor by making a public issue out of a death threat he said had been made against him.
"A death threat is a terrible thing and no one would want to see anything happen to the Borough President," said Jerome X. O'Donovan, a Democratic City Council member from Staten Island.
"But a death threat is not the sort of thing  most people want to make public. And the fact that Molinari called reporters makes it seem like he wants to get some political mileage out of it, if it is in fact real."


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, an article yesterday about the sale of fake Salvador Dali artworks by the Federal Government misstated the given name of Miro, whose works in the same sale are said to be genuine.
It is Joan, not Ernst.


Sports of The Times;Modell Joins Newest Game In Football
A couple of years ago, when the National Football League owners were mulling  over which cities were most ripe for expansion, Baltimore tossed its hat into the ring.
Baltimore had lost the Colts to Indianapolis in 1984, and it was a hungry city that wanted pro football back desperately.
It made quite a pitch.
It reshuffled its structure more than once, finally including Al Lerner, the Maryland banking guru and a part owner of the Cleveland Browns, as a lead figure.
The Baltimore group, competing against Jacksonville, Carolina and Memphis, believed it had a solid shot for a brand new team.


Cowboy Owner Fires Back With Suit Against N.F.L.
Using the national spotlight of his team's "Monday Night Football" matchup against the Eagles here, the Cowboys' owner, Jerry Jones, fired back at the National Football League today.
He announced that he had filed a $750 million lawsuit in Federal District Court in New York against the league today, charging that NFL Properties is an illegal cartel and seeking to have it dissolved as the exclusive licensing and marketing agent for all 30 teams.
The lawsuit seeks $200 million in actual damages, which would be trebled because it is an antitrust lawsuit, and $150 million in punitive damages on grounds that the league has engaged in an "unlawful campaign of harassment and intimidation" against the Cowboys.


On Opera Surtitles, Proceed With Caution
To the Editor:
Re "Surtitles Come to the Met" (editorial, Oct. 28): Over the past few years, I have seen the introduction of surtitles to the New York City Opera, Brooklyn Academy of Music, San Francisco Opera, Covent Garden, Paris Opera, Koln Oper and various smaller houses.
As a lifelong opera fanatic, I rarely need to refer to them but find them unobtrusive.


Kmart Seeking Lender Concessions
The Kmart Corporation, struggling to regain profitability, is asking lenders  for concessions so it can reduce the risk of default on $681 million of debt if  the company's credit rating slips below investment grade.
The debt, consisting of real estate loans for 60 stores, enables holders, primarily insurance companies and major bank lenders, to demand repayment in a so-called put option if Kmart becomes a junk-bond-rated company.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International Paper to Buy Federal for $2.7 Billion International Paper agreed to buy Federal Paper Board, a diversified forest products company, for $2.7 billion in cash and stock.


MOORE IS CLOSER TO GOAL OF WALLACE TAKEOVER
The Moore Corporation said yesterday that holders of 74 percent of the shares of Wallace Computer Services Inc. had agreed to allow those shares to be tendered in Moore's $1.4 billion hostile bid last Friday.
Moore, based in Toronto, also extended its $60-a-share offer for Wallace until Dec. 11 to provide enough time to complete the acquisition.
If Wallace continues to resist  a merger, Moore will need the votes of 80 percent of Wallace's shares to remove Wallace's poison pill takeover defense.
Moore has until the Dec. 8 annual meeting of Wallace, which is based in Chicago, to secure those votes.


Paul Eddington, 68, Star of 'Yes, Prime Minister'
Paul Eddington, an actor who gained attention on both sides of the Atlantic as the star of the satirical British television sitcoms "Yes, Minister" and "Yes, Prime Minister," died on Saturday at his home in London.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, The Associated Press reported.


A U.S. Role In Bosnia May Hinder Recruiters
Sgt.
Charlie Pomykaj, burly in his khaki shirt and blue trousers with a red stripe down the legs, looks every ounce the Marine Corps recruiter as he works a crowd of high school students on lunch break outside class here, offering college tuition, technical skills and exotic foreign adventures to anyone who enlists.


Israelis Hold Assassin's Brother As Suspected Accomplice in Plot
The police said today that they were holding the brother of the confessed killer of Yitzhak Rabin as a suspected accomplice in the assassination.
At one hearing in the Tel Aviv Magistrate Court, Yigal Amir, a 25-year-old university student, admitted the killing and continued to insist that he had acted alone.


POLITICAL GAINS BY PRISON GUARDS
In the past decade, as California has carried out the largest prison-building boom in the nation's history, a major new political force has quietly emerged: the state prison guards' union.
Led by Don Novey, a former maximum security prison guard, the California Correctional Peace Officers' Association has transformed itself into the most politically influential union in the state, using its muscle and generous
campaign contributions to push not only for better benefits for its members but  also for ever more prisons and tougher sentencing laws.


Cool? Sad? Scary? The Shades of Meaning in Black
MEN IN BLACK By John Harvey Illustrated. 280 pages.
The University of Chicago Press. $29.95.


CHRONICLE
Even theater people occasionally become star-struck.
When word spread that CAL RIPKEN JR. would attend the matinee performance of "Grease" on Sunday, cast  members began scrambling to find objects he could autograph for them.
"We were running around trying to find things he could sign," JENNIFER CODY,  an actress in the show, said yesterday.
"Some of us were even buying T-shirts from the concession stand." Mr.
Ripken is the Baltimore Orioles shortstop who in September surpassed Lou Gehrig's record for playing in consecutive games.
Because her character, Cha Cha DiGregorio, does not appear until the second act, "I often get stuck with remedying things," Ms.
Cody said.
"They wanted me to run to a store and buy stuff but there was no time," she continued, "so I called Herman's on 42d Street and asked to speak to the person who deals with baseball."


Sarajevo's First Snow of the Season


CLARK USA AGREEMENTS TO REDUCE PARENT'S STAKE
Clark USA Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay the Occidental Petroleum Corporation and the Gulf Resources Corporation $246.9 million in cash  and Clark stock in exchange for proceeds from the sale of 21 million barrels of  oil.
The deals will give Occidental a 19 percent stake in Clark, the nation's No. 4 independent oil refiner and marketer, and give Gulf Resources, a privately held energy company, 4 percent of Clark.
The stake of Clark's parent company, the Horsham Corporation, will be reduced to 46 percent from 60 percent.
Horsham, based in Toronto, also has interests in gold mining and real estate.


International Paper Plans to Buy Federal Paper Board
The International Paper Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the  Federal Paper Board Company, a diversified forest products company, for about $2.7 billion in cash and stock.
The deal, worth $55 a share, represents a 20.9 percent premium over Federal Paper Board's closing stock price on Friday.


Old Hand at Finding the Oldest Hominids
SEARCHER and seeker, Kamoya Kimeu sometimes believes that the bones he finds  speak to him.
He paces slowly, head bent, stopping every few feet, and then leans down to pick up what initially looks like a gray piece of stone.


Today's Vote
Voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut go to the polls today.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York, from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. in  Connecticut and from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey.


FORT WAYNE NATIONAL TO BUY VALLEY FINANCIAL
The Fort Wayne National Corporation reached an agreement to acquire Valley Financial Services Inc. in a transaction valued about $110 million.
Fort Wayne National said it would pay Valley Financial shareholders $53 million cash, $37 million in Fort Wayne National convertible preferred shares and $20 million in Fort Wayne National common shares.
Valley Financial, based in South Bend, Ind.,  is the parent of the Valley American Bank and Trust Company and had total assets of $766.7 million on Sept. 30.
Fort Wayne National is a bank holding company that had total assets of $2.23 billion on Sept. 30.


Hoechst Says Earnings More Than Doubled
Hoechst A.G., the German chemical company, reported yesterday that its nine-month earnings before taxes had more than doubled.
Nine-month pretax profit was 3.4 billion marks, or about $2.4 billion.
The result exceeds the full-year 1994 pretax profit of 2.21 billion marks.
And the nine-month figure means the company will roughly match the record pretax profit of 1989, when it posted pretax earnings of 4.1 billion marks.


Kinsley Hired for New Microsoft Magazine
The Microsoft Corporation has recruited Michael Kinsley, former editor of The New Republic and co-host of CNN's "Crossfire," to start a new on-line magazine of commentary on news, politics and culture.
The 44-year-old Mr.
Kinsley said many of the details of the planned electronic magazine had yet to be worked out, including when it would be started.
The magazine will be distributed over the Internet's World Wide Web and on the Microsoft Network, the software maker's on-line service begun late in August.


Sun Microsystems to Introduce Line of Upgraded Work Stations
Sun Microsystems Inc. said today that it would introduce a line of work stations on Tuesday that can run as much as four times faster than existing Sun  models.
The improved performance comes from Sun's long-awaited new microprocessor, Ultrasparc.


METRO DIGEST


Morgenthau Asks Advice On Seeking Death Penalty
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said yesterday that his senior prosecutors would help him decide whether to seek the death penalty in the slayings of three members of a Harlem family who were killed during an apparent robbery.
Mr.
Morgenthau -- an opponent of the death penalty legislation -- made the comments after a grand jury handed up the first capital murder indictment under the state's new death penalty law.
The indictment placed the District Attorney in the peculiar position of being the first prosecutor in the state to  decide on a capital murder case, even though he had expressed serious misgivings about the law before it was passed.


Now Comes the Voting
The fierce race for Staten Island district attorney ended yesterday with supporters of the incumbent, William L. Murphy, accusing Borough President Guy V. Molinari, the challenger, of using a death threat to bolster his cause.
The race was one of many hard-fought local contests throughout the region; in New Jersey, for instance, the entire General Assembly is up for election today.
Articles, page B5.


Billion-Dollar Bonus Baby: Networks Ante Up
Major League Baseball shed its characteristic business gloom yesterday by announcing a five-year package of national television deals with Fox, NBC, ESPN  and Liberty Sports that will be worth about $1.68 billion through 2000.
"The number changed constantly, almost daily," said Barry Frank, baseball's chief negotiator.


Ancient Bird Appears in Full Feather


Chargers Could Lose Means for 2 to 4 Weeks
If the sight of Natrone Means hobbling wasn't bad enough for the San Diego Chargers, they found out yesterday that their star running back could be out two to four weeks with a strained groin.
Means was hurt on the fifth play from scrimmage in Sunday night's 24-14 loss  to the Miami Dolphins when he tried to elude linebacker Bryan Cox after making a catch.


Showcase Tents, Not Circus Tents
Perhaps the most astute observation on the current state of fashion was made  recently by Marc Jacobs, who said his spring 1996 collection was inspired by the boredom of everyone in fashion -- "photographers and designers."
Boredom was a more frequent topic of conversation at shows this season in Milan, Paris, London and New York than the clothes, so much so that even the audience's boredom was getting boring.


Navy Refuses to Promote Officer in Sex-Harassment Case
Despite the acquittal last month of the Navy's former top equal-opportunity officer on charges of sexually harassing a woman who worked for him, Navy officials said today that the officer's promotion to admiral would be canceled.
The verdict last month by an eight-officer Navy tribunal cleared the officer, Capt.
Everett L. Greene, of any criminal wrongdoing.
When Captain Greene won that ruling, it seemed that choosing the risk of defending his reputation rather than quietly accepting administrative punishment had paid off.


Teacher Contract Faces Uphill Ratification Battle
Now that the leaders of the teachers' union have reached a tentative agreement with New York City on a new contract, they must begin their campaign to win the support of rank-and-file members like Paul Arcidiacono.
Mr.
Arcidiacono, a guidance counselor at Lincoln Academy on West 60th Street  in Manhattan, is disappointed that the five-year agreement provides for no raises until October 1997.
As an employee for 29 years, he is also dismayed that the pact gives individual schools the option to overlook an applicant's seniority when filling a teaching vacancy.
He is troubled that the contract authorizes the Board of Education to defer 5 percent of every new teacher's
annual salary for four years, an incentive for new teachers to remain in the system.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


Joint Tax Committee Did No Disguising
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 29 editorial attacking the professionalism of the Joint Committee on Taxation is an example of the lack of conceptual precision that too often characterizes tax policy discussions.
The lowering of the capital gains tax will free locked-up capital and result in increased revenue to the Government.
The idea that lower taxes increase revenue has been a hard notion for many to grasp.
But it is true and is reflected in the Joint Committee analysis.


South Africa McDonald's
The McDonald's Corporation said today that it would open its first restaurant in South Africa on Saturday.
McDonald's is in a court battle over the use of its name here.
McDonald's has been granted leave to appeal a Pretoria Supreme Court  ruling that dismissed the bid by the company to protect its trademark in South Africa.
It had sought an order stopping a Johannesburg businessman operating a restaurant as "McDonald's" from using its trademark.


Appearance by Farrakhan Aide Roils a CUNY Campus
A tense standoff at a Queens college between students and administrators, backed by police officers and campus guards in riot gear, was defused without violence yesterday, but only after the administrators agreed to let a controversial aide to Louis Farrakhan speak at the college's Black Solidarity Day.
Dozens of students at York College in Jamaica jostled and protested loudly as they and the headline speaker, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, a spokesman for Mr.
Farrakhan's Nation of Islam, were kept outside the gates.
After about an hour, administrators, worried that the confrontation could get out of hand, relented and allowed Mr.
Muhammad to enter and speak.


Mix and Match, Live and Learn;School Embraces a Dizzying Blend of Students and Tongues
Orlian Alvarez's face fell when he saw the grade in red marker on his social  studies exam: 8 of a possible 100 points.
On the big map of Latin America, he had confused the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and was unable to explain that the cities of Manaus, Brazil, and Iquitos, Peru, were on harbors.


Messier Pulls No. 500 Out of a Hat Trick
The gloves went up on the Rangers' bench and a sustained cheer erupted from the crowd last night in a memorable moment at Madison Square Garden.
With his third goal of the night, Mark Messier, the Ranger captain, had scored goal No. 500 of his National Hockey League career.
The milestone came 12 minutes 32 seconds into the last period of a 4-2 victory over the Calgary Flames.
Messier's slap shot from the right circle found the back of Rick Tabaracci's net, completing the Ranger's hat trick and the scoring in the game.
It was Messier's first three-goal game since Game 6 of the  Stanley Cup semifinal series with the Devils in 1994 when he guaranteed victory.


Rabin Learned Tough Lesson of Compromise
To the Editor:
Like many of us in the Jewish community, Yitzhak Rabin came to embrace the peace process with caution and trepidation.


2 U.S. Utilities Seek Counterparts Abroad
Two American utilities, seeking to gain experience and profits in the deregulated industry overseas, have announced separate acquisitions of foreign electricity distributors totaling about $4 billion.
The Central and South West Corporation of Dallas reached an agreement yesterday to buy Seeboard P.L.C. of Britain for L1.6 billion, or $2.58 billion.
Over the weekend, the Texas Utilities Company, also based in Dallas, said it would buy Eastern Energy, an Australian state-owned electricity company, for $2.08 billion (Australian), or $1.55 billion (United States).


Budget Cuts Threaten Services At Home for Troubled Youths
The outward tranquillity of the elegant brownstone of Inwood House is deceptive, because inside live some of the city's most angry and troubled young  women.
And the executive director of Inwood House, a private, nonprofit agency on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, says their lives have been made harder by recent city and state budget cuts.
Inwood House contracts with New York City to provide a variety of services for troubled teen-agers, including substance-abuse prevention, counseling and parent training for teen-age mothers and fathers, and foster care for pregnant girls and young mothers.
The city's Child Welfare Administration provides nearly half of the agency's $4 million budget.
Federal Medicaid financing covers 25 percent, and private donations make up the rest.


Tenneco Gets A New Logo
Taking another step in its corporate makeover, Tenneco Inc. said today that it had replaced its logo and renamed two of its four operating units.


World News Briefs;Colombia Arrests 4 In Politician's Slaying
In a dawn operation here, the police arrested four suspects in the killing of a former presidential candidate and Ambassador to Washington, a local television news program reported today.
NTC Noticias said the police had arrested three men and a woman in the fatal  shooting on Thursday of Alvaro Gomez Hurtado, 76, a leader of the Conservative Party and three-time presidential candidate.
Two unidentified gunmen shot Mr.
Gomez and an aide as they left the campus of Sergio Arboleda University.
The police said 14 shots were fired, 4 hitting Mr.
Gomez, who died of internal bleeding after arriving at a Bogota hospital.
The aide, Jose del Cristo Huertas, also died.


Dollar Is Down Against the Yen As Exporters Sell Their Reserves
The dollar retreated against the yen yesterday as Japanese exporters cashed in on the dollar's recent rally.
The German mark held its ground, bolstered by uncertainty about the wrangling over the Federal budget in Washington.


BLACKBOARD
Getting a Feel for Forecasting


LeBow and Icahn Buying RJR Stakes
Bennett S. LeBow and Carl C. Icahn have agreed to purchase about as much as $250 million each of the stock of RJR Nabisco Holdings in their effort to press  the company into spinning off the Nabisco foods unit from its tobacco operations.
In a document filed today with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Brooke Group Ltd., headed by Mr.
LeBow, said it and an Icahn investment partnership, High River L.P., had also agreed to pay $50 million if either party decided to back down and sell its stake back to the company.


On the Ballot Today
A roundup of the most important elections taking place today.
GOVERNOR


New York Does Odd About-Face on Medicaid
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
George E. Pataki have rejected the Federal Health Care Financing Administration's conditional approval of a waiver permitting New York City to extend mandatory managed care to additional Medicaid beneficiaries (news articles, Oct. 28 and 31).
This about-face follows months of cooperation between Federal, state and city health officials.


Robert Patterson, Opera Baritone, 70
Robert Patterson, a baritone who sang with the Metropolitan Opera in the 1960's, died on Oct. 31 at his home in Glendale, Queens.
He was 70.
The cause was lymphoma, said Henry Rinckhoff, a friend.


Tokyo Journal;Japanese Prefer Blondes (In Their Ads, That Is)
Brian G. Banowetz, a 28-year-old former Army intelligence trainee in Oregon,  flew here this year with empty pockets and big dreams.
With a smattering of Japanese, dark good looks and a bit of acting experience, Mr.
Banowetz hopes he is on his way.
He has already helped sell KitKat chocolate bars, Toyota cars and other products in five Japanese commercials.


Mourning Was Almost a Knick
Before he was acquired by the Heat last Friday, Alonzo Mourning was the latest bargaining chip between the Knicks and Miami.
Mourning had told the Charlotte Hornets that he would only be traded to either New York or Miami, even though Lakers General Manager Jerry West nearly pulled the trigger on a deal to  get Mourning.
"A couple of Charlotte players called me to tell me to pack my bags," said Charles Oakley, who was part of a package with Charles Smith for Mourning.


Cable-Price Test Is Considered
Federal regulators are considering an experiment that would open cable television rates to the free market in one central New Jersey community.
Under the Federal Communications Commission proposal, cable companies serving Dover Township would be able to do something not permitted under Federal law since 1992: compete to offer the best price, rather than charge what regulators say.


The Life and Art of Martha Graham
Yes, the Robert Wilson whose provocative and rich "Snow on the Mesa" was presented by the Martha Graham Dance Company here at the John F. Kennedy Center  for the Performing Arts is the same Robert Wilson of Next Wave fame at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The new work, his first for a modern-dance company, will be performed by the  Graham company Thursday through Saturday at City Center, and it should not surprise anyone who has followed his interest in movement since 1969, including  "Einstein on the Beach," his 1976 opera with Philip Glass.
Yet the so-called downtown crowd, put off by the idea of tutus, failed to show up in 1988 at the Metropolitan Opera House when the Paris Opera Ballet offered Mr.
Wilson's visionary version of Debussy's "Martyre de St.-Sebastien." Meanwhile, the Met's  conservative audience, put off by the lack of tutus, walked out in droves from that production.


In Move to Improve Relations With Exiles in U.S., Cuba Eases the Wayfor Investment
Seeking to improve relations with Cuban exiles it once derided as "worms" and "counterrevolutionaries," the Cuban Government announced measures today that could make it easier for them to invest on the island.
Under the new regulations, announced by Roberto Robaina, Cuba's Foreign Minister, the 1.2 million Cubans living abroad will be able to apply for travel  documents, renewable every two years, that will allow them to enter and leave the country as many times as they like.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
N.C.A.A. Women's Tournament


Intentionally Funny Mayors
Mayor Sharpe James has earned a reputation as a lot of different things during his years of running New Jersey's largest city.
But is he a comedian?
That will be determined on Saturday when he and two other Mayors compete to see who is the nation's funniest mayor on the seventh annual "HBO Comic Relief"  show.
During the program, which raises money for the homeless, Mayor James will  be competing against Mayor Norm Rice of Seattle and Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke of Baltimore, all three, by coincidence, black Democrats.


Miami Journal;TV Station Behind Bars Gives Inmates a Voice
It is 4 P.M., the new telephone system is not working, and there is no sign of the public defender who is supposed to be the host on "Public Defender Live," a call-in television program that is now officially late.
At 4:02, the public defender, Steve Levine, makes a hurried entrance.
At 4:07, after a temporary solution to the phone problem is found, the program finally gets started with a rock theme song as Mr.
Levine dances in his chair.


Talk of a Sumitomo Merger Lifts Price of Daiwa Stock
The shares of Daiwa Bank continued to rise today on expectations of a merger, but Japanese Finance Ministry officials were quiet about the progress of discussions.
Late last week, the ministry summoned officials of Sumitomo Bank to discuss a potential merger with Daiwa, a union that would create the world's largest bank.
The discussions followed losses by Daiwa of $1.1 billion in unauthorized bond trading in New York, the expulsion of the bank from the United States, and its indictment on a variety of fraud and conspiracy charges.
Daiwa is facing the threat of American fines as high as $1.3 billion.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day on Sept. 13 about pleas of guilty by five people in fraud against Bally Gaming Inc. referred incorrectly to a plea earlier this year by Alan J. Maiss, the company's former president.
He pleaded guilty to failure to report to regulators that a video poker distributor lacked a license to do such business in Louisiana; he did not  plead guilty to having video poker dealings with an unlicensed person.
Federal prosecutors have acknowledged that Mr.
Maiss did report to compliance personnel  at Bally that the distributor lacked a license.
The article also misstated Bally's view of Mr.
Maiss.
Neither the company nor Federal prosecutors have accused Mr.
Maiss of knowingly dealing with organized crime or causing Bally to deal with it.


Time to Fortify Flour With B Vitamin
To the Editor:
An Oct. 26 news article presents the discovery of a human gene that predisposes a significant segment of the population to an increased nutritional  requirement for folic acid, one of the important B vitamins.


Apple Clone, by Any Other Name
THE Power Computing Corporation refuses to call its computers "clones," and Apple Computer Inc. refuses to allow them to be called "Macintoshes." But everyone else is going to call the Power Wave 604 a Macintosh clone, and a very  impressive one at that.
In the last year the Power Computing Corporation has created a line of highly regarded computers that use the same Power PC microprocessor and Mac OS operating system that Apple uses.
With the newest line, the Power Wave 604's, Power Computing has actually stepped ahead of Apple in introducing new technology.


Concealed-Guns Law
To the Editor:
Re "Holes Found in Law on Carrying Hidden Guns" (news article, Nov. 2): As in other studies inspired by the anti-gun lobby, the reports from the University of Maryland and the Violence Policy Center present information skewed to support a  predetermined result: the "holes" are arguably less in Florida's law than in the studies' designs.


372 Million Compaq Deal For Networth
The Compaq Computer Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire  Networth Inc., a developer of computer networking products, for about $372 million, or $42 a share, in cash.
The acquisition is Compaq's third move in recent months into the networking market.
Three weeks ago, it agreed to buy the Thomas-Conrad Corporation, a maker of network adaptor cards, and in June it entered a strategic alliance with Cisco Systems Inc., the leading maker of network equipment.


World Group to Enforce Ban
The world governing body for swimming is set to intervene if the United States federation fails to suspend Jessica Foschi, the 15-year-old swimmer from  Brookville, L.I., who tested positive for steroids.
A three-member review panel of United States Swimming decided last week to give Foschi a two-year probation rather than impose a two-year suspension as mandated under international rules.


Paine Webber Plans Shake-Up and Cuts
Paine Webber Group Inc. plans to cut costs by $200 million in the next two years, including about $100 million from employee compensation, company officials said yesterday.


Parking Rules
Because it is Election Day, alternate-side street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about an Alabama prison for aged and disabled  inmates gave an incorrect first name in some editions for a convict.
The man, who has been serving a life sentence since 1946, is Sidney Merrill, not Sandy.


Cordis to Be Acquired by Johnson &amp; Johnson
The Cordis Corporation agreed yesterday to be acquired by Johnson &amp; Johnson after its buyout offer was raised to $1.8 billion in stock from $1.6 billion.
The sweetened offer of $109 a share -- up from $105 -- was lower than what many analysts and investors had expected.


Suit Against Winfield Dropped
DAVE WINFIELD finally put behind him a 10-year-old attempt by an airline flight attendant to claim him as her common-law husband.
Yesterday, two days before the start of a second trial on the matter, SANDRA RENFRO dropped her claim that she was married to Winfield.
"No marriage, whether ceremonial, informal or common law, has ever existed between Sandra Renfro and David Winfield at any time," said a consent decree dismissing the claim in a Houston court.


MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO. (MA,N)
The May Department Stores Company reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income slipped 3 percent as a result of higher selling costs, a poor showing from its discount shoe chain and slow apparel sales.
May, which owns the Lord &amp; Taylor and Payless Shoe Source chains, earned $135 million, or 53 cents a share, in the quarter ended Oct. 28, down from $139 million, or 54 cents, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Still, the results were slightly above Wall Street's expectations of about 52 cents a share, according to the most recent survey of six analysts by Zacks Investment Research.


Q&amp;A
In-Flight Phones


Two Dozen Midshipmen Are Implicated in Drug Case
In a widening of the latest scandal at the United States Naval Academy, two dozen midshipmen were implicated today in the sale or use of drugs, including LSD and marijuana, Academy officials said.
Five suspected of peddling drugs to their classmates face possible courts-martial, while as many as 19 others could be dismissed for using drugs, according to a statement issued by the Academy in Annapolis, Md.


On My Mind;For Peace in Israel
God has given. God has taken away. Blessed be the name of the Lord.
Now, after those words spoken over the grave of Yitzhak Rabin, the prayer for all who hold Israel dear should be this: May He give special strength and sensitivity, both, to Shimon Peres.


F.D.A. Unit Backs New AIDS Drug
A Federal advisory panel recommended today that a new experimental AIDS drug  be approved in combination with AZT, the standard therapy.
The panel said a combination of the new drug, 3TC, and AZT improved the immune systems of patients and lowered blood levels of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
But panel of scientific advisers to the Food and Drug Administration cautioned that there were many unanswered questions that patients must be aware of before choosing the combination over AZT alone.
The advisers also said the combination showed more effect in patients who had never taken AZT than in those who had taken AZT alone.
This would be the first approved drug combination with AZT.
In the past, other drugs were used only after AZT failed.


Training Students to Help Others
A lot of teaching about teaching will be going on in Hudson County because of a $927,000 Federal grant to the Institute for the Advancement of Urban Education at St.
Peter's College.
College students will be trained to tutor high school students and high school students will learn how to help elementary students.
Parents and senior citizens will be recruited, too.


Governor of New Hampshire Is Reported Ready to Endorse Dole
Stephen Merrill, the popular Republican Governor of New Hampshire, whose backing has been eagerly sought by most candidates for his party's Presidential  nomination, will endorse Senator Bob Dole this week, people close to the Governor said today.
A top Republican official who spoke on condition of anonymity said Mr.
Merrill would put his political reputation and well-run statewide organization behind Mr.
Dole at a news conference on Wednesday in Manchester, N.H..


With No Data to Digest, Prices of Treasuries Slip
Without any fresh economic data to give traders direction, Treasury prices slipped in light trading yesterday.
While some market participants sold yesterday to take profits on last week's  gain, others declined to buy before knowing whether the Treasury would go ahead  with a series of note auctions this week.


U.S. Jews Come Together in Mourning Israel's Premier
At the United Jewish Appeal offices in Manhattan yesterday, the big-screen television did not work, so those attending a memorial service for Yitzhak Rabin had to crowd around a smaller set to watch the funeral in Israel.
The uncomfortable closeness was fitting in a way, because it served as a reminder that the sorrow over the death of Israel's Prime Minister was in a sense a family tragedy.


Burying a Man of Israel
The eyes of Israel and much of the world were on Mount Herzl in Jerusalem yesterday as Yitzhak Rabin -- soldier, political leader, peacemaker and the last representative of a founding generation that literally created the state of Israel with its bare hands -- was laid to rest.
Mr.
Rabin embodied Israel's modern history.
He was successively underground fighter, soldier in the war of independence, architect of victory in the six-day war, Prime Minister and Nobel Peace laureate.
He was the nation's first native-born Prime Minister and its first to fall victim to assassination.


2 Health Insurers Seek Rate Rise
Two of the state's biggest health insurers have asked for rate increases of 12 to 40 percent on a variety of Medigap policies held by 350,000 senior citizens.
The policies help pay for medical bills not covered by the Federal Medicare program.
The State Insurance Department stressed yesterday that the increases requested by the Prudential Insurance Company and Blue Cross and Blue  Shield of New Jersey would not necessarily be granted.
"They could ask for the moon, and we could give them zero," a department spokeswoman, Kathleen Bird, told the A.P.


Tribute to a Gifted Teacher And the Duncan Technique
Anita Zahn, a noted dance teacher who died last year at the age of 91, was honored on Sunday afternoon at the 92d Street Y with a program that became a stirring declaration of faith in the continuing value of a dance tradition.
Miss Zahn was associated with the style created by Isadora Duncan, one of the founders of modern dance, and she was trained in that style by Elizabeth Duncan, Isadora's pedagogically gifted sister.
After moving from her native Germany to New York in the early 1920's, Miss Zahn taught at many schools.
Kay Bardsley, a dance historian, discussed her career, and students who had worked with Miss Zahn from the 20's to the 70's shared reminiscences.


Rabin Is Laid to Rest, Moruned by Israel and the World
Yitzhak Rabin was buried today before the greatest assembly of foreign leaders ever gathered in Israel, eulogized by President Clinton as "a martyr for peace" and by King Hussein of Jordan as "a brother, a colleague and a friend."
In ceremonies that blended military precision, ringing tributes and home-grown emotion, Mr.
Rabin's body was laid to rest under the pines and cypresses of Mount Herzl, the burial ground of Israel's military and spiritual
heros.


Words of Grief and Resolve From Friends and World Leaders
Following are excerpts from remarks by foreign leaders and friends at Yitzhak Rabin's funeral in Jerusalem yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times and the Federal Document Clearing House, a private transcription service.
The speeches by Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres and Eitan Haber were translated from the Hebrew by The Times and by official translators.
PRESIDENT CLINTON


Back to Bartok, Roots and Branches
Attention spans are said to be short these days, yet it seems that there is a public for concentrated explorations of composers and their works in programs patterned after musicological conferences.
Leon Botstein has been presenting composer weekends (or, actually, pairs of weekends) at Bard College for the last few summers, with discussion panels interspersed between chamber, vocal and orchestral concerts.
Lincoln Center has been importing these festivals in recent seasons, not repeating them so much as extending them by including works  not offered at Bard itself.
This year's installment, "Bartok and His World," took over Alice Tully Hall on Saturday and Sunday.
As always in these endeavors, there was a hefty overlay of context, which in  Bartok's case takes several forms.
One was the ethnomusicological context.
Bartok, in the early years of the century, was an avid collector of peasant songs and dances, and in his works he used both the traditional melodies and newly composed ones in the folk style.
Exploring this side of the composer was the business of the Sunday afternoon program, "Bartok and the Folk Tradition."


COMPANY BRIEFS
MEDALLIANCE INC., Brentwood, Tenn., said it had sold its remaining assets to unit of W. R. Grace &amp; Co., Boca Raton, Fla., for $21.4 million.
Medalliance also agreed to assume some liabilities and debt.


No Headline
We are not ashamed nor are we afraid, nor are we anything but determined to continue the legacy for which my friend fell, as did my grandfather in this very city when I was with him and but a boy. -- KING HUSSEIN, in Jerusalem. [A1:5]


SHERWIN-WILLIAMS TO BUY PRATT &amp; LAMBERT
The Sherwin-Williams Company, one of the nation's largest producers of paints and varnishes, has agreed to buy Pratt &amp; Lambert United Inc. for $35 a share, or about $400 million, the companies said yesterday.
The news sent Pratt &amp; Lambert  stock soaring $13.875, or more than 67 percent, to $34.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Pratt &amp; Lambert, based in Buffalo, is a major developer and producer of coatings and adhesives.
It merged with United Coatings in August 1994, creating a company with about $500 million in annual sales.
It has nearly 2,000  employees.
The stock of Sherwin-Williams, based in Cleveland, fell 12.5 cents, to $37.50.


By Design;Tans for All Seasons
On runways last week, models sported tan, rosy faces.
For Marc Jacobs's show, they were asked to get tans, and some did, at the tanning salon.
But most of the glow came from makeup artists like Francois Nars, who did Mr.
Jacobs's show, and Bobbi Brown, who worked on Michael Kors and Han Feng.


Nicaraguans Begin Assault on Disease
Nicaraguan health officials said they have begun an all-out assault on the bacterial disease tentatively identified today as the cause of a mysterious epidemic that has killed at least 16 people.
Researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta diagnosed four cases of the disease as leptospirosis, which is characterized by  fevers and internal bleeding, Health Minister Federico Munoz said today.
Further tests to confirm the diagnosis and investigate whether the disease may also have caused the other deaths are under way, he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14


Sampras Takes Over as No. 1
PETE SAMPRAS officially returned to the top spot in the ATP Tour rankings as  the weekly list was released yesterday, one day after he won the Paris Open.
It  marks the first time he has held the No. 1 slot since April.
Sampras beat BORIS  BECKER in Sunday's Paris Open final.
With last year's winner, ANDRE AGASSI, sidelined and losing the ranking points, Sampras gained enough points to pass him for the No. 1 spot. (AP)


For Arabs, The Anger Outweighs Scant Grief
On the day of Yitzhak Rabin's funeral, there was little mourning here.
With streets deserted, shops shuttered and much of its population of one million idled and made resentful by the Israeli Army's closing of the border, the Gaza Strip seemed a world away from the funeral in Jerusalem, only an hour and half away.


Deutsche Telekom Wins Union Backing on Cuts
Deutsche Telekom A.G. won union backing yesterday for its plan to cut 60,000  jobs by 2000 after the company pledged to extend its moratorium on actual layoffs until the end of 1997.
In return for that promise, the postal workers' union agreed that employees could be transferred without compensation.
It also said it would debate changes  to pensions, which it had earlier ruled out.


Accounts
*
Barilla Co., Parma, Italy, to Grey Advertising, to handle the pasta manufacturer's advertising in North and South America and Europe (excluding Italy).
Young &amp; Rubicam continues to handle the account in Italy.
Grey, which will initially serve the account from London, succeeds various local agencies in countries like France, Germany and Greece; elsewhere, Grey becomes the initial agency for the brand.
The billings have not been determined.


LEARNING COMPANY TO POSTPONE MERGER DECISION
The Learning Company said yesterday that it planned to postpone a meeting scheduled for Thursday at which stockholders would have considered a merger with Broderbund Software Inc.
The decision came after last week's unsolicited tender  offer from Softkey International Inc. for the educational software company, which topped the earlier bid from Broderbund Software.
In a separate announcement, Softkey said it had begun soliciting Learning's stockholders to vote against the Broderbund merger.
The Learning Company said it asked its stockholders to defer deciding whether to accept Softkey's tender offer until they have been advised of its position on the offer.
The company also said it expected to set a new date for the special meeting.


INSIDE
New Bypass Techniques


Market Place;Latest Mergers Driven by Cost Cuts
In the current merger boom, the prevailing strategy is to buy what you know.
Staying in your own business, if not in your own neighborhood, makes it easier to justify the purchase price with promises of better management and ruthless cost-cutting.
So the big question confronting shareholders of the acquiring companies is whether those savings are real.
Yesterday's blizzard of merger agreements fit this pattern.
The industries ranged from cookies to paint, from electricity to paper, from banking to surgical devices.
But what they all had in common was that the would-be acquirer is not venturing far afield in terms of business line.


Ocean Study to Start After Big Changes And a Long Delay
AFTER 18 months of delays and acrimonious debate over whether it would deafen whales and other marine mammals, a $35 million experiment using underwater sound to investigate the reality of global warming is scheduled to begin this week, though much modified because of protests.
The experiment, run by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., and involving seven foreign nations, was originally intended to fire sounds from underwater speakers across the Pacific Ocean at least once a day for a year.
Sound travels faster in warm water than cold.
In theory, changes in the  sound's speed as it crossed the Pacific could reveal temperature shifts as subtle as a few thousandths of a degree Fahrenheit.


The Future Is Ow, The Past Is Peeved
The Jets have fallen to 2-8, and now have a one-man quarterback controversy that won't be resolved until next year.
As expected, Coach Rich Kotite today named the disgruntled Boomer Esiason to  be the starter again, while a stunned Glenn Foley began the long, hard process of trying to recover from a dislocated throwing shoulder.


A Departure At Viacom
Viacom Inc. said yesterday that H. Wayne Huizenga had resigned from his positions as vice chairman of Viacom, chairman of Viacom's Blockbuster Entertainment unit and a Viacom director.
Mr.
Huizenga, 57, announced after Blockbuster was acquired by Viacom last year that he wanted to leave the video and music retailer after a transition period.
Viacom completed its acquisition of Blockbuster on Sept. 29, 1994.


Proceeding With Caution
In making his comeback in the sport of wheelchair racing, with an eye toward  the 1996 Boston Marathon and the Summer Olympics in Atlanta, John Rodolph of suburban Albuquerque, N.M., did his training where many able-bodied cyclists and runners do theirs -- on the roads.
He had been one of the country's top racers in the mid-1980's before retiring, only to approach the sport with renewed vigor in recent years.
The top wheelchair marathoners train more than 100 miles a week, just as elite runners do.
They push lightweight, streamlined chairs that cost anywhere from $1,500 to  $4,000 and can reach speeds of 40 miles an hour on a steep downhill.


Satellite Sent Into Orbit
America's most powerful unmanned rocket blasted off today with a $1 billion communications satellite for the Defense Department.
The Air Force launched the Titan 4 rocket at 12:15 A.M.
The Milstar satellite it carried is the second of six extremely secure and jam-proof communications spacecraft.


Gunmen Kill Four in Front of Stunned Customers at a Boston Restaurant
Two gunmen opened fire in a busy restaurant today, killing four men and wounding a fifth in front of a stunned lunch-hour crowd.
Two off-duty police officers who were eating in the restaurant arrested the two gunmen outside, the authorities said.


Perfecting the Art of Political Longevity
Nobody sensible is betting on the defeat of the Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson, in today's election, any more than they are on the political  demise of the Queens chief prosecutor, Richard A. Brown, whose term is also up.
Mr.
Johnson is running under the Democratic, Republican and Liberal banners,  but at least he has opponents, unlike Mr.
Brown.
These opponents are not the sort whose names appear on bumper stickers.


Abortion-Ban Bill Usurps Doctor's Part
To the Editor:
Re "House Acts to Ban Abortion Method, Making It a Crime" (front page, Nov. 2): The vote in the House of Representatives on a bill to criminalize a medically established, safe method of treating a late-diagnosed genetic or fetal malformation is a politically motivated intrusion into the practice of sound, compassionate and acceptable clinical medicine.


Half of World's Coastlines Are Found to Be in Peril
WASHINGTON, Nov. 6
Half the world's coastlines confront significant threats from development, and more than 60 percent of the marine protected areas face increasing risks, a  study by an environmental research group has found.


Gates Gets Electronic Rights to Hermitage
The Corbis Corporation, the digital media company owned by William H. Gates,  who is also chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, has reached an electronic rights agreement for images from the State Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg, Russia.
The nonexclusive agreement will allow Corbis to license the artwork and other images to publishers and use the images in its own software.
Terms of the agreement, which was announced today, were not disclosed.


Political and Energy Crises Foil Ecuador's Hopes
This was supposed to be Ecuador's year.
An austerity program curbed inflation and stabilized the economy, and the country was looking forward to the rewards of sacrifice: increased employment, rebuilt roads and bridges, and foreign investment in the Government-run oil, electrical and communications industries.


A Disappointing Teachers' Contract
In announcing his negotiating strategy with New York City's labor leaders earlier this year, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani set a high standard.
The city had no money for wage increases, he declared, so that any gains for municipal employees would have to be paid for by concessions in work rules, wages and benefits.
By that standard, Mr.
Giuliani's agreement with the teachers' union fell short.
The agreement was too heavily based on questionable savings and assumptions that could set a costly pattern if its terms are repeated with other city labor unions.
Perhaps the greatest significance of the agreement was political.
It brought  into the open the alliance between Mr.
Giuliani and the powerful teachers' union, whose neutrality in the last mayoral election deprived Mayor David Dinkins of crucial support in his fight against Mr.
Giuliani.
Now Mr.
Giuliani may well run in 1997 with outright teacher support, and possibly that of other unions, improving his re-election chances enormously.


Oliver Harrington, Cartoonist Who Created 'Bootsie,' Dies at 84
Oliver W. Harrington, a pioneering black cartoonist best known for a comic character named Bootsie that he created in the 1930's, died on Thursday at his home in Berlin.
He was 84 and had lived in what was formerly East Berlin since 1961.
Mr.
Harrington began his career as a cartoonist when there were few blacks in that profession.
His friend, the writer Langston Hughes, called him America's most popular black cartoonist and a first-rate social satirist.


Law Speeds Organ Transplants
Doctors will not be the only ones allowed to remove organs from bodies for transplants under a law signed yesterday by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The law, designed to ease the shortage of transplantable organs, would allow the work to be done by a medical professional or technician trained by an organ procurement organization following Federal guidelines.


Gilles Deleuze, 70, French Professor and Author
Gilles Deleuze, a philosopher and university lecturer whose prolific writings on art, literature and human thought influenced French intellectuals, died in Paris on Saturday.
He was 70.
Family members said he had jumped from his apartment window to end a worsening chronic respiratory illness for which he had recently undergone a tracheotomy.


Coach Guilty of Sexual Assault
A 38-year-old coach for a youth football team pleaded guilty yesterday to charges of sexually assaulting four of his players.
The coach, George Harris, could serve up to 10 years in prison for the assaults, which took place from 1991 until his arrest in March.
The four boys, now 11 to 15, have been referred  to counseling.
"He was a pillar of the community, which made the process even more difficult," said Michael J. Lapolla, first assistant prosecutor for Union County.


Isang Yun, 78, Korean-Born Composer Pursued by His Homeland
Isang Yun, a Korean-born German composer of powerful, kaleidoscopically scored chamber and orchestral works, died on Friday in Berlin, where he lived.
He was 78.
The cause was a lung infection, according to The Associated Press.


High Court Weighs Judicial Authority and Mandatory Sentencing
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Federal judges can give defendants a sentence lower than the mandatory minimum in the absence of a specific request by the Government.
The case, an appeal by a New Jersey man sentenced to the statutory minimum of 10 years for selling cocaine, raises a question that has divided Federal courts  around the country.
The issue is part of a broader debate over how much discretion judges should retain to determine sentences in light of the increasing popularity of mandatory minimums and sentencing guidelines intended to reduce judicial discretion.


FINANCE BRIEFS


Medical Student Found Dead, and a Painkiller Is Suspected
A medical student at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn was found dead in a radiology darkroom at Kings County Hospital yesterday, her body sprawled a few feet from two syringes believed to contain a powerful painkilling narcotic.
The body of the student, Jennifer Timbrook, 32, was discovered shortly before 9 A.M., when a hospital employee noticed the darkroom door was locked.
Stephen Villano, vice president of university affairs at the SUNY Health Science Center, said there was no "evidence of foul play."


Opponents Say Ex-Sen. Hart Has Quit Race
Gary Hart has abandoned an effort to reclaim the Senate seat he gave up nearly a decade ago, rival candidates for that seat said today.
"He said he was not running," said Phil Perington, one of five candidates in  the Democratic Senate primary who attended a breakfast meeting led by Mr.
Hart today.


Wheat Rallies After Recent Dip As Increased Exports Are Seen
Wheat prices rose on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, recovering from a  recent slump, bolstered by speculation of new demand for exports.
On other markets, cotton prices rose while heating oil fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities rose 0.18 point, to 243.53.


Maradona Speaks Out at Oxford
DIEGO MARADONA used an unusual appearance last night at Oxford University to  continue his crusade for a soccer players' union.
In a smooth, prepared 20-minute speech in Spanish, Maradona recounted his boyhood growing up poor in Argentina and criticized club owners and FIFA for getting rich at the players' expense.
Pressed by reporters later, the 35-year-old player declined to say much about his private life or his two 15-month drug-related bans from soccer. (AP)


Fred Hechinger, Education Editor and Advocate, Dies at 75
Fred M. Hechinger, the former education editor of The New York Times whose articles, columns and books reflected his abiding concern for the impact of education on shaping individuals and the nation, died yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 75.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Grace, who often joined him in his writing, editing and research.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Oct. 22 about a Navy destroyer that was named for a seaman killed by terrorists referred erroneously to the precedents.
The ship, the Robert D. Stethem, is one of many Navy vessels named for an enlisted man; it is not the first.


Mr. Mason Is Requesting Knick Fans' Best Behavior
He insists it's nothing personal.
But on the eve of the Knicks' season opener at Madison Square Garden, Anthony Mason was looking to infringe upon the rights  of every hardened New York sports fan.
He does not want you to boo, as many fans did during two preseason games at the Garden last month.
Mason says it makes them appear phony.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Distractions? Cowboys Only Distract Eagles
Last week, as his team was preparing to play against the Cowboys, Eagles Coach Ray Rhodes talked about the Dallas mystique.
Rhodes said: "They're so confident that they look around the league at the other teams and say, 'It doesn't matter what they do. As long as we do what we do, we're going to be O.K.' "


Transactions
Football


Iacocca Sues Chrysler Over His Stock Options
Lee A. Iacocca sued the Chrysler Corporation today, asserting that the company he led back from the brink of bankruptcy was illegally keeping him from  exercising his options to buy its stock.
The lawsuit, over options worth just over $40 million at today's stock price, is the latest in a series of accusations of betrayal and bad faith between Mr.
Iacocca and Chrysler, who with stinging public statements and legal documents are together writing a sad epilogue to a celebrated business turnaround.


Plan Offered To Revamp SUNY System
Gov.
George E. Pataki's appointees to the board of the State University of New York, while two members shy of a majority, have proposed a decentralizing of the system that would, among other measures, allow each of the 64 campuses to set its own tuition according to what the market will bear.
Under the proposals, a school like the university center at Binghamton, which is consistently listed as one of the best educational bargains in the country, could raise its tuition higher than, say, the neighboring State University College at Cortland.
Currently, undergraduates at both schools, as at the other  four-year SUNY colleges, pay $3,400 a year in tuition.
At the two-year colleges, they pay $3,200.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the campaign for Staten Island District Attorney gave an incorrect middle initial in some editions for the Democratic incumbent.
He is William L. Murphy.


Observer;Taking the Cure
Reading the Sunday Times under the influence of drugs, my mind stopped still  in its wobbly tracks when confronted by the statement that "Daniel Barenboim does not suffer fools gladly."
Normally the mind glides over cruel judgments such as this without bothering  to think how cruel they are, but the drugs were turning me into a new person.
I had become intensely aware of matters that had never before seemed worth being aware of.


Prosecutors Wrap Up Case In Massacre of 6 in Queens
Prosecutors wrapped up their case yesterday against two men accused of murdering six people in a Queens condominium, saying that physical and circumstantial evidence -- coupled with the testimony of a young woman who survived the bloody episode -- amounted to "overwhelming proof" that the defendants had "wiped out an entire household."
Defense lawyers countered that there was far more to the case than jurors had been told, and suggested that some of those killed at the condominium, in College Point, were not innocent victims but drug dealers connected to Colombia.


The Browns Put N.F.L. Back in Baltimore
A gaping hole ripped out of Baltimore's civic pride 11 years ago by the departure of the Colts for Indianapolis was filled today when Maryland Gov.
Parris N. Glendening announced that the Cleveland Browns would move to Baltimore next season and play in a new downtown stadium two years later.
"This is a great day for Baltimore and a great day for the state of Maryland," Glendening said at a news conference on the site of the planned stadium as he held aloft a 30-year contract signed by the Browns owner Art Modell.
"The Browns are indeed coming to Baltimore."


CD-ROM's Revisit Radio Days
TRICK question: Among the many media at the disposal of the CD-ROM, which may be best suited to it?
Video and film become grainy and jerky when transferred to computer disks.
Photographs, maps and even text lose their crispness on the low-resolution screens of personal computers.
Art and animation expressly designed for those screens works better, but must labor under severe limitations.
The winner?
Radio.
The CD format, after all, was originally designed to deliver music, and although the sound cards and speakers most people use preclude truly high-fidelity audio, they can deliver radio-quality sound.
And as its partisans constantly repeated in the early days of television, radio makes listeners exercise their imagination.
Some canny multimedia producers have begun to figure this out.


Piniella Is the A.L. Manager of the Year
Lou Piniella, the Seattle Mariners manager whose team needed an extra game to squeeze by the California Angels in the American League West and into the playoffs this past season, is used to racing down to the wire and winning.
Piniella did so again yesterday when he edged Boston's Kevin Kennedy to become the American League Manager of the Year in balloting by the Baseball Writers Association of America, even though Kennedy got two more first-place votes.


Midwives Do Fewer Caesareans
Women who rely on nurse-midwives to deliver their babies are less than half as likely to have Caesarean deliveries as those who rely on doctors, a consumer  group said today.
While almost 25 percent of babies in the United States are born by Caesarean  section, the rate is less than 12 percent for those births attended by nurse-midwives in hospitals, according to a survey by Public Citizen's Health Research Group.


In Israel, Pataki, Giuliani and Other Officials Remember Rabin
It seemed somehow fitting that New York, a city known as one of the world's Jewish capitals, sent its own representatives to the funeral of Yitzhak Rabin today.
Five minutes after the ceremonies had begun and an honor guard had carried Mr.
Rabin's coffin onto the esplanade of Mount Herzl Cemetery, a line of latecomers quietly walked to a row of white plastic seats: Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, State Comptroller H. Carl McCall and former Mayor Edward I. Koch.


Race With No Elite Division
One premier road race without a division or prize money for elite wheelchair  racers is the New York City Marathon, a matter that is irritating to the sport's stars.
Given the international stature of the race, said a leading racer, Scot Hollonbeck, the lack of an elite field in New York is a "disgrace."


Japan May Fine Merrill Lynch
In addition to a two-day limit on stock trading, the Tokyo Stock Exchange may impose a fine on Merrill Lynch Japan Inc. for violating trading rules, a market  official said today.
Under a penalty announced last week, the Japan branch of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company will be barred from executing trades for its own account on Tuesday and  Wednesday.


First Interstate Accepts Bid By First Bank
Rejecting a higher but hostile offer from Wells Fargo &amp; Company, First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles agreed yesterday to sell itself to the First Bank System of Minneapolis, a company not much more than half its size.
First Bank agreed to pay with stock that at yesterday's closing price was worth a total of $9.88 billion, making the bid worth $129.55 for each share of First Interstate.


Chess
Korchnoi runs off with first prize in a plebian event with a patrician lineup including 26 grandmasters.
Forty years ago, no one would have known what to make of a tournament with 26 grandmasters and 33 international masters: too crowded for an invitational round-robin and too spectacular for an open.


CARR REALTY AGREES TO SELL STAKE IN COMPANY
The Carr Realty Corporation agreed yesterday to sell a 39 percent stake to Security Capital U.S.
Realty for $250 million, to help raise cash for office-property investments outside the Washington market.
Carr Realty stock rose $1.125, to $20.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company, which plans to rename itself the CarrAmerican Realty Corporation, said the cash would  help it buy and develop suburban office properties nationwide.
Proceeds would also be used to repay about $50 million of debt and buy the Oliver Carr Development Company, a commercial real estate developer owned by some members of Carr Realty's senior management.


Citing Debt Impasse, Treasury Drops Plan For Selling Securities
The Government today postponed the $31.5 billion in borrowing it had planned  for this week because President Clinton and Congressional Republicans failed to  agree on raising the $4.9 trillion debt limit.
The Treasury Department had announced tentative plans last week to sell $18 billion in three-year notes on Tuesday and $13.5 billion in 10-year notes on Wednesday to pay off maturing securities and replenish Government coffers.


Stay the Righteous Course, Clinton Urges the Israelis
Accompanied by two former Presidents and a bipartisan Congressional delegation, President Clinton implored Israelis today to "stay the righteous course" and honor their assassinated leader, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, with
an unflagging commitment to Middle East peace.
His voice sometimes breaking as he spoke to thousands of mourners at the state funeral, Mr.
Clinton said, "Israel's covenant with God -- for freedom, for tolerance, for security, for peace -- that covenant must hold."


Losing Games and Patience, Whalers Dismiss Holmgren
The slumping Hartford Whalers discharged PAUL HOLMGREN as coach yesterday and replaced him with PAUL MAURICE, a 28-year-old assistant who was hired in June.
Maurice is a former coach of the Detroit Junior Red Wings.
The Whalers began this season with four straight victories, but have since gone 1-6-1, including a 6-1 loss Sunday to Philadelphia.


Tax Threat for the Rich and Famous
An 11th-hour budget amendment by a conservative lawmaker, to hear their accountants tell it, is threatening the life styles of the rich and famous.
The proposal by Senator Hank Brown, a Republican from Colorado, passed 99 to  0 with no debate, but it has since angered owners of sports teams, Wall Street traders, athletes and entertainment figures.
The measure would deny tax deductions for pay in excess of $1 million unless tied to gauges of specific performance, building on a far narrower provision adopted in 1993.


Turning Art Into Steps and a Sense of Insecurity
In program notes for "Le Palindrome," presented by the Philippe Saire Dance Company on Friday night at the Pace Downtown Theater, Mr.
Saire writes of the gallery programs that were the genesis of the suite of three dances that his Swiss modern-dance troupe performed.
He had intended to create an experimental situation in which he and his dancers would respond to the art on display and to the artists who made it.
To his surprise, the art called forth not so much responses specific to each artwork as a general sense of powerlessness and insecurity.
That feeling of being adrift permeated the dances and floated through the space in which the five dancers moved, giving the pieces an odd electricity that drew the attention even when the dances needed editing.
Each piece took its nuances and style, however, from the art onstage.


ADOBE VENTURES TO FOCUS ON IMAGING SOFTWARE
Adobe Systems Inc. announced yesterday that it had formed alliances with Apple Computer Inc., the Eastman Kodak Company and Metatools Inc. to simplify digital-imaging technology.
Adobe also introduced Adobe Photodeluxe, software that lets personal computer users retouch photographs.
The company said the alliances and its software, would allow easy access to technology for image input, editing and enhancement.
Adobe and Apple are working to integrate the Apple Quicktake 150 digital camera with the Windows and Macintosh versions of the Photodeluxe software.
Adobe and Kodak are trying to simplify the process of  accessing digital photos from a computer.
And Adobe and Metatools are working on a variety of special-effects tools in Adobe PhotoDeluxe.


World News Briefs;Walesa Agrees To a Campaign Debate
President Lech Walesa kept up the pressure today in an election campaign that left him just behind a former Communist, Aleksander Kwasniewski.
Fresh from Sunday's first round of voting, Mr.
Walesa took up his rival's challenge to hold live televised debates before the runoff vote on Nov. 19.


Among Hard-Liners in Hebron, Ambivalence and Brooding but Little Sorrow
All across Israel and wherever there were Israelis to hear them, the sirens sounded at 2 P.M. today to summon the nation to silent mourning for Yitzhak Rabin, but Shmuel Mushnik showed no grief.
Mr.
Mushnik, 40, a history teacher from the hard-line Jewish settlement at Hebron's heart, preferred to ponder a question that will divide Israel long after the mourning is over: who bears the moral guilt for Mr.
Rabin's assassination, the far right that fired up passions against his policies of peace or the left that pursued them so vigorously?


Oates Earns Contract Extension
Texas Rangers Manager JOHNNY OATES has received a one-year contract extension through the 1997 season, the team announced yesterday.
No terms were disclosed.
The 49-year-old Oates guided the Rangers to a 74-70 record in his first year at  the helm.
Texas finished four and a half games behind Seattle in the American League West, the closest the Rangers have finished to first. (AP)


Doctor Group Says Violence Imperils Nation
Sexual assault and family violence are devastating the United States' physical and emotional well-being, the American Medical Association said today,  releasing guidelines that it hopes will help break the cycle.
More than 700,000 women in the United States are sexually assaulted each year, or one every 45 seconds, said the association, the nation's leading doctors organization.
Such assaults are the most rapidly growing violent crime in the country, the association said in its report.


Rabin Learned Tough Lesson of Compromise;Three Jobs for Israel
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's concern in "The Death of Israel's Everyman" (column, Nov. 5) that the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians may not survive in the wake of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's tragic assassination probably overestimates the contribution of a single man, albeit important, to a  dynamic that is unlikely to be reversed.


Rupert Murdoch's Life: Big, Bigger and Biggest
The rise and rise and rise of Rupert Murdoch into a multimedia megamogul is chronicled in tonight's how-he-did-it.
Since one thing Mr.
Murdoch did not do was cooperate with Ken Auletta, the New Yorker's media reporter and the evening's correspondent, he remains a somewhat distant presence for these 90 minutes.
But the man's style -- "ruthless, aggressive, buccaneering, incredible," says one sometime associate -- is revealed in the "take no prisoners" takeovers that have brought him control of an ever-expanding global empire of television, movies, newspapers, magazines, books and odds and ends.
Like Mr.
And more.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Republican plans on the national debt and the budget referred incorrectly to the status of the Department of Commerce.
While the department would be abolished under the House's budget bill, its future is not touched by the Senate's.


Subpoenas Request Records on Fuhrman
The Federal authorities investigating the conduct of Mark Fuhrman, the former Los Angeles police detective who was a focal point of the O. J. Simpson case, have served subpoenas on the Police Department seeking his work records, The Los Angeles Times reported today.
Mr.
Fuhrman, in tape-recorded sessions with an aspiring screenwriter, boasted about beating up and framing suspects, leading the Justice Department to start a civil rights investigation.
The detective came to prominence when he said he found a bloody glove on Mr.
Simpson's property the day after the June 12, 1994,  killings of Mr.
Simpson's former wife and her friend.
A jury acquitted Mr.
Simpson of murder charges in October.


Rare Verdi Sketches For 'Otello' Are Up For Sale in London
When the other shoe of a Verdi mystery thudded to the floor recently, few seemed to realize that there had been a first.
Two weeks ago, Sotheby's auction house in London told several European newspapers that previously unknown sketches for Giuseppe Verdi's "Otello" would  be put on sale on Dec. 1 and were expected to fetch as much as $320,000, a record price for a Verdi musical manuscript.


Mourning Leaves a Big Void
The Charlotte Hornets are letting their fans have a say about what to do with a nine-story mural bearing the faces of ALONZO MOURNING, MUGGSY BOGUES and LARRY JOHNSON.
The mural, on a First Union bank building in Charlotte, N.C., must be altered because of Mourning's trade late last week to Miami.
The bank and the club officials asked Hornets fans yesterday to mail in ideas for the mural, a favorite among residents and visitors to the city.
(AP)


REPUBLICAN DRIVE FAILS TO ADVANCE AROUND COUNTRY
Democrats held their ground in the off-year elections around the nation yesterday, turning back efforts by Republicans to control the Virginia and Maine legislatures and retaining the Governor's office in Kentucky.
The results halted an unbroken string of electoral triumphs for Republicans after President Clinton's election in 1992.
The one bright outcome for the party was in Mississippi, where Gov.
Kirk Fordice easily won a second term.


A Child Abuse Case Taints All Sides
Just when you might have imagined or hoped that sensational yet shaky allegations of sex rings preying on children had subsided, "Dateline" reports another outbreak.
"Innocence Lost" (a title already used by "Frontline" for its  disturbing accounts of a similar case in Edenton, N.C.) focuses on Wentachee, Wash., where over the last 18 months charges have flourished like the apples that are this small town's main product.
The local sex-crimes detective says he has 40 to 50 suspects on his list, along with 40 to 50 victims.
As the NBC correspondent, John Larson, tells the story, that officer, Bob Perez, is the Johnny Appleseed of the accusations.
His career blossomed soon after he took on the sex-crimes assignment and arrested several people on charges of molesting children, including their own.
Two were convicted; eight others pleaded guilty or no contest.


Races Around the Region: HUDSON COUNTY;Democrats Take Must-Win Race
Robert C. Janiszewski, the incumbent Hudson County Executive, easily defeated Bill Macchi, preserving Democratic control over the county.
Mr.
Macchi, 57, conceded defeat shortly after 9 P.M.
Mr.
Janiszewski won his  third four-year term in the office, which no Republican has won since it was created in 1975.


Sister Evelyn Schneider, 84, Retired Head of St. Vincent's Hospital
Sister Evelyn M. Schneider, a former chief executive of St.
Vincent's Hospital and superior general of the Sisters of Charity, the order that founded  it 146 years ago, died on Sunday at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 84.
Sister Evelyn's association with St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center spanned five decades.
She joined the hospital as director of nutrition in 1945,  retired as president and chief executive officer in 1980 and continued as a volunteer until this year.


Israelis Start To Pick Up The Pieces
After the wrenching grief of Yitzhak Rabin's funeral and amid much lingering  sorrow, both Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization pledged today to continue with the moves toward peace that cost Mr.
Rabin his life and still provoke extremism across the region.
A day after Mr.
Rabin's burial, Israelis continued to converge on his grave at Mount Herzl cemetery under gray and showery skies.
Others lighted candles outside his home and in the Tel Aviv square where he was gunned down Saturday night by a 25-year-old Israeli law student who told prosecutors he acted to protest what he termed the creation of a Palestinian state.


Voting in the Region
A KINGMAKER IS TOPPLED


Amtrak Is 'Looking' After 23 Years
Amtrak said yesterday that it was "looking at the capabilities of other agencies" for its account, which has been handled for 23 years by DDB Needham New York.
The billings were estimated at $40 million.
"I like to keep my hand on the pulse of the agencies in the marketplace," Bob Wehrmann, vice president for national marketing and sales at Amtrak in Washington, said in confirming an Adweek report this week of the talks.
He praised DDB Needham's work but added, "I need to know what the other options are."


NEW LINE TO BE CREATED AT TRANSMISSION PLANT IN OHIO
The Ford Motor Company said yesterday that it would invest $180 million at its transmission plant in Sharonville, Ohio, for a new line to produce automatic transmissions.
The auto maker said the plan would result in the creation of up to 250 jobs.
Ford said the investment would include new tools, machinery and other equipment at the plant, which has been in operation since 1958.
The line will provide capacity for a new family of transmissions with automatic overdrive for rear-wheel-drive vehicles to be introduced in the late 1990's.
The line will have the capability of producing other rear-wheel-drive transmissions.


Biggest Stockholder in Daiwa Frowns on a Sumitomo Merger
Daiwa Bank's largest shareholder has reportedly thrown cold water on the idea of a merger between the troubled bank and Sumitomo Bank.
The shareholder, Nomura Securities, which owns 3.3 percent of Daiwa, did not  make its reasons clear.
But in a meeting on Monday between Hideo Sakamaki, Nomura's president, and Takashi Kaiho, his counterpart at Daiwa, Nomura expressed reservations about a merger, according to a report in a Japanese daily, Mainichi Shimbun.


COMPANY BRIEFS
NALCO CHEMICAL CO., Naperville, Ill., a maker of chemicals, bought the pulp and  paper chemicals business of privately held Texo Corp., Cincinnati, for an undisclosed amount.


Foreign Affairs;How About You?
In the wake of the murder of Yitzhak Rabin there is an understandable desire  to dismiss his assassin as a lone gunman from outside the pale of Israeli political life, and to call for a period of national unity.
Those impulses are wrong -- all wrong -- and the man who could have told you that best was Yitzhak Rabin.
This is not a time for unity.
This is a time for taking sides.
That is what Yitzhak Rabin was doing when he was shot.
He was not muffling his voice or blurring his aims.
He was taking a principled stand in favor of a historic compromise with the Palestinians -- to share the land of Israel-Palestine between the two peoples who called it home.
We do not honor Mr.
Rabin by avoiding that choice.
We honor him by making that choice.
We honor him by helping in every democratic way possible to enlarge the Israeli majority in favor of peace with the Arabs, because, as Mr.
Rabin knew, that is the only hope for preserving a secure, democratic Jewish state.


Rookie of the Year Named
Sweden's JARMO SANDELIN was honored yesterday as the PGA European Tour's rookie of the year.
Sandelin, 28, won the Canary Islands Open in February and tied for second in the Mediterranean Open and BMW International.
He finished 21st on the tour's money list with $275,000.
Previous winners include TONY JACKLIN (1963) and JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL (1986).
(AP)


Turning Rain Into Money


Sports of The Times;Money Talks, But Barkley Talks Louder
THE last time the Knicks played a game that counted in Madison Square Garden, they suffered the indignity of watching Patrick Ewing's finger-roll shot wriggle off the rim as time and the season ended.
Last night the Knicks and Ewing were back in the Garden, and they suffered the indignity of watching Charles Barkley's late acrobatic reverse-spin layup set up a 3-point play as the Phoenix Suns took the home opener from the Knicks,  102-94.


Perot in Washington, Just Visiting


Talks Resume, but Palestinians Worry About Keeping Self-Rule on Course
Talks on the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian towns and villages resumed today, after a three-day suspension because of the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin.
But this did little to allay rising anxiety among Palestinians that recent events might delay the larger process toward peace and Palestinian self-rule.


Rwanda Says Army Killed 300 Hutu In 2-Day Raid
Government forces killed some 300 former Rwandan troops and militiamen on an  island near Zaire's border in their heaviest blow yet to rebel forces, Government officials said today.
The Government troops stormed the island of Iwawa, 10 miles off the Rwandan  shore of Lake Kivu, on Saturday and fought with Hutu militants before overrunning the island on Monday night.


MICHAEL JACKSON SELLS RIGHTS TO BEATLES SONGS TO SONY
Michael Jackson, the singer, sold the music publishing rights to about 250 Beatles songs yesterday to the Sony Corporation for $95 million.
A new publishing venture will combine Sony's music publishing division with Mr.
Jackson's ATV Music catalogue to create a business valued at $500 million.
In addition to the Beatles songs, Mr.
Jackson's catalogue includes songs performed  by Elvis Presley and Little Richard.
Publishing rights to Mr.
Jackson's own songs were not included in the deal.
A spokesman for Mr.
Jackson did not return  a telephone call seeking comment.
He bought ATV in 1985 for about $47.5 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


New Yorkers Say Shalom to Rabin at Carnegie Hall
Carnegie Hall echoed with the "Song for Peace" yesterday as nearly 3,000 New  Yorkers bid shalom to Yitzhak Rabin at a hastily organized memorial service.
Many read the lyrics of the Israeli folk song from a printed text, much as the Prime Minister had during the Tel Aviv peace rally at which he was killed on Saturday night.


Compuserve to Settle Suit
Compuserve Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to settle a copyright infringement lawsuit against the company for an undisclosed amount.
The class-action suit, filed in November 1993, charged the on-line service and its customers with violating the copyrights of about 900 songs owned by the Harry Fox Agency Inc., a musical rights licensing agency.
The suit said the songs were copied by subscribers from the service's data bases.
Compuserve, a unit of H &amp; R Block Inc., did not say it was liable but agreed to make a payment to Harry Fox, which will divide the settlement among publishers whose songs were involved.


U.S. SURGICAL PLANS TO BUY A UNIT OF E-Z-EM INC.
The United States Surgical Corporation, the world's largest maker and marketer of surgical staplers, said yesterday that it would acquire Surgical Dynamics Inc. from E-Z-EM Inc. for $60 million in cash.
Surgical Dynamics, based in Concord, Calif., makes materials and instruments for spinal surgery.
It has developed spine cages that can be implanted to provide support for patients with back injury or degenerative disease.
Surgical Dynamics has completed a four-year clinical trial under control of the Food and Drug Administration and expects to receive approval in 1996 to market the system.
The shares of United States Surgical, which is based in Norwalk, Conn., were unchanged at $24.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
E-Z-EM's class A stock climbed $1.125, to $9.625, on the American Stock Exchange.


Harsco to Acquire Symons
The Harsco Corporation, an industrial products and services company, said today that it had agreed to acquire the Symons Corporation, a maker of concrete-forming equipment, in a stock transaction valued at about $27 million.


Donations Restore Junior Varsity Sports
Junior varsity sports will be restored in New York City's public high schools, at least for the winter and spring seasons, Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew announced yesterday.
The teams, which were cut this fall to help close a $750 million budget gap,  should be back on the fields and in the gyms to begin practice as early as next  week.
They will be financed in part by corporate grants, including $100,000 from Nike Inc., the sports equipment and shoe manufacturer.
Other corporate contributions and $350,000 from the Board of Education were enough to restart the program.


Business Chiefs to Meet This Week in Spain
Business leaders and government officials from the United States and Europe are gathering in Spain this week to discuss ways to lower regulatory barriers and improve the flow of goods between the trading partners.
"I am not aware that there ever has been anything quite like this," said Alexander J. Trotman, chairman and chief executive of the Ford Motor Company.


George Wallace as a Founding Father
THE POLITICS OF RAGE George Wallace, the Origins of the New Conservatism and the Transformation of American Politics By Dan T. Carter Illustrated. 572 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Staley Wins in Reunion
Dawn Staley returned to University Hall to play basketball Tuesday, this time for the other side as a member of the United States' national team.
Staley had 12 assists, 2 steals and 3 points as the United States beat Virginia 96-68.


Waterbury's 7-Term Mayor Ousted
The seven-term Mayor of Waterbury, Conn., Edward Bergin, a survivor with a knack for comebacks and overcoming challenges from his own party, was defeated yesterday by Philip Giordano, a Republican freshman state legislator.
In one of the few upsets in yesterday's municipal elections in Connecticut, Mayor Bergin conceded defeat less than an hour after the polls closed.
One of his top campaign aides said voters may have simply grown tired of Mr.
Bergin, 52, who had been in office 14 of the last 20 years.


Russel Metals Sells Unit
Russel Metals Inc. has sold Cashway Building Center, a chain of building-supplies stores, to an investor group for about $52 million.
Russel, a  metal distributor and processor, said the group that bought Cashway was led by Craig Graham, Cashway's chairman and chief executive.
As part of the deal, Russel leased real estate to the investor group and also retained certain debt and a minority stake in the investor group.
Russel said the sale was part of its strategy to sell its non-metals businesses.


Jose Yglesias, Novelist of Revolution, Dies at 75
Jose Yglesias, a novelist, journalist and playwright best known for writing about Latin Americans affected by revolutions, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his son, the novelist and screenwriter Rafael Yglesias.


Islanders' McLennan Performs No Magic
There was another new look for the Islanders, this time in goal.
The result,  however, remained the same.
Jamie McLennan, just recalled from the minor leagues, had his moments at Nassau Coliseum tonight, especially in the first 20 minutes.
But the Vancouver Canucks had Pavel Bure, Alexander Mogilny, Trevor Linden, Mike Ridley, Jeff Brown and a host of others.


High Court Supports U.S. On Seizures
Bolstering the Government's efforts to seize the assets of convicted drug dealers, the Supreme Court ruled today that defendants who agreed to forfeit their property as part of a guilty plea were not entitled to a judge's review of whether the Government was taking more property than authorized by law.
Ordinarily, a Federal judge must review a guilty plea to make sure that the defendant understood his action and that there was a factual basis for the admission of guilt.
The question for the Court was whether this procedural protection extended to a review of a forfeiture agreement, which is a common part of a bargain for a lighter sentence in Federal drug cases carrying stiff mandatory sentences.


Knicks Get Caught Flat-Footed in Home Opener
The scenes were not encouraging for the courtside set at the Knicks' home opener last night: Anthony Mason leaving the floor for good in the third quarter; Michael Finley, a 6-foot-7-inch rookie leaping high over the 7-foot Patrick Ewing and dunking in a rebound; blood streaming from the side of Charles Smith's fractured nose and, finally, Charles Barkley showing he is still flammable.
For $1,000 last night at Madison Square Garden, you got a front-row view of the Knicks throwing away three impressive quarters of basketball in the last 14  minutes and losing their home opener to the Phoenix Suns, 102-94.


Death Penalty Case Lures Top Legal Help
Had Lawrence Whitehurst been arrested three weeks earlier for the murder and  kidnapping of a 7-year-old girl in Kingston, N.Y., he probably would have ended  up with a single court-appointed lawyer.
But Mr.
Whitehurst was arrested after New York State's death penalty law took effect on Sept. 1.
As a result, Mr.
Whitehurst, an unemployed 25-year-old grocery clerk, has four lawyers, a paralegal, an investigator and a social worker.
And his legal team is not just made up of recent law school graduates making an idealistic detour on their way to lucrative legal careers.
It includes lawyers who were seasoned in states that have the death penalty and who enlisted in New York out of either opposition to capital punishment or a feeling that capital defendants deserve vigorous representation.


8 Million Vanishes At Union
For more than two decades, Teamsters Local 875, which represents truck drivers, garage mechanics, assembly-line workers, rug cleaners and grave diggers in New York City, has been scarred by accusations of graft, kickbacks and crime.
In the last 25 years, five of its officers and financial advisers were convicted of embezzlement or accepting payoffs for sweetheart labor contracts.
A former local president was once described by a United States Senate committee on labor racketeering as "a major 'fence' " for jewelry and other goods stolen from Kennedy International Airport.


War Crimes Conflict
Despite its insistence that war criminals in Bosnia must be brought to justice, the United States, citing national security, said it was withholding intelligence from an international court that is investigating the atrocities.
Article, page A10.


Cellular Provider Sues Telefonos de Mexico
Grupo Iusacell S.A., a big Mexican cellular-phone company, sued Telefonos de  Mexico today, accusing the huge state phone-service provider of illegal business practices.
Iusacell filed the lawsuit with the Federal Competition Commission, contending that Telmex, as it is widely known, illegally subsidizes the business operations of its cellular division, Radio Movil Dipsa S.A., or Telcel, with revenue from its domestic telephone business.


Chase Buys Ibos Stake
Chase Manhattan Bank has bought a 24.05 percent stake in Ibos Ltd., an international banking system.
Terms were not disclosed.
Ibos is owned by Banco Santander of Spain, the Royal Bank of Scotland and Electronic Data Systems Ltd.  of Britain, whose stakes will fall to 24.05 percent each from 31.7 percent each.
The remaining stake is held by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, whose interest will fall to 3.8 percent from 5 percent.


World News Briefs;For Walesa, Final Results In Poland Confirm Runoff
Final results in the first round of Poland's presidential election were released today by the state electoral commission, showing President Lech Walesa  facing a runoff with a former Communist.
Aleksander Kwasniewski, the 41-year-old former Communist Sports Minister, received 35 percent of the vote in Sunday's elections.
Mr.
Walesa, the 52-year-old former shipyard electrician and Solidarity leader, won 33 percent.
A runoff will be held Nov. 19.
Fifteen other contenders have been eliminated.


Races Around the Region: ERIE COUNTY;Strong G.O.P. Challenge Rebuffed
Dennis T. Gorski, a Democrat running for his third term as Erie County Executive, easily defeated his Republican challenger in a race that became a battleground for state Republicans and Democrats alike.
By beating Lucian J. Greco, Mr.
Gorski and his forces stopped what had been three years of solid Republican gains in Erie County, a traditional upstate beachhead for statewide Democratic candidates.
Erie voted heavily for a Republican, George E. Pataki, in the elections last year.


Understand That Quebec Is Different
To the Editor:
Andrew Stark's Nov. 2 Op-Ed article on Quebec nationalism contains the same flaw that almost always underlies assessments of the problem by Canadians outside of French-speaking Quebec and helps perpetuate the secessionist threat.


Personal Health;Vegetables, fruit and exercise fight arthritis, too.
FOR decades, people with wear-and-tear arthritis have been advised to try aspirin first to subdue the aches in their creaky joints.
For those who had to take pain relievers many times a day, drug companies even produced specially coated "arthritis strength" tablets to counter the stomach irritation that can result from chronic aspirin use.
But now aspirin, and its newer rivals, ibuprofen and naproxen, are being relegated to second place, behind another over-the-counter pain reliever, acetaminophen, as the drug of choice for the 16 million Americans with osteoarthritis.
The recommendation is part of new guidelines issued by the American College of Rheumatology to treat arthritis in the two most debilitating joints -- the hip and the knee -- and help those afflicted continue to lead active lives.


Trying to Fulfill Sister's Last Wish
Even from her training base in Germany, Tegla Loroupe sensed that something was wrong at home.
She called her family in Kenya early last week, but could not reach her mother.
In a matter of days, Loroupe would be defending her title in the New York City Marathon.
She felt edgy, unsettled.
Finally, a neighbor accidentally let the bad news slip.
Her family was away at a funeral.
Whose funeral?
Loroupe asked.
The neighbor  would not say.
Loroupe had her German coach, Volker Wagner, call the neighbor again and demand to know the truth.
It was Tegla's sister, Albina, the coach was told.
She had come home from church on Oct. 29 and had begun hemorrhaging.
A day later, at age 33, she died in the hospital.
The doctors could not say why.


Corrections
A review on Oct. 21 about a concert by the Boston Symphony Orchestra at Carnegie Hall misidentified the flute soloist in "The Rose Lake," by Michael Tippett.
She was Elizabeth Ostling, not Amy Porter.


Home Is Where to Filter Drinking Water
To the Editor:
New York's watershed plan, intended to avert the need to build a multibillion-dollar filtration plant, is indeed a progressive step (editorial, Nov. 3).
However, focusing on the protection of reservoirs misses the target of  assuring high-quality drinking water.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Songs of the Wanderer, Haunted and Solitary Christoph Pregardien Weill Hall


New Jersey Daily Briefing;More of Gas Tax to Aid Roads
Last year, the New Jersey ballot was supposed to contain a question about Congressional redistricting, but the Secretary of State's office forgot to include it.
This year, it remembered.
One of the three constitutional amendments approved yesterday would set up a bipartisan commission at the beginning of each decade to redraw Congressional districts.
Another would require the state to put money behind its mandates on local governments and school districts.
The third would dedicate more of the gas tax to the state's Transportation Trust Fund, the financing agency overseeing road, highway and mass transit projects.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Tax Cuts Would Evade Majority of Americans The Republican tax cuts now making their way through Congress would not affect what most Americans owe, a computer analysis shows.
Under the big budget bill passed by the Senate last month, 68 million taxpayers, or 55 percent of all households, would see no change.


Russia's Political Miracle: A Red Comeback
As a man trained in philosophy, Gennadi A. Zyuganov loves to toss around the  big words of the 20th century.
He is forever talking about the social democrats  of Britain and the egalitarianism of Sweden.
And about how liberalism changes when it travels from Germany to Italy to Spain.
But there is one big word you almost never hear the balding, reflective Mr.
Zyuganov say out loud: Communism.
For some people, particularly in Russia these  days, that would be completely understandable.
For the active, voluble and extremely popular chairman of what is still called the Communist Party, it seems a little bit strange.


Baylor, A Winner, Is at a Loss For Words
By the time an expansion team wins its first major award, the manager of the  Colorado Rockies noted yesterday, the team's first manager is usually long gone.
But, he said, "When it happens to their first manager and he's still here. . . . To do it in a short time. . . ."
Don Baylor did not finish either sentence.
That was not unusual for him, but  in this instance, it was understandable because he had just been named the National League manager of the year.


Picasso Is King as Art Auction Tops $100 Million
The important fall art auctions got off to a rip-roaring start at Christie's  last night as enthusiasm for Impressionist and modern art kept building, work after work.
Prices soared and soared, way beyond anyone's expectations, with some paintings almost hitting the same highs they did when they were auctioned in the boom years of the late 1980's.
The sale totaled $107.7 million, breaking the $100 million barrier for the first time since May 1990.
The figure far exceeded Christie's estimate of $84.8  million to $105.5 million.
Of the 62 works offered, 55 found buyers.
And a record was set for a work on paper: Egon Schiele's "Self-Portrait With Raised Elbow" (1914), sold to an unidentified telephone bidder for $1.87 million.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP


Goldman, Sachs Group Strikes Deal for Rockefeller Center
An investor group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and including David Rockefeller struck a deal yesterday to buy Rockefeller Center from Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., the real estate investment trust that is preparing to take ownership of the trophy property.
The deal appears to have ended the pitched months-long battle for Rockefeller Center.
Moreover, it means that Mr.
Rockefeller has apparently succeeded in his fight to restore his family's interest in the Manhattan landmark that his father, John D. Rockefeller Jr., built in the middle of the Great Depression.


Officers Ousted After Charges Of Beating Dog
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he had dismissed a police officer and a sergeant accused of beating a station house beagle in part  because their conduct after the dog's death followed a "pattern of deceit."
The officer and the sergeant were accused of beating the dog last Dec. 10 and then putting it in the trunk of their patrol car and taking it to an animal shelter, where it was put to death.
The men, who denied beating the dog, were suspended in January.


CHRONICLE
CHUCK SCARBOROUGH, the anchor and reporter for WNBC-TV, and OSEOLA McCARTY, the 87-year-old Mississippi laundry woman turned philanthropist, have something  in common: strong ties to the University of Southern Mississippi in Hattiesburg.
Miss McCarty gained national attention in August when she took $150,000 that  she had scrimped and saved from 75 years of washing clothes and donated it to the university for scholarships to black students.


In Wake of Disaster, Opportunity
Gov.
Frank Keating of Oklahoma sat by a sun-bathed window in the lobby of the luxurious St.
Regis Hotel on the Upper East Side of Manhattan one recent morning, autographing photos of himself for constituents back home and recalling the party given the night before in his honor.
With the financier Henry R. Kravis as host at his Manhattan apartment, the affair was attended by corporate icons and celebrities who saluted the Republican Governor's leadership during the difficult days last spring after the Oklahoma City bombing, and discussed what could be done to create jobs and wealth for the people of his state.


Kotite Says He Liked What He Saw of Foley
Rich Kotite described Glenn Foley in such glowing phrases yesterday that it sounded as if he had been ready to anoint the youngster as the Jets' quarterback of the future.
Instead, Foley's future remains as clouded as the Jets' past.
But certainly,  Kotite will give Foley another chance next season assuming he can come back from a serious shoulder dislocation.


Market Place;A Chip Order Is Cut. Result: Technology Stocks Reel.
In an indication that demand may be slowing for some types of personal computers and the parts used to build them, Cirrus Logic Inc. said yesterday that one of its largest clients had too much inventory and was reducing orders for the graphics and audio computer chips that account for the largest part of Cirrus's sales and profits.


APRIA SAYS PRESIDENT RESIGNED TO CONTROL COSTS
The Apria Healthcare Group said yesterday that its president and vice chairman, Timothy M. Aitken, had resigned to control costs.
Apria is the result  of the $1 billion merger in June of the Abbey Healthcare Group and Homedco Inc.
Mr.
Aitken was the chairman, chief executive and president of Abbey before the merger.
"With the imminent prospect of reductions in government reimbursement, it is clear that further cost savings should be made," Mr.
Aitken said.
"Given that I am, and always have been, a strong advocate of the company controlling its costs, I have decided to do my part by eliminating my own position." Apria,  which is based in Costa Mesa, Calif., provides home health services like infusion therapy.


Seductive Appeal of Local Control Over Schools;In London, System Created 7 Years Ago Divides Politicians
Seven years ago, Britain's Conservative Government decided to give publicly financed schools the opportunity to govern themselves, in a sense.
Under the plan, primary and secondary schools could for the first time opt out of their local educational authorities and choose to be run instead by an independent board of governors.
Now school control has become a hot political issue here, with the Conservative and Labor parties divided over how well the change in control has worked and whether to move completely in that direction or to dismantle the plan.


No Headline
We're seeing an increasing number of bagel-related injuries in the emergency service." -- DR. STEPHEN ADAMS, emergency-room physician. [C1:2.]


Ocotlan Journal;For Mexican Artist, 70, All the Town's a Canvas
In a rooftop studio here, an aging artist is taking gentle revenge on art experts who scorned him for most of his life by painting with more energy than ever.
At the age of 70, Rodolfo Morales is in a frenzy of production.


KODAK TO BE FREED OF MARKETING RESTRAINTS
After a two-and-a-half-year battle with the Federal Government, the Eastman Kodak Company has been freed of decades-old restraints intended to keep it from  monopolizing the United States photographic market.
The Justice Department said  yesterday that it would not seek a Supreme Court appeal of a Federal court ruling setting aside consent decrees issued in 1921 and 1954 that were aimed at  restraining Kodak's marketing practices.
The 1921 order prohibited Kodak from making private-label film, while the 1954 order barred the company from including photofinishing costs in film prices.


Consumer Debt Growth Rate Slows Sharply
In another sign of increasingly pinched household budgets, consumers sharply  curtailed new installment debt in September, Federal Reserve figures showed today, adding to a number of recent indications that consumer spending may be running out of steam.
The amount of outstanding installment credit rose $5.4 billion during the month, barely half as much as the August increase.
Credit-card balances increased by $2.8 billion, the slimmest rise of the year.
At the same time, lenders have become more reluctant to make loans.


Rivalry Supplies a Spark for Messier's Milestone
Mark Messier seems to be picking the right time for his memorable accomplishments on the ice.
Messier, the industrious captain of the Rangers, got his 500th goal on a hat trick Monday night in a home game against Calgary, a team that was his biggest rival when he won four Stanley Cup rings with Edmonton.
"He's a master at being able to grab the moment," said Rangers General Manager Neil Smith, who turned down St.
Louis's offer last week to trade Messier for Brett Hull.


Operating Profit Up At British Petroleum
British Petroleum P.L.C. reported yesterday that its third-quarter operating  profits had risen 28 percent, to L532 million ($840 million), but added that it  expected a temporary slowdown in demand for chemicals.
The profits were at the top end of analysts' forecasts.
Analysts had been expecting the company to predict a downturn in the chemicals operations, especially after its rival Royal/Dutch Shell reported falling chemical prices last week.
But British Petroleum said it expected its chemicals operations to benefit from market growth in 1996 after a temporary slowdown in demand.
(Reuters)


Modell Says Debt Forces Him to Move
The only thing missing from the National Football League owners' meeting here today was a big tent and three rings.
Front and center was Art Modell, who denied reports that he would get $50 million up front in the deal to move the Browns from Cleveland to Baltimore.
He said money from the sale of personal seat licenses -- "not a cent will go in my pocket" -- will go toward paying off  the debt on Cleveland Stadium, the practice facility at Berea, Ohio, the cost of relocating the team, severance pay for employees who aren't moving and the relocation cost of those employees who are going to Baltimore.
Modell said at a news conference that he was leaving Cleveland for Baltimore  "with a heavy heart, a profound sense of remorse and almost overwhelming despondency" because he had lost $21 million over the last two years and the franchise was in debt.
Still, he thought Cleveland deserved an N.F.L. team.


Agassi Supports the Arts
ANDRE AGASSI, who is a Las Vegan, has given $100,000 from the proceeds of his Grand Slam for Children benefit concert to a University of Nevada-Las Vegas arts scholarship fund in memory of his friend Cynthia Bunker, a student killed two years ago in a traffic accident in Arizona.
(AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13


Journal;Jew Against Jew
My friend Eden spoke for many American Jews, I think, when she said she respected Yitzhak Rabin enormously without feeling particular affection for him.
So she, like many of us, was taken aback by the surge of emotion she felt as the news spread Saturday.
That surge provoked not only prayer but a two-day vigil at the altar of TV, American-assassination style. (And CNN, bless it, was always there for us -- though couldn't someone have given that pseudo-"Schindler's List" theme music the hook?) Eden's 12-year-old son asked if this was what the Kennedy assassination was really like, and she answered: "It is -- because all we know is that everything changes and we don't know in what way."


BALLY ENTERTAINMENT SETS HEALTH-CLUB UNIT'S SPINOFF
The Bally Entertainment Corporation said yesterday that it planned to issue about 11.8 million shares of the Bally's Health and Tennis Corporation in a spinoff of the unit, which has been losing money.
Bally Entertainment, a Chicago-based casino company, said it planned to issue one share in the unit for every four Bally Entertainment shares held by stockholders of record Nov. 15.
There are 47.2 million shares outstanding.
The distribution is to occur by Jan. 5.
Bally Entertainment has been working on the spinoff for more than a year.
Bally's Health owns about 330 fitness clubs in the United States and Canada, while Bally Entertainment owns casinos in Nevada, New Jersey, Louisiana  and Mississippi.


When First Legislature Sits, The G.O.P. Will Be in Charge
Two centuries after the Constitution made a directly elected Legislature the  foundation of American democracy, Nassau County followed suit today with the election of a new Legislature that appeared to be under Republican Party control.
By midnight, Republican candidates appeared to have captured at least 13 of the 19 seats in Nassau's first Legislature, a political institution created as a result of a civil rights challenge and a Federal judge's ruling that the old Republican-dominated system of government was unconstitutional.


In Medicine of the 90's, House Calls Are to Nurses, on the Telephone
HELLO?"
"My 20-month-old daughter has had a cold for a week that hasn't gotten better, and today she started wheezing. What should I do?"


Races Around the Region: SUFFOLK COUNTY;Executive Wins Second Term Handily
Robert J. Gaffney, a Republican, was re-elected to a second four-year term as Suffolk County Executive, easily defeating his Democratic opponent, Tony Bullock, Supervisor of the Town of East Hampton, by a 2-to-1 ratio.
"We ran a great race and we won because we put government in Suffolk County bank on track," Mr.
Gaffney said as he declared victory.


McCann Promotes A Media Executive
McCann-Erickson USA, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, has promoted George Hayes, a longtime media executive, to two top positions on the West Coast.
Mr.
Hayes, 43, who has been senior vice president and director for agency-of-record accounts at McCann North America in New York, was named senior vice president and media director at McCann's Los Angeles office, succeeding Chuck Abrams, who left.
He was also named to the new position of communications director for the four McCann West Coast offices -- in Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco and Seattle -- and will continue to direct agency-of-record accounts on the West Coast.


U.S. Says It Is Withholding Data From War Crimes Panel
Despite the Clinton Administration's insistence that people who committed war crimes in Bosnia must be brought to justice, the United States said today that it was withholding intelligence from an international court investigating the atrocities.
"There's certain types of intelligence information that our Government cannot share with the international community," said Michael D. McCurry, the White House spokesman, when asked about complaints from the court's chief prosecutor that the United States had not fully cooperated.


3d Man Arrested in Fatal Boston Shootings
A third man was arrested today in the shooting deaths of four people on Monday in a Charlestown neighborhood restaurant as he arrived at a courthouse where two men, including his son, pleaded not guilty to homicide and weapons charges in the case.
The police said they were not sure how the man, Anthony P. Clemente Sr., 46,  of Medford, escaped the restaurant on Monday.
He is to be arraigned on Wednesday morning for four counts of murder, one count of assault with intent to murder and one count of possession of a weapon.


Nicaragua Outbreak May Be Solved
IN investigating an outbreak of disease that has afflicted more than 1,000 people in Nicaragua in recent weeks, Federal scientists may have solved one mystery but created another.
A bacterium that causes leptospirosis has been identified in tissues of four  people who died in the outbreak, providing an important lead in determining its  cause, scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said yesterday.
But the scientists emphasized that the findings were very preliminary and that they needed to test many more people to be sure the illnesses were due to infection with the leptospira spirochete, a form of bacteria.
Leptospira bacteria are spread in urine by many wild and domestic animals like rodents, swine and cattle; the urine can contaminate drinking water.


Campbell Heads to Athens
The former Knick and Laker TONY CAMPBELL is close to signing a one-year contract with AEK Athens for a reported $650,000.
Campbell, 33, averaged 6.8 points and 2.0 rebounds last season in 78 games for the Cleveland Cavaliers.
He  will replace a Denver draft choice, ANTHONY PELLE, who is out for the season because of injury.
(AP)


2 Unwitting Bronx Candidates Savor Their Landslide Defeats
A pair of election losers celebrated their defeats last night.
Two candidates for State Supreme Court justice in the Bronx, whose names were put on the ballot by the Conservative Party without their knowledge or consent,  were defeated by wide margins.


Treasury Officials Accused of Undermining Review in Whitewater Case
Federal regulators told the Senate today that officials in the Treasury Department had undermined a 1994 ethics review that has become the cornerstone of the Clinton Administration's defense against accusations of meddling in the Whitewater investigation.
The regulators, career officials in the inspector general's office at the Resolution Trust Corporation, the savings and loan bailout agency, said the Treasury's top lawyer on what was supposed to be an independent review was a subordinate to a leading figure under investigation and had improperly divulged  details of the case to Administration officials.


Riley Outmaneuvers Knicks Again
The saga began with the Knicks getting the Miami Heat to give them $1 million and a No. 1 draft pick in 1996 to get Pat Riley as coach.
It grew more intriguing when Riley called the free agent Anthony Mason and said something like, "You come here, Mase, we'll take care of you."
The Knicks won that one by re-signing Mason the next day to a deal worth nearly $25 million.
But the gamesmanship between the Knicks and their former coach took another twist last week.


Stiffer Competition In Restaurant Guides
TIM ZAGAT is not an easy man to challenge.
At a robust 6 feet 2 1/2 inches, the publisher of the Zagat Survey has an imposing physique, and his guide to New York City restaurants dominates the field with sales of almost a half million copies a year.
But now there is a new guide in town.
Marcellus Hudalla, a debonair German who has been publishing Marcellino's Restaurant Report in Germany since 1988, has introduced Marcellino's Restaurant Report for New York City.
The pocket-size guide goes on sale this week for $9.95.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Questions Over Teachers' PAC
The Newark Teacher's Union released a report yesterday that raised questions  about whether a political action committee organized by the union's previous management broke the law.
The report said that the Committee on Political Education spent $165,569 from 1980 to 1995; of that, almost $84,000 appears to have gone for unauthorized or unreported donations to candidates.
The fund, which raised money through salary deductions of $1 per month from teachers, aides and clerks, was also never legally registered with the state's Election Law Enforcement Commission, the report said.
SUSAN JO KELLER


If Elite Columbia Students Can't Resolve Hatreds
To the Editor:
By publishing the anti-Semitic drivel of Sharod Baker, a black Columbia University senior, The Columbia Daily Spectator may have uncovered a deeper human rights schism on campus (NYC column, Nov. 1).
Mr.
Baker cannot be viewed as a wayward student.
He is reported to be president of Columbia's Black Students Organization.


A Novel by Pat Barker Wins the Booker Prize
The Ghost Road," the third novel in Pat Barker's World War I trilogy, won the Booker Prize for fiction today, after a competition that was unusually free  of conflict, by Booker standards.
Ms.
Barker's novel, which beat out four other finalists including the heavily favored "Moor's Last Sigh," Salman Rushdie's novel about three generations of a  remarkable family, is about a working-class officer who returns to the front line after a shellshocked convalescence.
She wrote it, she said, so readers would think not just about the horrors of the war, but also about "why it happened and the effects it had on society."


New Jersey Daily Briefing;More 'Green' for 'Green Acres'
Nine times since 1961, voters have been asked to approve money for a land acquisition program known as "Green Acres." Nine times they have said yes.
The first eight votes resulted in bond issues of $1.14 billion to buy land for recreation and conservation.
The vote yesterday produced $340 million more.


In Texas, the 'Inner Child' Has Finger on the Trigger
To carry a concealed weapon here in Texas, a person must pay a $140 application fee, have no history of major crime or mental illness, demonstrate an understanding of use-of-force laws and pass a shooting proficiency test with  a .38-caliber revolver or a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun.
And one other thing: the applicant must be in touch with his or her inner child.


Legalizing Drugs Creates More Addicts
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's exhortation to legalize drugs (column, Nov. 3) reminds me of  the blind man who grasped the elephant's tail and concluded the elephant was a snake.


Organic Foods Go Mainstream
THIS week, shoppers can add the name Wild by Nature to a short list of organic and natural-foods supermarkets in the country that includes Mrs.
Gooch's in California, Bread and Circus in New England, Fresh Fields in the East and Whole Foods Markets in the West.
The first Wild by Nature store will open on Friday in what was a King Kullen supermarket on North Country Road (Route 25A) in East Setauket, L.I.
Wild by Nature is a new division of the King Kullen chain of 45 supermarkets  on Long Island.
It is the first time a mainstream supermarket chain has opened a store dedicated to organic and natural foods.


Where Repetition Is Exciting
Not long ago, botanists discovered that mushrooms scattered over a 30-acre area in upper Michigan were actually part of one huge fungus.
Something similar is happening here at the headquarters campus of the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, where new materials for products as diverse as highway signs, laptop computer screens and diapers are growing out of a single manufacturing technology called microreplication.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about an agreement to protect New York City's watershed referred incorrectly to an expected increase of $7 in water rates.
It would be annual, not monthly.


Editorial Notebook;Cyberspace in Singapore
From his 37th-floor office overlooking Singapore Strait, George Yeo can survey the oil refineries and bustling dockyards that helped make Singapore the  trade and financial center of Southeast Asia.
But the view that interests the Minister of Information and the Arts these days is not the vista beyond his window.
It is the image on the computer terminal at his desk.
Mr.
Yeo, like the  rest of Singapore's top politicians, wants his country to be a leader in the manufacture and use of computer technology without relinquishing the Government's chokehold on the dissemination of information in Singapore.


Corrections
An article on Monday about tribal elections held by the Mashantucket Pequot Indians in Connecticut referred incorrectly to the status of some participants.
Michael Goodwin, who criticized the tribe's leaders, ran unsuccessfully for the  tribal council.
He was not disqualified, nor were any tribal members ruled ineligible to run.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Schubert and Mozart Together: Which Is More Substantial?
Orchestra of St.
Luke's Carnegie Hall


Rapper Arrested on Gun and Drug Charges
William Drayton, the rapper known as Flavor Flav, was arrested in the South Bronx last night for carrying an unlicensed gun and three vials of crack, the police said.


Wait for Debt Limit Deal Keeps Bond Traders Quiet
Bond prices moved lower within a narrow range in light trading yesterday, as  credit market participants continued to watch the talks in Congress about the Federal budget and the debt ceiling and showed scant reaction to economic data and comments made by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan.
Traders noted continuing consolidation within the market, as some participants locked in gains made last week, with only modest buying from those  taking advantage of dips in prices to pick up bargains.


New Jersey Democrats Gain 3 Seats and Respect
New Jersey Democrats picked up three seats in the General Assembly today, narrowing the Republicans' margin of control in the State House and giving Democrats a boost in a year of Republican dominance across the nation.
The change makes no difference in the Republicans' overwhelming control of the Assembly but was a morale builder for the embattled minority party.


EQUITABLE COS. (EQ,N)
The Equitable Companies reported yesterday that net earnings rose 9 percent in the third quarter, helped by gains from its brokerage and money management divisions.
Profit totaled $97.4 million, or 49 cents a share, compared with $89.3 million, or 47 cents a share, in the quarter.
The results were slightly less than Wall Street estimates.


Sri Lanka Takes Control Of Relief Aid In Rebel Areas
As its advancing troops tighten their grip on the rebel-held city of Jaffna,  the Government has rejected appeals from the United Nations and international relief agencies for permission to mount stepped-up independent operations to care for tens of thousands of people who have fled the fighting.
Instead, President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga has announced that all  food, shelter and medical care must be funneled through the Government's own relief operation.


Edward Wormley, 87, Designer Of Modern Residential Furniture
Edward J. Wormley, a style setter in modern residential furniture in the United States for four decades, died on Friday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 87 and lived in Weston.
Mr.
Wormley designed furniture from 1930 to 1970.
He began creating pieces with simplified silhouettes and plain surfaces after a trip in 1930 to Paris, where he met Le Corbusier and Emile-Jacques Ruhlmann, the Art Deco designer.
Back in the United States in 1931, he was hired by the Dunbar Furniture Corporation of Berne, Ind., to improve its least expensive furniture line, which people bought with soap coupons and was therefore popularly referred to as "borax."


Graf Drops Set, Not the Match
Steffi Graf said she was rusty after struggling to defeat Amy Frazier, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2, today in a second-round match at the Advanta Championships.
Dogged by  health problems, Graf has played just once since the United States Open, losing  in the first round at Brighton.
"I need one or two matches to get my shots going," Graf said.
She won the Philadelphia tournament in 1992.
"I feel pretty good now."


Grief and Guilt Soak Gravesite Like the Rain
By late afternoon today the skies had turned gray, and an chill rain soaked candles and letters placed next to the wreath-covered grave of Yitzhak Rabin at  the Mount Herzl cemetery.
But Israelis streamed there into the night to stand in silence, leaving behind notes, poems and makeshift signs that have become part of a landscape of  grief across the country.


With New Fare, Drivers Brace for Breakdowns (in Civility)
THESE are days of dread at the Manhattanville Bus Depot, on West 132d Street  alongside the Henry Hudson Parkway.
Unless a miracle occurs in the form of Federal court intervention, bus and subway fares will go up by a quarter on Sunday, to $1.50.
The scores of drivers  who report to Manhattanville each day and then ride off to navigate the streets of Manhattan and the Bronx know what that means.


Voters Back Company in Close Schools Vote
An attempt to end Hartford's controversial experiment with private management of public schools fell short today when candidates pledged to cancel the city's  contract with Education Alternatives Inc. failed to win a majority on the Board  of Education.
With the president of the school board and a chief defender of the for-profit company, Thelma Dickerson, winning her race by fewer than 200 votes out of about 6,400 cast, according to unofficial counts, candidates supporting the company gained three of the five open seats.


Betting Australian, Without the Travel
The Meadowlands, which pioneered all-out, full-card simulcasting three years  ago and thrived, has been noticing a "malaise" creeping over business this autumn and does not know what it means.
Even so, it was a pioneer again this week by bringing the Melbourne Cup from Australia to the United States for the first time in one more example of a business reaching overseas for solutions.
"It's not going to transform our business," Chris McErlean, assistant general manager of the Meadowlands, said.
"But it's a good start. It exposed people to a new product."


Hostetler's Modest Goal: Play Well and Win by a Smirk
Jeff Hostetler's eight-year career with the Giants ended on less than amicable terms after Dan Reeves chose Phil Simms to be the team's starting quarterback for the 1993 season.
On Sunday at Giants Stadium, Hostetler finally  gets his chance to show Reeves what he can do when the Raiders meet the Giants.
"He'll downplay it like he always does," Doug Hostetler, one of Jeff's three  brothers, said yesterday, speaking by telephone from his office in Baltimore.
"But he's been looking forward to this game for a long time. He has a long memory. He doesn't forget. In his mind, his objective is to win the game, play well and leave with a smirk on his face."


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Wildwood Backs Casino Plan
In the shadow of Atlantic City, voters opened the door for Indians to run a casino.
Officials in Wildwood have proposed deeding a 2.5-acre municipal parking lot to the Delaware tribe of Oklahoma.
Each year, the Delawares would give the town of 5,000 residents $8 million from casino profits.
The vote endorsing the plan, which still faces an uphill battle for state and Federal approval, was 1,028 to 481.


A Comedy of Trans-Atlantic Manners
Richard Nelson's "New England," which opened last night at the Manhattan Theater Club, is a comedy of mixed heritage about trans-Atlantic manners.
Mr.
Nelson, an American playwright ("Two Shakespearean Actors" and "Some Americans Abroad," among others), is less well known at home than he is in London, where "New England" was given a production of stinging wit this year by the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Though the setting is a farmhouse in western Connecticut, seven of the eight characters are English, six of them members of the same family.


Brakes on the Revolution
House Speaker Newt Gingrich has finally made good on his five-month-old agreement with President Clinton to set up a commission to study campaign finance reform.
This may sound like good news.
Yet if Congress follows this path, it will be another blow to voters' hopes that the 104th Congress would be different, that it would represent change, that it can be trusted.
What we need is not more study of the problem of money and politics in Washington.
What we need is to end the problem.


3 Plead Guilty in Rape Case That Rocked Japan


Dow Chemical Hid Truth on Breast Implants;Injured Still Wait
To the Editor:
For every plaintiff's lawyer that tort reformers like Joseph Nocera cite as earning tons of money (Op-Ed, Nov. 1), there is a defense law firm making much more money up front and on an hourly basis.


Chicago Experiment Offers Lessons, But No Verdict on Decentralization
Six years ago, Chicago ushered in the nation's most radical exercise in transforming the way schools are run, shifting power from a central office to principals and elected school councils at all the 553 schools in its system.
Since then, much of what Chicago pioneered has become a model that cities across the country, particularly New York, are viewing as a potential road map for improving public schools.


Devils Sign a 12-Year Lease, but Keep an Escape Clause
The Raiders returned to Oakland.
The Browns are heading to Baltimore.
And the Yankees may migrate across the Hudson from the Bronx.
But the New Jersey Devils  are going nowhere.
For 11 more seasons. Definitely.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Live Man Outlasts Dead Man
Donald Cresitello ran against a dead man and won.
The outcome of the Council  election was less certain than it might at first have appeared.
The local Republican committee urged residents to pay their last respects by voting for George Burke, who died Sept. 22.
"Unfortunately, George passed on before he was  able to achieve his goal," Margit Brown, chairwoman of the Morristown Republican Committee, told voters in the town's third ward.
"This, however, does not mean you cannot vote for George Burke." Last night, Mr.
Cresitello, a Democrat and former Mayor and Council member, was declared the winner.
He received 462 votes  to Mr.
Burke's 182.


Food Notes
Wine at the Greenmarket


Strong Cable Growth Helps Turner's Profits
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. yesterday reported a turnaround in earnings in the third quarter on the strength of its cable networks and the start of syndication of the television show "Seinfeld."
Turner Broadcasting, whose acquisition by Time Warner Inc. is pending, earned $39.8 million, or 14 cents a share, compared with a loss of $4.6 million, or 2 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
In the 1994 quarter, the company took a charge of $25 million, or 5 cents a share, for early debt retirement.


CHRONICLE
DAVID HOCKNEY, the British artist who has lived in Los Angeles for more than  30 years, received a welcome in London yesterday worthy of a rock star.
Reporters, photographers and television crews mobbed a news conference where he  appeared in connection with a retrospective show of his drawings that opens tomorrow at the Royal Academy of Arts.
Some journalists were unable to squeeze into the room for the hourlong session.


French Premier Shuffles Cabinet, Hoping to Shore Up Confidence
Prime Minister Alain Juppe put a new face on his conservative Government today after six months in which he and President Jacques Chirac have seen their  popularity fall precipitously.


MCI to Allow Record Buyers To Dial Up And Tune In
Movies on demand and interactive television will have to wait.
The MCI Communications Corporation, in its first plunge into the entertainment business, plans to introduce on Wednesday what amounts to a record store that sells music  over a toll-free "800" telephone number.
Customers who dial the service will be able to hear snippets from about 20,000 songs and then order an album, all by pressing buttons on their touch-tone telephones.
Callers will be able to listen free to as many snippets -- each lasting about 20 to 30 seconds -- as they wish.
MCI is hoping to make money selling records and will ask customers making their first call to set up accounts by providing credit card and address information.


Fuji Bank Sets Write-Off
Fuji Bank, one of Japan's largest commercial banks, said yesterday that it would write off by next March all the problem loans it had made to Japan's heavily indebted housing-loan companies.
Fuji becomes the first major Japanese bank to declare its intention to rid itself of the bad loans in one lump sum.
Most banks had been expected to take several years to write off the loans.
Fuji  has not disclosed its total of such problem loans.
Its president, Toru Hashimoto, said Fuji would not incur pretax losses from the write-off, though he acknowledged that some other banks might if they took similar action.
(Bloomberg Business News)


METRO DIGEST
BUSINESS DISTRICTS CITED FOR ABUSES


Stocks Finish Lower, With the Dow Down 16.98 Points
Stock prices slumped yesterday, as a wave of selling in technology issues again pushed much of the market lower.
Both stock and bond traders were also increasingly concerned about the unsolved Federal budget dispute between the Clinton Administration and Congress.


Murphy, the Veteran Prosecutor, Wins Again
When it became clear last night that Guy V. Molinari, the most popular political figure on Staten Island, had lost his bid to become the borough's district attorney, perhaps no one was more suprised than William L. Murphy, who  had held the office for 12 years but whose low profile had made him unknown to many voters at the start of the race last spring.
"I've said it about six times in the course of the campaign: Wow!" said Mr.
Murphy, who had once seemed certain to lose to the Borough President, but who had made gains in recent weeks.


Calvin Klein is withdrawing, and reshooting, some underwear ads after more complaints are heard.
FOR the second time in three months, Calvin Klein is embroiled in a controversy over his advertising, though this one covers -- or uncovers, to be precise -- familiar ground: his penchant for underwear ads that bare flesh.
Even so, another Klein campaign is being revamped after coming under fire.
Warnaco Inc., which manufactures the underwear brand bearing Mr.
Klein's name, and Calvin Klein Inc., his company, say the underwear advertisements will be changed; some are being withdrawn and replaced with ads that have already appeared without incident.


A 5-Man Mission For Peace
One runner was hoping to qualify for the 1996 Summer Olympics.
Another had been training for a year to run his first marathon.
Then, 12 hours before five Israeli athletes were to board a plane for this coming Sunday's New York City Marathon, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated.
All five Israelis said they considered dropping out of the race.
On second thought, they decided, what better way to carry the message of peace than running through the five boroughs of New York?


Florida Sues Carter Son And Ex-Aide
The State of Florida filed suit on Monday against one of former President Jimmy Carter's sons and Mr.
Carter's former budget director, Bert Lance, among others, citing their involvement in an insurance company that officials said had defrauded a workers' compensation fund.
Neither Mr.
Carter's son, James (Chip) Carter 3d, nor Mr.
Lance was directly  involved in any wrongdoing, said C. Timothy Gray, a lawyer for the Florida Department of Insurance, which filed the suit.


Tokyo May Get 2d Disney Park
The Walt Disney Company and the Japanese operator of Tokyo Disneyland plan to build a new Disney theme park in Tokyo, the companies said today.
The Oriental Land Company, the Japanese concern that opened Tokyo Disneyland  in 1983, said it hoped to sign a final agreement with Disney in the spring to build the park on Tokyo Bay next to Tokyo Disneyland.
The park would open in the latter half of 2000 or the first half of 2001.


Let History Show United Nations Site Is Developer's Credit
To the Editor:
What can one say about an advertiser who knowingly rewrites history to score  political points with the public for reasons not altogether clear?


Ex-Student Is Found Insane in Killing of 2
A former law student who said he could read minds was found not guilty by reason of insanity today in the deaths of two men he shot to death near the University of North Carolina campus.
The gunman, Wendell Williamson, 26, was immediately sent to a mental hospital.
He could be held until he proved he was no longer mentally ill or no longer a danger to himself or others.


Mountain Affair Wins Stakes
Mountain Affair, a 2-year-old daughter of Mt.
Livermore, balked and kicked for several minutes yesterday before entering the starting gate at Aqueduct, then came out flying and went on to win the Miss Grillo Stakes for her third victory in four starts.
Lulu's Ransom finished 1 1/4 lengths back in second, two lengths ahead of Casanova Storm.
The favorite, Majestic Dream, ran fifth.


Industry Group Rebuffs U.S. On Encryption
The campaign by the Clinton Administration to create a standard for data encryption acceptable to industry, civil liberties and law enforcement groups broke down yesterday when a group including some of the nation's most powerful technology companies rejected a compromise proposal.
The aim is to set a policy that meets the needs of electronic commerce as well as the concerns of the National Security Agency and other Federal offices that are opposed to the proliferation of data-coding software, feeling it will make it impossible for them to gather intelligence overseas.


Mexican Business Trying to Create Funds to Shield Peso
Government and business leaders are holding closed-door negotiations on a private industry proposal to create joint funds to stabilize the peso, officials and executives here said today.
Leading Mexican companies offered to contribute to a fund of about $5 billion that could be used to buy pesos in currency markets to help bolster the value of the peso when it faced sharp selloffs.


Rona Jaffe Propriety Becomes Her (Or Does It?)
RONA JAFFE was only 26 when her best-selling first novel, "The Best of Everything," challenged the placid world order of the 1950's.
Her sharp-edged portrayal of "girls brought up to fulfill the image of what boys wanted" and "the 50's rat race toward the altar" shocked many readers, in 1958, mostly men.
Career instead of marriage?
Horrors!
Perhaps unsurprisingly, she has been on her best behavior ever since.


Powell Ends His Brief Seclusion, But Not the Big Guessing Game
Colin L. Powell came, he spoke and he left a travel agents' convention here today without giving any hint on whether he will run for President.
In a midday speech before a friendly, attentive crowd at the American Society of Travel Agents, General Powell made one passing reference to his post-book-tour deliberations about whether to enter the 1996 Presidential race.
"I know that there is a role for each and every one of us to play," he said.
"I'm searching for the role I should play."


For Troubled Partnership, A History of Problems
The Grand Central Partnership, which faced and denied allegations this year that its workers were roughing up homeless people, confronted similar allegations of abuse as early as 1990, an inquiry by the City Council has found.


Lazard May Close Municipal Bond Business
Lazard Freres &amp; Company has told employees it expects to decide soon whether  to close its embattled municipal bond business.
Lazard's municipal market activities have been under scrutiny from Federal regulators for more than two years.
Last month, along with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the partnership agreed to pay regulators $24 million to settle charges  of fraud related to a fee-splitting arrangement between the two brokerage firms.
It was the largest cash settlement ever in the municipal market.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:


The Death of Rabin: An On-Line Report
A special report on the Rabin assassination, including articles and photos from the archives of The New York Times, is available to computer users on


A UNIT OF FIRST HAWAIIAN WILL BE SOLD
The Bank of New York Company signed an agreement yesterday to buy the municipal bond and trust business of First Hawaiian Bank for undisclosed terms.
Bank of New York said the acquisition involved the transfer of about 20 municipal bond trustee and agency relationships.
The acquisition is expected to  close in the fourth quarter and will add to earnings immediately, Bank of New York said.
The deal was the 10th trust acquisition in two years by Bank of New York.
First Hawaiian Bank is a unit of First Hawaiian Inc., which is based in Honolulu.


SHARES OF PETE'S BREWING SURGE ON THEIR FIRST DAY
The stock of the Pete's Brewing Company soared yesterday on its first day of  trading.
Shares of Pete's Brewing, a microbrewery in Palo Alto, Calif., were priced at $18 and closed at $25.25.
Three million shares were offered.
Analysts  cited the brewer's loyal customer base, the growth of microbrewers and demand from investors who missed out on shares of the last such brewer to go public, Redhook Ale Brewery Inc., as reason's for the offering's strength.


Stocks Lower in Japan
Stocks traded lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 157.93 points, or nine-tenths of 1 percent, at 17,863.29.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei slipped 15.75 points.


World News Briefs;China Will Seek a Rival For Dalai Lama's Choice
China said today that it was searching for its own reincarnation of the second holiest lama in Tibet to set up a rival to the six-year-old boy chosen by Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama.
Chinese officials said monks gathered in Beijing were expected to identify the boy in an ancient rite this week.
"The Dalai Lama's arbitrary selection of a soul boy as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama is null and void," said the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang, referring to the Dalai Lama's announcement last May.


Third-Quarter Earnings Rose 43.8% at Bayer
Bayer A.G. said yesterday that its third-quarter pretax profit rose 43.8 percent, even as the chief executive predicted that earnings might begin to fall.
The company, Germany's second-largest chemical maker, said third-quarter profit jumped to 906 million marks ($638 million), lifting nine-month pretax profit 39 percent above the period a year ago, to 3.3 billion marks.
"The fourth quarter might not be so good as last year," the chief executive, Manfred Schneider, said, adding that it "would be a success" if the 1995 full-year profit level could be maintained in 1996.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Schneider said that an increase in the dividend still made sense.
Shareholders received 13 marks a share last year, and Mr.
Schneider indicated that the payout could reach 14 marks soon.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Copper Price Up on Tight Stocks And Precious Metals Also Jump
Copper prices surged on the Commodity Exchange of New York yesterday on signs of persistent tightness in supply.
Precious metals also rose sharply, which helped lift the Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities 0.81 point, to 244.34.


INSIDE
Action Urged on AIDS Drug


Daimler Says the Dutch Must Help Save Fokker
Daimler-Benz A.G. said yesterday that it would not bail out its Netherlands-based Fokker aircraft unit unless the Dutch Government also contributed to a rescue effort.
Fokker needs an estimated 2.3 billion guilders ($1.45 billion) in financial aid and is being kept afloat by short-term loans from Daimler.
The Dutch Government, which owns 22 percent of the holding company that controls Fokker, said that if it contributed at all to a rescue effort, it would do so only in proportion to the stake it holds.
The main responsibility for Fokker's rescue lies with Daimler-Benz, said Luuc van Zijp, a spokesman for  the Economics Ministry in The Hague.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Veterans Seek Free Agency
Some of the elderly eligibles filed for free agency yesterday.
ANDRE DAWSON of Florida, 41, LOU WHITAKER of Detroit, 38, and BRETT BUTLER of Los Angeles, 38, added their names to the list, along with CHUCK FINLEY of California and GREG GAGNE of Kansas City.
The Seattle Mariners prevented JOEY CORA, their second baseman, from becoming a free agent, exercising the option in his contract for $600,000 next season.
The Chicago White Sox, though, chose not to pick up the option on center fielder LANCE JOHNSON, who would have had a $3.15 million salary.


No Muss, No Fuss At 1995 Carnegie
The Carnegie International is once again falling asleep at the wheel, or at least that's the implication of the congenial assortment of painting, sculpture  and video art forming the 1995 incarnation of this big survey of contemporary art.
Founded in 1896 and mounted every few years at the Carnegie Museum of Art, the Carnegie International has, like most such shows, drifted between alertness  and drowsy irrelevance.
Its most recent nap began in the late 1960's, ending when the show was roused for the late-1980's art boom.
Its Paul Reveres were John R. Lane, then director of the Carnegie, and John Caldwell, its curator of contemporary art, who put the show back on the map by aggressively stacking the  decks of the 1985 and 1988 versions with European and American 80's art stars, most prominently Neo-Expressionists, before leaving for the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.


Queens Jury Convicts Man Of 6 College Point Murders
After less than six hours of deliberations, a jury in State Supreme Court in  Queens convicted a 30-year-old Manhattan man last night of murdering six people  in a College Point condominium last January.
The man, Enrique Rodriguez, was also convicted of related robbery charges and of attempting to murder a young woman who survived to testify despite being shot in the head and slashed in the throat.


Pirates' Buyer Is Approved
The Pittsburgh Pirates' 15-month search for new owners neared an end yesterday when major league baseball's ownership committee authorized KEVIN McCLATCHY's purchase of the team.
The Pirates' owners will vote today on the $85 million buyout.
Ratification is almost a certainty; 5 of the 10 owners have joined McClatchy's group.
If the owners accept, McClatchy would sign a final purchase agreement and post the remaining $2 million of his $3 million down payment.
Ten of the 14 National League owners and 8 of the 14 American League owners  must still ratify the sale, with a vote expected at a January meeting.
But the ownership committee's approval is often the key hurdle.
In all, 12 investors have pledged more than $40 million in cash, including McClatchy's own $10 million stake.
(AP)


Lush Music To Match Emotions On Screen
Movie music is quite insistently in vogue.
CD best-seller lists are cluttered with soundtrack albums these days.
Most of those, however, are compilations of established pop songs used in films to evoke mood and period.
The technique owes more than a bow or two to Dennis Potter's "Pennies From Heaven."


Business Travel;The White House Conference on Travel and Tourism produces a series of recommendations.
THE many business executives who attended last week's White House Conference  on Travel and Tourism are back at their usual haunts, after having voted to carry out a series of recommendations.
The recommendations include include making it easier for foreign business and leisure travelers to enter the United States, and developing a reliable economic analysis of the travel and tourism industry, which is currently valued at $417 billion.


Israel's Leader Declines to Call Early Elections
Israel's Acting Prime Minister, Shimon Peres, said today that he would not call national elections quickly, a step that would have taken advantage of the wave of sympathy aroused by the assassination of his predecessor Yitzhak Rabin.
In so doing he insured that the furious maneuvering and mutual recriminations that began as soon as Mr.
Rabin's body was laid to rest would continue until the elections scheduled for next November.


H.M.O. Quality Called Equal, at Less Cost
A broad new study asserts that patients treated by health maintenance organizations and those treated by doctors in traditional medical practices had  similar results, even though the H.M.O.'s cost substantially less.
The study, by the New England Medical Center in Boston and the Rand Corporation in Santa Monica, Calif., is the first comprehensive case-by-case comparison of the treatment and cost of the two kinds of health care systems.
It was published yesterday in The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Fast Campaign Reform
To the Editor:
You are right to criticize Speaker Newt Gingrich for his obstruction of genuine campaign finance reform legislation (editorial, Nov. 6).
But you miss the mark when you recommend two bills that make only cosmetic changes to campaign regulations.


Officer Leaves Hospital and Begins Therapy
With hopeful words spoken from a hospital gurney, a 29-year-old police officer paralyzed in a gunfight between the police and drug suspects in an East  Village bodega last month left Bellevue Hospital Center yesterday to begin his rehabilitation.
Surrounded by fellow officers and accompanied by his wife, the officer, Keith Prunty of Levittown, L.I., said he hoped one day to return to the police force.


Aristide Sets Dec. 17 As Date for Election
Haiti today set Dec. 17 as the date for elections intended to select a new president when Jean-Bertrand Aristide's term ends in February.
But with just five weeks to prepare, opposition leaders are vowing to boycott the vote, accusing Mr.
Aristide of robbing them of time to run credible campaigns.


Regency Files For Chapter 11
Regency Holdings (Cayman) Inc. filed yesterday for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law  protection from creditors.


Molinari Loses Race for District Attorney on Staten Island
Guy V. Molinari, the powerful Borough President of Staten Island, was soundly defeated last night in his bid to unseat District Attorney William L. Murphy, the three-term Democratic incumbent who had stressed his experience as a prosecutor over his opponent's considerable political sway in the borough.
On a dark and drizzly Election Day with few major contests, voters around the region went to the polls in small to moderate numbers to pick a score of mostly  minor offices and to decide on several ballot initiatives.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov 3
Oct 27
Nov 4
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.4
7.5 Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2 Gasoline stocks
197.0
196.7
202.3 Distillate stocks
131.4
129.8
142.5 Crude imports, daily
7.0
7.5
6.7 Product imports, daily
1.3
1.3
1.6 Crude stocks
308.3
301.8
339.8 Crude production, daily
6.4
6.4
6.7 Refinery utilization (%)
89.5
90.3
90.1


H&amp;R Block Official Quits
H &amp; R Block said today that Harry W. Buckley, 50, the president and chief executive of the tax services unit, had resigned effective Dec. 4.
The company did not give a reason for Mr.
Buckley's resignation, which came after 27 years with the company.


Races Around the Region: YONKERS;Zaleski Ousted as Mayor By a Republican Councilman
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski, an insurgent Democrat who took office in 1991 vowing to end political corruption and the city's fight against desegregation, was ousted last night by John D. Spencer, a Republican Councilman who branded the Mayor an isolated and ineffective leader.
Mr.
Spencer, the 48-year-old majority leader of the Council, led 57 percent to 43 percent, capturing 21,682 votes with 253 of the city's 262 districts reporting.
The Mayor had 16,669 votes.


An Arkansas Firm Is Fined By N.A.S.D.
The National Association of Securities Dealers said today that it had fined a Little Rock, Ark., brokerage firm, its former president and other employees $258,400 after they agreed to settle charges that the firm's customers had been  given misleading statements about the risks of mutual fund shares.
N.A.S.D., the brokerage industry's self-regulatory organization, said it had  imposed the fine against Worthen Investments Inc.; Patrick Miller, the former president; Frank McGibbony, its executive vice president and former compliance officer, and seven of its registered representatives.


Streamlining Jury Service, at Last
Chief Judge Judith Kaye has announced new rules that will add dignity and efficiency to New York State's civil justice system and make jury service a less depressing experience than it is now.
Beginning on Jan. 1, the time-consuming jury selection process will no longer be left entirely to windy lawyers who often subject prospective jurors to repetitive questioning and long waits.
Instead, judges will begin overseeing jury selection and will impose limits on how long lawyers can interrogate potential jurors.


Gain at Fund Manager
Mercury Asset Management, Britain's largest fund manager, said yesterday that its first-half pretax profit rose 11 percent as it increased its funds under management in a "relatively weak" retail market.
Pretax profit in the six months that ended on Sept. 30 rose to L63.5 million ($99.7 million), from L57 million in the period a year ago.
Some analysts said the earnings were at the bottom of  the range of expectations.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Jesse Helms's Hostages
Because of the obstinacy of Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the United States does not have an ambassador in Beijing at a time when relations with China have reached their most delicate and dangerous point in more than 20 years.
President Clinton's choice for this crucial post is former Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee, a moderate Democrat who could normally count on easy confirmation  from his former colleagues.
Mr.
Sasser could be using his considerable political skills and closeness to Mr.
Clinton to improve communications between the two capitals and provide the kind of consistent attention the President himself or the Secretary of State is unable to give.
He ought to be confirmed without further delay.


World News Briefs;Possibly Ancient Carving Delays Portuguese Dam
Portugal's new Socialist Government stopped work today on a dam project whose waters threatened to flood caves containing Stone Age rock carvings that archeologists say are among the oldest in Europe.
Prime Minister Antonio Guterres told Parliament that work on the Foz Coa dam  project would be halted while experts were given time to confirm the date of the artwork.


F.D.A. Panel Urges Fast Action On Approving a New AIDS Drug
A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel today recommended expedited approval of the first of a new class of drugs to fight the virus that causes AIDS.
The panel of experts said that the drug saquinavir should be approved as the  vanguard of a group of drugs called protease inhibitors that interfere with the  reproduction of the virus, H.I.V.


Dow Chemical Hid Truth on Breast Implants
To the Editor:
Joseph Nocera's "What Did Dow Chemical Do?" (Op-Ed, Nov. 1) deserves an accurate answer.
What Dow Chemical did was conceal the hazards of liquid silicone that makes up 85 percent of the gel in silicone gel breast implants.


Corrections
A listing of prominent figures at Yitzhak Rabin's funeral, compiled by The Associated Press, included a name erroneously yesterday.
Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger did not attend; former Secretaries Cyrus R. Vance and George P. Shultz did.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Leonia Against Regionalization
If it was not clear to local officials already, it should be now: Leonia residents want them to do everything in their power to fight a school regionalization plan aimed at desegregating the high school in neighboring Englewood.
They have been speaking out against recommendations to involve their  schools and others in Bergen County in state efforts to improve the racial balance at Dwight Morrow High School.
A question on yesterday's ballot asking whether the mayor and Council members should take "all appropriate action" to fight regionalization was approved, 2,027 votes to 244.


A Bumper Crop of Brandied Sour Cherries
SOUR cherries are a small and unpredictable crop in New York State.
To be on  the safe side, last spring Waldy Malouf, the chef at the Hudson River Club, arranged for the restaurant to buy the entire crop of sour cherries at Kleins Kill Farm in Germantown, N.Y.
But the summer's harvest was abundant, producing more of the tart cherries than Mr.
Malouf could use in the restaurant.
He has brandied the extras and is now selling them, pitted or unpitted, for $7.50 for four ounces and $29.50 for a half gallon.
They are sold at the restaurant, 4 World Financial Center, 250 Vesey Street.


Young Is Willing to Face Cowboys, but Not Quite Eager
No one wants to know whether Steve Young will play this weekend more than Steve Young.
Young's team, defending Super Bowl champion San Francisco, staggers into the  once highly anticipated showdown at Dallas on Sunday not knowing who will start  at quarterback.
Will it be Young, who has stood on the sideline with a bruised throwing shoulder for the last three games, two of them losses?
Or will it be his backup, Elvis Grbac, who is listed as questionable because of a sprained ankle?


New Jersey Daily Briefing;A Step Toward Consolidation
There really are two Princetons: the borough, a 1.76-square-mile area encompassing the downtown area and the university campus, and the township that  surrounds it, 16.39 square miles of estates and suburban businesses and homes.
They share a common library, planning board and health commission, but have retained separate governments, police departments, courts and budgets.


Deli-Shortcut Salad
WHEN you get home late and just don't feel like turning on the stove for any  reason, here is a dish that you can throw together in no time.
Take advantage of your deli counter: have a piece of smoked turkey cut that weighs about six ounces.
If you have a good salad bar, buy some cut-up red peppers and red onion.
Even if you have to cut these yourself, the rest of the work consists only of washing, chopping and combining the ingredients.
Add crusty country bread, and dinner is served.


The Honors Come Late For a Japanese Schindler;A Month of Tribute to Savior of Thousands
In 1940, as the first spasms of war struck Europe, Chiune Sugihara was an obscure bureaucrat serving as the Japanese consul in Kaunas, Lithuania.
He was a kind and gentle family man, an able linguist, a typical low-level civil servant.
Then, in one ineffable moment, he became a hero.


Scientists Say Rain Forests Lower Levels of Global Carbon Dioxide
Scientists working in Brazil have found the first proof that undisturbed tropical rain forests soak up huge amounts of the carbon dioxide that people produce by burning fuels.
The measurements, published on Friday in the journal Science, show that each  year, each hectare (2.47 acres) of the southwestern Amazon rain forest absorbs a ton of carbon dioxide.


Whalers Win First Game for Their New Coach
Whalers 7, Sharks 3


Cunningham Benefit
An "Out Surfing With Merce" benefit party for the Merce Cunningham Dance Company is to take place on Tuesday at 7 P.M. at @ Cafe, 12 St.
Marks Place, East Village.
Highlights of the event include a question-and-answer session with Mr.
Cunningham on the Internet Chat Box and the opening of the company's Home Site on the World Wide Web.
Tickets are $75, and the proceeds go toward Mr.
Cunningham's next work.
Information: (212) 255-8240.


One Pleads Guilty to Okinawa Rape; 2 Others Admit Role;Protests by Relatives
Relatives of three American servicemen who pleaded guilty in a Japanese court today to the conspiracy to abduct and rape a 12-year-old Okinawa girl continued  to maintain that despite the pleas, their loved ones were innocent and had been  coerced to confess.
The families also criticized United States Government officials for "washing  their hands" of the case, failing to keep them informed and in the words of one  mother, "sending them to the wolves."


House Committee Passes Increase in Debt Ceiling
As Congress and the Administration flexed their budget muscles, House Republicans moved tonight to provide short-term borrowing and spending authority for the Federal Government, but very much on their own terms.
The House Ways and Means Committee adopted a plan to raise the debt limit from $4.9 trillion to $4.967 trillion, but only until Dec. 12.
An Under Secretary of the Treasury, John D. Hawke Jr., accused Republicans of taking the  "country to the brink of default" unless Mr.
Clinton "caves in" and agrees to all their budget plans.
Nevertheless, the bill was approved, 21 to 13.


A Report Criticizes Improvement Zones In New York City
In the first government review of the self-taxing business districts that have proliferated in New York City in the last decade, a City Council inquiry has concluded that some have abused their power and failed to deliver promised services.
The Council's inquiry, to be released today, found that a lack of oversight has allowed some of these business improvement districts to pay their executives excessive salaries and spend too much money on their operations.
That contradicts the original notion that the districts would deliver better services at lower cost than the government precisely because they would be more efficient.


One Pleads Guilty to Okinawa Rape; 2 Others Admit Role
Three American servicemen pleaded guilty today to conspiring to abduct and rape a 12-year-old Okinawa schoolgirl in a case that has caused an uproar throughout Japan.
One admitted beating and raping the girl, but the others insisted that they did not actually go through with the rape.
The pleas came in a hushed Japanese courtroom on the opening day of the trial for the men accused of a crime that has galvanized opposition to the presence of American military bases in Okinawa and the rest of Japan and has threatened the  security alliance between the Washington and Tokyo.


Astra Reports Results
The Swedish drug maker Astra A.B. reported nine-month results that were slightly weaker than expected but said underlying growth was better than the figures showed.
The company said yesterday that its pretax profit grew 26 percent, to 9.12 billion kronor ($1.37 billion), compared with 7.21 billion kronor in the corresponding period a year ago.
Astra said its total sales grew 33 percent, to 26.68 billion kronor ($4 billion), and predicted that its sales for the full year would grow faster than profits.
(Reuters)


Court Battle on Tyson Bout
LENNOX LEWIS has asked a Paterson, N.J., judge to bar the World Boxing Council from sanctioning a heavyweight championship bout between MIKE TYSON and  FRANK BRUNO.
Passaic County Superior Court Judge AMOS C. SAUNDERS ordered the W.B.C. on Monday to appear at a Nov. 28 hearing to show cause why he should not issue the  ban.


Book Notes
Poets Out of Their Youth


What Politicians Aren't Saying: A Tax Cut Measured in Pennies
In the political crossfire over the Republicans' tax cuts now making their way through Congress, a crucial point has generally been overlooked: most Americans' taxes would not be affected one way or the other.
A computer analysis shows that the big budget bill passed by the Senate last  month would not change the taxes paid by 68 million households, or 55 percent of those in the country.
That is mainly because these families include no children  under 18 and sold no investments during the year.


Abortion Pros and Cons Gain Emotional Weight
Standing in the rain across from the Capitol, a pregnant mother was fighting  tears in explaining her abortion last year.
"All of a sudden it was: Oh, my God!" said Vikki Stella, a 39-year-old mother of two from Illinois.
She was telling of her emergency decision to abort at 36 weeks, near the end of pregnancy, after the son she was expecting was found to have no brain and multiple deformations of the spine, hands and feet.


French Bid Approved For British Water Utility
The British Government approved a takeover bid yesterday by the French utility Lyonnaise des Eaux S.A. for Northumbrian Water P.L.C., Britain's 10th-largest water and sewage company.
The takeover would be the first in Britain's privatized water industry.
The Government backed a recommendation by its water regulator, Ian Byatt, that a takeover be accompanied by cuts in water  prices of up to 15 percent.
Lyonnaise has yet to make a formal bid for Northumbrian, which it said earlier it planned to merge with its existing water subsidiary, North East Water P.L.C.
Under British regulations, any bid for a water company is automatically referred to the national antitrust authority, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
(Dow Jones)


Moves in Paris Bolster Franc, Helping Dollar Rise vs. Mark
The dollar rose against the German mark yesterday after a Government reshuffling in France bolstered the French franc against the mark.
The Cabinet shake-up indicated to currency traders that the Government of Prime Minister Alain Juppe and President Jacques Chirac would make trimming the  $58 billion budget deficit a priority over reducing the 11.5 percent unemployment rate.


MORE NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS ARE INTRODUCED BY I.B.M.
I.B.M. introduced a new line of Thinkpad notebook computers yesterday and lowered prices on the 755 series of Thinkpads.
The International Business Machines Corporation said the new computers, the 365 series, were priced at $1,999 to $3,100.
They have 10.4-inch color screens, CD-ROM drives, accelerated  video performance and wireless infrared printing and file-swapping capabilities.
I.B.M. cut prices on the 755 series by as much as $650.


Israelis Investigate Far Right; May Crack Down on Speech
Members of far-right Israeli fringe groups slipped into hiding today as the police sought many of them for questioning, seeking possible links with the assassination of Prime Minister Yizhak Rabin.
Government ministers said they were considering new laws against the kind of  harsh political language that has ratcheted up tension here in recent weeks, and which many Israelis feel contributed to the slaying.


Women Being Forced From U.N. Workplaces in Afghanistan
Women are being forced out of United Nations workplaces in Afghanistan because self-appointed conservative Islamic councils are threatening to attack the women and the offices.
In Jalalabad, where United Nations agencies are caring for more than 100,000  Afghans recovering from civil war, at least three United Nations offices have kept women home rather than risk the collapse of their programs, officials said.


BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE CUTTING NONUNION JOBS
The Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation said yesterday that it would cut about 1,125 salaried nonunion positions this week, consolidating its work force  after the $4 billion merger that created the company.
The railroad, formed by the merger of Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Pacific, had said last year that  it would cut 1,475 salaried, nonunion jobs after the merger.
Jim Sabourin, a spokesman for the company, said that figure could be as high as 1,600 by the end of 1997.
After the merger, which was completed in September, the company had about 45,000 employees, about 10 percent of whom were nonunion.
The laid-off workers will be paid through the end of the year and will then receive severance packages of up to two years' salary.


Michelin U.S. Unit Agrees to Add $380 Million to 8 Pension Plans
Michelin North America said yesterday that it would pay $380 million to the eight pension plans of its Uniroyal Goodrich Tire unit in one of the largest settlements with the Federal agency that guarantees pensions.
The pension plans, which lacked the minimum cushion of funds required under Federal law, were inherited by Compagnie Generale des Etablissements Michelin, the French tire maker, when it acquired the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company in 1990.


Soloing, in the Manner of Pheidippides
I RAN a marathon years ago.
Actually, I ran several, but one was a bit different.
I ran it all alone, in the summer of 1978.
But wait: I really have to go back further -- to when I started running.
How  long have I run?
The only real answer is: always.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East


The Real Nets Stand Up in Home Opener
Sometime during the Nets' home opener against the Portland Trail Blazers tonight, Coach Butch Beard had to be thinking to himself, "This is more like it."
Maybe the Nets' dismal performance in a season-opening loss at expansion Toronto Friday night was an aberration, after all.
Maybe the team that made its  debut at Byrne Meadowlands Arena will be the one that shows up with increasing regularity.


Clues Sought in Dumping of 19 Guns at a School
The police are trying to unravel the mystery of how 19 new, high-powered handguns wound up in a trash dumpster outside a school in a quiet neighborhood here.
The weapons were among 24 reported stolen after a burglary at a home in neighboring Teaneck on Saturday evening, the day before they were found in the garbage bin outside Janis E. Dismus Middle School, authorities said today.
Five  other guns taken from the residence have not been found.


Wine Talk
AUTUMN -- real autumn with brisk mornings, cold clear nights and snow scenes  from Denver -- is red wine time.
Cooler days call for more substantial meals and sturdier wines.
What follows is an informal grouping of 15 wines that seem made  for the season.
For many of us, the symbolic start of the red wine season is the third Thursday of November, a week from tomorrow, when Beaujolais nouveau goes on sale.
In fact, there is quite a bit of "nouveau" of one sort or another available right now.
It is made from gamay, the grape of Beaujolais, but it isn't necessarily Beaujolais.


Garnett Is a Force As Wolves Top Lakers


Some Big Holders Hesitant About First Interstate Deal
First Interstate Bancorp's agreement to be bought by First Bank System Inc.,  announced on Monday, may run into problems with shareholders if Wells Fargo &amp; Company chooses to proceed with its hostile bid.
Several large shareholders said yesterday that they would vote against the First Bank deal if given the alternative of a higher offer by Wells Fargo.


Cotton Exchange May Still Move
State and local officials say negotiations are taking place to bring the New  York Cotton Exchange and its 1,500 jobs to the Jersey City waterfront even without its larger affiliate, the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange.


Eighth-Grade Sweethearts in a Love Suicide
Two eighth-grade sweethearts leaped to their deaths in a canal after the girl's parents forbade her to continue the relationship because she and her boyfriend were so young, the police said today.
The bodies of the youths, Maryling Flores, 13, and Christian Davila, 14, were found on Tuesday in suburban Miami canal.
Neither could swim.


THINKING MACHINES MOVES TO EMERGE FROM BANKRUPTCY
The Thinking Machines Corporation, a supercomputer pioneer that went into bankruptcy 15 months ago, said yesterday that it had filed a plan to raise $10 million and reorganize as a software company.
The plan, which must be approved by Federal Bankruptcy Court in Boston, would take advantage of Thinking Machines's expertise in software used for multiprocessor computers.
The court is expected to make a decision within 90 days.
Since filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in August 1994, the company has shrunk from 425 employees  to 180 and moved its headquarters to Bedford, Mass., from Cambridge last month.


Dollar Rises Against the Mark, But Slips Back in Yen Trading
Despite another tumble in the Mexican peso, the dollar advanced against the German mark yesterday, which weakened because of a stronger French franc and hints of lower interest rates in Germany.
But the dollar fell against the Japanese yen.
Currency traders sold dollars after a report from Japan showed that investors there were not sending as much money overseas as was thought, thus indicating less of a demand for dollars.


Slappy White, 74, Who Brought Black Humor Into White Clubs
Slappy White, one of the black stand-up comedians who blazed a trail out of the so-called chitlin' circuit to perform before predominantly white audiences in the 1950's, died on Tuesday at his home in Brigantine, N.J.
He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokesman for the Atlantic City Medical  Center.


Frequent Fliers Appreciated
Who is handing out free newspapers and coffee in the morning and free cider in the afternoon?
And crayons for children or restaurant discounts for adults?
The answer is Newark International Airport.
The gifts will be given out today in Parking Lot G from 7 to 10 A.M. and from 3 to 6 P.M. as part of Customer Appreciation Day.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Hallucinating Patients Give Doctors a Clue
Gaining a new insight into the basic mechanisms of schizophrenia, scientists  using a brain-imaging technique have captured the creation of hallucinations, a  characteristic symptom of schizophrenic patients.
The new images of the hallucinating brain help pinpoint the regions of the brain involved in schizophrenia.
While the new insights do not immediately suggest any new treatment, they promise to improve basic understanding of the disorder, from which better treatments may flow.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a memorial service for Yitzhak Rabin at Carnegie Hall misspelled the given name of the Israeli Consul General in New York.
She is Colette Avital, not Collette.


Kathleen Elliott, 85, Radcliffe Official
Kathleen Overmyer Elliott, a former vice president of Radcliffe College, died on Monday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 85 and lived in Cambridge.
Mrs.
Elliott had a 33-year career at the college, starting in 1943, and held  a variety of posts, including director of admissions and dean of students.
She retired in 1976 as vice president, associate dean and senior tutor at South House, now Cabot House.


Knight-Ridder Unit Plans Cuts
Knight-Ridder Inc. said this week that it would dismiss 125 people, or 10 percent of the work force, at its Knight-Ridder Financial unit, which provides financial news and data.
The job cuts are part of a reorganization of the unit to improve profitability, Knight-Ridder said.


POWELL RULES OUT '96 RACE; CITES CONCERNS FOR FAMILY AND HIS LACK OF 'A CALLING'
Resisting an enormous popular drumbeat for his candidacy, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the hero of the gulf war, declined today to compete in the 1996 Presidential election because, he admitted, he lacked "a passion and commitment  that, despite my every effort, I do not have for political life."
"Such a life requires a calling that I do not yet hear," the general said, turning away from the race at the height of a personal appeal among the American public that had threatened to upend the current political arena and reorder the  strategies of both major parties.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Norwegian Professor Offers Ripe Romantic Sonatas Arve Tellefsen, violinist Frick Collection


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Gov.
Frank Keating of Oklahoma and his promotion of economic development located Mr.
Keating and his wife, Kathy, incorrectly in some editions.
Mr. and Mrs.
Keating, pictured on a recent visit to the New York City Hall, were standing side by side at the left.


New Settlement In Plumbing Suit
The Hoechst Celanese Corporation, the United States unit of the German chemical company Hoechst A.G., said today that it and Shell Oil had agreed to pay $950 million to settle a class-action lawsuit concerning faulty plumbing systems.
That represents an increase of $100 million from the $850 million amount in the original settlement agreement.


Nippon Telephone Plans 25% Job Cut
Seeking to reduce pressure for a breakup of the company, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation said today that it would reduce its work force nearly  25 percent.
The company's president, Masashi Kojima, said at a news conference that jobs  at the parent company would shrink to 150,000 by the end of March 2001 from 195,000 as of last March.
The cuts will be made through transfers and attrition.


Car's Air Bag Can Kill A Child in a Safety Seat
The car in which the 20-day-old child was riding, a new Ford Escort, was equipped with two of the best safety devices developed in the last 20 years: air bags and a rear-facing child safety seat.
The collision, on July 18, was at only 23 miles per hour, and the passenger compartment of the Escort remained intact.
Why, then, did the baby die?
The National Transportation Safety Board says the reason was that nobody paid attention to the warning label on the child safety seat or to the warning label  on the car's right-front sun visor, both of which cautioned not to put the baby  seat on the front passenger seat.
When the air bag inflated, its cover hit the back of the safety seat and the baby's head, causing multiple skull fractures.


Storage Tech Shift at Top
The Storage Technology Corporation said this week that Ryal R. Poppa, its chairman, president and chief executive, would retire in January 1997 and that the board would begin searching for his replacement.
In a statement, Mr.
Poppa,  62, said the chief operating officer, David E. Weiss, "is a leading candidate for the position, but the board is interested in exploring all options" before making its decision.
Storage Tech makes information retrieval and storage systems for computers.


Currents;An Eclectic Mix Of Antiques
SCATTERED around Langham Leff, a new store, is an eclectic mix of antiques, from a small English desk clock and a carved Byzantine stone fragment -- priced  around $200 -- to more ambitious pieces like a 19th-century Algerian charcoal portrait and a Spanish hall table.
The stock reflects the interests of its owners: Sarah Langham, a former advertising executive who is studying the decorative arts, and Joel B. Leff, a managing partner of Forstmann-Leff Associates, the investment firm.
The best bargains may be the giant European advertising posters, which start around $700.
The gallery is at 19 East 71st Street; (212) 288-4030.


Ultimate Bouts Are Opposed
Gov.
George E. Pataki and State Senator Roy M. Goodman are supporting separate legislative efforts in New York to ban ultimate fighting, bare-knuckled contests that are frequently criticized for their brutality.
According to Chris Chichester, a spokesman for Pataki, the Governor is drafting legislation to prohibit the sport.
Goodman, Republican from Manhattan,  will sponsor legislation intended to curb such competition, which he described as "animalistic and hazardous to the contestants."


42,000 Miles a Year on the Antiques Track
SOMEWHERE on Interstate 75 between Lake City, Fla., and Valdosta, Ga., just past midnight, Jimmy Allen, folk-art scout extraordinaire, pulled into his fifth McDonald's of the day, ordered coffee and a cherry pie, and opened his diary --  a scribbled, somewhat chaotic compendium of unusual Southern antiques and their  beguiling owners or makers.
On a desk builder in Sapelo Island, Ga.: "Goes to bed early, as soon as the chickens do."


Unwitting in California
To the Editor:
As a Californian, I read with interest in your Nov. 7 front-page article that my state is leading the nation in building prisons, and paying prison guards more than schoolteachers.
The irony here is obvious.
Not only are prison guards  now making more than many University of California professors, they will eventually put those professors out of work.


City, Districts Reject Calls For Oversight
The self-taxing business districts that have sprouted throughout New York City in recent years have started to devise their own codes of ethics and should be allowed to monitor themselves rather than follow City Council recommendations for broader government oversight, officials from the Giuliani administration and from some of the business districts said yesterday.
The Council yesterday released a six-month study that found that a lack of oversight had allowed a range of managerial problems and abuses in several of the city's 34 business improvement districts.
The report also found that some districts spent too little on community improvements, and that salaries for some executives exceeded those of city officials, including the Mayor's.


Learning Accepts New Offer From Broderbund Software
The Learning Company accepted a sweetened merger offer from Broderbund Software Inc. today and rejected a competing offer from Softkey International Inc.
But it was still not clear which bidder will prevail.
Under the revised terms, Broderbund's offer is valued at $555 million, representing a 13 percent increase from the previous offer.
Broderbund would pay 0.92 of a share of its common for each share of the Learning Company, valuing the Learning shares at $59.685, based on Broderbund's closing price today.


NEC and Samsung Make A Computer-Chip Deal
The NEC Corporation of Japan and the Samsung Electronics Company of Korea announced an agreement yesterday to work together on making computer chips.
Samsung will license NEC technology to make 16-bit microcomputers -- chips that  control the functions of electronic devices like air-conditioners, videocassette recorders and computers.


Yonkers's New Leader Is Reticent About Power
John D. Spencer, the Mayor-elect of this blue-collar city, has a rather odd reservation about his new job: he thinks it is too powerful.
His uneasiness stems from a City Charter revision passed on Tuesday giving the mayor powers he feels are best left in the hands of the City Council, on which he served as Republican majority leader over the last four years.


B.A.T. Profits Outpace Forecasts
Benefiting from strong performances in its core operations in tobacco and financial services, the British-based conglomerate B.A.T.
P.L.C. reported third-quarter profits yesterday that were well ahead of market expectations.
In  the three months that ended on Sept. 30, pretax profit rose to L659 million, about $1.04 billion, from L549 million.
Analysts had forecast a figure of between L610 million and L630 million.
Trading profit from tobacco rose 34 percent, to slightly more than L1.2 billion, or $1.9 billion, in the first nine months of the year, and in financial services, Eagle Star, a big automobile and home insurers, benefited from continued record profits among Britain's non-life insurers.
(Reuters)


Chip Makers Bolstered by Strong Report On Orders
The semiconductor industry displayed surprising strength in a report today, with its leading indicator rebounding beyond analyst expectations and easing Wall Street's fears that the technology boom might be crumbling.
The Semiconductor Industry Association reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.18  in October, reversing a brief decline to 1.15 in September from August's 1.17 and from July's record of 1.23.


Some Republicans Lose That Can't-Lose Feeling
After waging 10 election campaigns without a defeat, Guy V. Molinari looked like the inevitable winner when he entered the race for Staten Island District Attorney.
But early yesterday morning, the Republican patriarch returned, defeated, to  his old wood-paneled office in St.
George, the one that Staten Island reserves for its Borough Presidents and the one where voters overwhelmingly wanted him to stay.


Currents;First Design Then Sell
HASSAN ABOUSEDA, a young Egyptian graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology's architecture school, is a busy man.
Not only does he design furniture that is built by hand in maple, poplar and mahogany by a fine woodworking shop in Brooklyn, but he has also created his own store in SoHo to showcase it: HAF, a small space at 68 Thompson Street (between Spring and Broome Streets).
Prices begin at $800 for a side table.
Starting with a hardwood frame, for instance, Mr.
Abouseda adds sliding shelves, drawers and a glass top to make what he calls "a geometry of spare parts" (below).
He also creates custom designs.
Information: (212) 925-3100.


INSIDE
Strict New Homeless Policy


German Stores May Open Later
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Cabinet decided today to liberalize laws governing store-closing hours.
But whether the change actually becomes law is anyone's guess because politicians from Mr.
Kohl's own party have reservations about the  idea.
Under a 1956 law, most German stores close by 6:30 P.M. on weekdays and 2 P.M. on Saturdays, with a few extra hours on Thursdays and some Saturdays.


Cuba's Problem Is Castro, Not U.S. Embargo;Rights Group's Access
To the Editor:
Re Representative Robert G. Torricelli's Nov. 1 letter, in which he states that Human Watch Rights/ Americas (formerly Americas Watch) has never been permitted to enter Cuba: The organization has been granted limited access to Cuba over the years.


CHRONICLE
When you visit a home in Russia, it is a tradition to take a gift.
Maj.
CHRIS HADFIELD of the Canadian Air Force, a member of the Atlantis space shuttle mission that is scheduled to leave the Kennedy Space Center on Saturday, is taking a collapsible guitar and a CD of guitar music to give to three Russian cosmonauts when Atlantis rendezvous with the space station Mir 20 next week.
A spokesman said Major Hadfield, preparing for the flight, could not be reached for comment yesterday, but the guitarist SHARON ISBIN says he told her in a recent phone conversation that he was taking along her new recording, "American Landscapes" (Virgin Classics/EMI).
As for the instrument, a Soloette Travel Guitar, she said he was walking in a park in Houston when he noticed someone playing one and "decided that was the perfect gift."


Judge Was a New York Fixture Before His Federal Appointment
Robert P. Patterson Jr., the Federal judge who ruled yesterday against a transit-fare increase, was a prominent and fairly liberal fixture in New York's  legal establishment long before he was appointed to the bench in 1988.
Judge Patterson, a former president of the New York State Bar Association, had served as director of the Legal Aid Society.
He was also chairman of Prisoners Legal Services, which provides legal counsel to inmates, and chairman  of the Citizens Committee on Prison Overcrowding, a group that recommended state spending on methods other than imprisonment for dealing with convicted criminals.


Cuba's Problem Is Castro, Not U.S. Embargo
To the Editor:
I read the Nov. 1 letter by Wayne S. Smith, a friend I have not seen since I  was jailed four years ago for my work as a human rights activist in Cuba.
Mr.
Smith quotes me as endorsing an end to the United States economic embargo against Cuba.
With much respect to my friend, I would like to clear up this issue.


For More Than a Fistful of Dollars
Can Pat Riley, one of the game's best coaches, and Alonzo Mourning, one of the game's best centers, find solace and success in the Florida sun?
Or will they look back years from now and wish they had made different choices?
Riley and Mourning already agree on one point.
They have come to the Miami Heat with aspirations, not apologies.


Graham by Graham
The Martha Graham Dance Company is to present two works by Graham in addition to the New York premiere of Robert Wilson's "Snow on the Mesa" this week at City Center (131 West 55th Street).
"Chronicle" and "Diversion of Angels" are to be performed tomorrow and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 2 P.M.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


Body in Auto Is Reported to Be Kevorkian's 26th Assisted Suicide
Dr.
Ljubisa Dragovic, the medical examiner for the sprawling Detroit suburbs  of Oakland County, was starting his work today when an anonymous telephone call  around 9:40 A.M. reported that there was a body in the parking lot.
"So we all went outside and there was a battered gray Renault Alliance registered to Jack Kevorkian with a body in it," Dr.
Dragovic said.


Both Sides Stiffen Lines In Showdown On U.S. Debt
As the Clinton Administration and Congress danced toward the deadline for national default, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin always knew he had a few tricks up his sleeve to keep the finances of the United States afloat.
Even if the Republicans in Congress failed to act, he could tinker with the way the Government invests in two huge trust funds, and play other accounting games that could keep the Government from defaulting for the first time in 200 years.


No Headline
His endorsements are a little like Confederate money.
Although actually, Confederate money is a collector's item."
FERNANDO FERRER, on Mayor Giuliani.  [B3:6.]


Big East Breaks Into Two
In a move coaches have sought since the Big East expanded to 13 teams, the conference has split into divisions, a decision that will affect only the seeding for the post-season tournament.
The announcement was made yesterday at the league's annual media day, and it will affect both men's and women's basketball, starting this season.
The first-place team with the better conference record will be seeded No. 1 in the post-season tournament and receive a bye along with the other first-place team and the second-place team with the better conference record.
The same system will be used for the third-place finishers.
The remainder of the teams will be seeded by conference record without regard for division.


Voices, Pacino To Dino
Danny Gans on Broadway" is not, as you might suspect, a headline prepared in a Times Square joke store to celebrate the birthday of the office cutup. It's the title of the one-man show that opened last night at the Neil Simon Theater,  presented by the Nederlander Organization and sponsored in part by United Airlines.
Billed as "the man of many voices," Mr.
Gans is reported to have a busy, lucrative career as one of corporate America's favorite entertainers.
That's said to explain why most of us have never heard of the man, who has appeared in  small roles in films and on various television series.
He's the performer I.B.M. calls when it throws a dinner to honor the salesman of the year, month or week.
He doesn't offend.
He minds his manners.


U.S. Promises Data to War Crimes Panel
The State Department said today that it would insure that the international tribunal on war crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia would receive any intelligence information relevant to its inquiries.
"If we have any information, whether it's open-source information, unclassified information or intelligence information, that we believe is pertinent to the question of war crimes, we will find a way to get that to Judge Goldstone," said Nicholas Burns, a department spokesman, referring to Judge Richard Goldstone, the tribunal's chief prosecutor.
He added that Washington would protect intelligence sources.


Cotton Prices Fall After Agents Seek Documents From Merchant
Cotton prices fell on the New York Cotton Exchange yesterday after Federal agents sought documents from one of the nation's largest cotton merchants.
On other markets, copper fell while coffee prices rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities fell 0.42 point, to 243.92.


Aides Say Clinton Wants New Changes In Welfare Measure
Presented with a new analysis of Senate welfare legislation that shows the bill would push about one million children into poverty, President Clinton now plans to push for additional changes in the welfare legislation that is making its way through Congress, Administration officials said today.
The study, which may be released Thursday by the Office of Management and Budget, is much like findings that the Administration received in September from the Department of Health and Human Services.


Liberties;The General's Retreat
I feel as if this is "The Bridges of Fairfax County," and I'm Francesca.
The graceful, hard male animal who did nothing overtly to dominate us yet dominated us completely, in the exact way we wanted that to happen at this moment, like a fine leopard on the veld, was gone.
Only nine short weeks from the beginning of our dalliance, and he's disappeared from our lives.


Let Suburbanites Pay New York 'Admission'
To the Editor:
Paul Kent Oakley's Nov. 3 letter urging an income tax instead of bridge tolls to enter New York City is ludicrous.
As a Manhattanite, I already pay the highest taxes in the country, and I see no reason why I should have to support Mr.
Oakley's visits to New York City.


House Passes Spending Bill, But It Carries a Big Catch
Congress and President Clinton today moved another step closer to a showdown  on the budget.
The House narrowly approved a temporary measure that would allow the Government to continue to spend money through Dec. 1.
Another bill that would extend the Government's authority to borrow money until mid-December advanced in a House committee.


Parking Rules
In observance of Veterans Day, which is on Saturday, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended on Friday and Saturday.


Bosnia Serbs Free U.S. Newsman After 9 Days
After nine days in a Bosnian Serb jail, an American journalist, David Rohde,  was released today.
"I didn't expect it to take so long to be released, but I'm glad I finally got out," Mr.
Rohde said after arriving safely at the United States Embassy in Belgrade, Serbia, shortly before President Clinton phoned with congratulations.


ALERT CENTER AGREES TO BE ACQUIRED BY ADT
Alert Center Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to be acquired by ADT Ltd., a provider of electronic security services, in a cash tender offer of $9.25 a share, or about $90.7 million.
Alert, based in Englewood, Colo., sells and installs alarm systems.
Shares of Alert jumped $4.3125, to $9.0625, on the American Stock Exchange.
Shares of ADT, based in Bermuda, increased 50 cents, to $14.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
If fewer than 90 percent of the shares are tendered, Alert will call a special shareholder meeting to vote on the merger.


Court Panel Says Foreigners Share Rights of Free Speech
In a case fraught with implications for international relations as well as constitutional law, a three-judge Federal panel ruled today that foreigners in this country have the same right to free speech as American citizens.
Civil liberties lawyers called the ruling perhaps the most significant challenge to date of the 43-year-old McCarran-Walter Immigration Act, which was  nurtured by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and passed at a time of great public concern over communism.
Over the years the law has been used to bar several prominent Marxist authors and intellectual dissidents from visiting the United States.


DIAMOND SHAMROCK TO BUY CONVENIENCE STORES
Diamond Shamrock Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire National Convenience Stores Inc. for $27 a share, or $260 million.
The agreement, which has been approved by both companies' boards, would thwart the Circle K Corporation's tender offer to  buy National Convenience for $20 a share.
National Convenience rejected the offer, and the companies were negotiating.
Diamond Shamrock, based in San Antonio, is a petroleum refiner and gasoline marketer that also operates convenience stores.
Its offer is conditioned upon acquiring at least two-thirds  of National Convenience's shares and other terms.
National Convenience, based in Houston, operates 661 Stop N Go convenience stores in Texas.
Most of Diamond Shamrock's stores are in Texas.


Lindros to Miss at Least a Week
ERIC LINDROS, who had 11 goals and 11 assists in the Flyers' first 12 games,  said yesterday that he expected to be out of the lineup at least another week with a strained knee ligament, an injury he suffered Friday against the Florida  Panthers.
He will miss this weekend's home-and-home series against the Devils.
The strain is to the medial collateral ligament of his left knee, the same ligament Lindros tore as a rookie in 1992-93, when he missed 23 games.
The next  season, he injured the right knee and missed 14 games. (AP)


Franklin Rhodes Jr., Y.M.C.A. Head, 52
Franklin A. Rhodes Jr., the executive director of the Harlem Y.M.C.A. on West 135th Street, died on Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 52 and  lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, a progressive degeneration of the lungs, according to the Y.M.C.A. of Greater New York.


Sprint Cellular Selects Martin
Sprint Cellular in Chicago said yesterday that it had selected the Martin Agency in Richmond to handle its national advertising account, which had been at Keroff &amp; Rosenberg in Chicago since 1987.
The billings were estimated at $20 million.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Finding One's Way Amid the Grand Gestures Bolshoi Symphony Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall


Suffolk Votes For Reduction In Its Sales Tax
The Suffolk County Legislature voted today to cut the sales tax in the county by a quarter of one percentage point, to 8.25 percent, effective Jan. 1.
The 11-to-7 vote in the Republican-controlled Legislature was strictly along  party lines.
It will enable County Executive Robert J. Gaffney, a Republican who was re-elected on Tuesday, to make good on a campaign promise to cut the sales tax.


Foster Grant Pension Accord
The Federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation plans to take over the pension plan of Foster Grant Inc., a move aimed at protecting the pensions of more than 1,000 former workers and retirees.
The company, based in Leominster, Mass., which manufactured sunglasses and industrial products for protective eye care, filed for bankruptcy in 1990 and sold all of its assets, including the trade name.
In the interim, the local Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union has been administering the pension  plan.


Richard A. Guarino, I.B.M. Executive, 48
Richard A. Guarino, a longtime executive of the International Business Machines Corporation who helped establish the company's alliance with Apple Computer Inc., died on Oct. 29 in Santa Clara, Calif.
He was 48 and lived in Brookfield, Conn.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife, Debra, said.
I.B.M. announced Mr.
Guarino's death last week.


Productivity Gains Cited In Siemens Performance
Siemens A.G., the German electronics and engineering company, said yesterday  that productivity increases had helped to raise its profit 26 percent to 2.08 billion marks, or $1.46 billion, in the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30.
A year earlier the profit before extraordinary items was 1.65 billion marks.
Including a one-time gain from the sale of its pacemaker unit, Siemens's net income was 1.99 billion marks last year.
"Siemens achieved its targeted growth in fiscal 1995 despite the strong German mark," the company said.
According to preliminary figures released yesterday, Siemens's sales in the latest fiscal year rose 5 percent, to 88.8 billion marks, from 84.6 billion in the previous year.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Security Council Continues Trade Curbs on Iraq
The Security Council, as expected, decided today to continue trade sanctions  against Iraq after concluding that Baghdad had failed to make sufficient progress in meeting demands imposed by the Council.
Sir John Weston, the delegate of Britain, said it was "the will of the Council to continue the existing sanctions regime on grounds that Iraqi performance under all the headings which are relevant continues to be less than  fully satisfactory."


Markets Skeptical, the Peso Falls Again
The peso slid again today to a record low against the dollar, signaling stubborn skepticism in the markets about the Mexican Government's economic management and recovery program.


Currents;Revealing Collections
PERSONAL Pursuits," a show of 12 designers' private collections that opened yesterday at the New York School of Interior Design, is full of surprises. Margo Grant, who designs sleek corporate offices for Gensler, collects antique American footstools (left). "I have 300 of them, and no two are alike," she said. "When I started in 1985, they were $15 apiece.
Now, one is $200."


Chief Is Dismissed At Russia's Central Bank
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia dismissed the head of the central bank,  Tatyana Paramonova, yesterday and named her first deputy, Aleksandr Khandruyev,  acting chairman.
The move was widely expected after the Parliament's lower house failed for a second time last summer to confirm Ms.
Paramonova's nomination.
She took over the post in October 1994 after Viktor Gerashchenko was ousted in the wake of a major collapse of the ruble.
Ms.
Paramonova has been credited with holding to tight monetary policies, which have helped bring down inflation and stabilize the ruble.
But she has been criticized by commercial banks and politicians for tightening reserve requirements, mishandling August's liquidity crisis and a growing tide of bank insolvencies.
Mr.
Khandruyev is regarded as an ally of Mr.
Gerashchenko and is seen as less committed to tight money than Ms.
Paramonova.
(AP)


A Decision Relieving Some, But Disappointing Others
Early this morning, Joan Lawrence, a Republican in the Ohio House of Representatives, put the finishing touches on a letter to Colin L. Powell.
"I can imagine little that would do more for this nation than to have you become President of the United States," she wrote.
"Please join the fray for the Republican nomination for President."
A few hours later, as she returned to her office from a legislative session,  she got a telephone call from a friend who had seen General Powell on television saying that he would not run.


Talk-Show Moments, No Matter How Bizarre
In the midst of much moral dudgeon about talk shows, one show has just the right attitude.
"This is the weekend edition of 'Talk Soup'; think of it as a Kafka nightmare with a laugh track," John Henson said in last Friday's introduction to his popular show on the E!
Entertainment Television channel.
A daily talk show for people who would never take a talk show seriously, "Talk Soup" collects the most bizarre clips from the previous day's shows -- a woman who believes she is a vampire, a man in a tiara who proudly calls himself "a gay gold digger" -- and packages them with comic introductions and often lame little skits by Mr.
Henson.
However weak its comedy, though, "Talk Soup" has an appealing and revealing perspective.
It understands the way ordinary viewers approach these shows: with  a sense of the difference between fantasy and reality.
Moral watchdogs rarely give the audience credit for such common sense.
But "Talk Soup" is based on the  solid belief that no one is sitting at home sighing: "My life is so dull. I've never been a vampire or a gay gold digger!"


Essay;This Year's Cuomo
Remember Mario Cuomo?
As the 1992 field formed up, he was the media darling to be the Democrat to oppose the boring Bushies.
We were all hyped up, rarin' to go, as Mario chartered a plane that would whisk him to his destiny.
Then he thought it over, lowered his sights to Albany, sawed off the limb behind all the pundits, and is now practicing law and hosting a radio talk show  -- an honorable life, but no cigar.


Dow Advances by 55.64 Points to Reach a High of 4,852.67
The stock market surged into record territory yesterday, halting a two-day slide.
A recovery in technology issues gave the rally enough momentum early in the day that even a continued retreat by computer-chip stocks failed to stop it.
The market was also bolstered by strong gains in bonds, which lifted interest-rate-sensitive stocks like those of banking companies.


Morgan Stanley Gets Big Role In Privatizing Uranium Unit
Settling a hotly contested Wall Street competition, the Federal Government announced yesterday which investment banks would advise it in its plans to privatize its uranium enrichment operations, known as the United States Enrichment Corporation.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment banking operation of Morgan Stanley  Group Inc., was the biggest winner among the advisers in the $1.8 billion privatization.


Billy Graham Chooses Son as Likely Successor
The Rev.
Billy Graham, who once said only God could choose his successor, yesterday set the stage for the mantle to be assumed by his oldest boy, a prodigal son who drank, fought and was expelled from college before undergoing a religious conversion at 22.
In an announcement likely to end years of speculation over who will take over one of the nation's most prominent evangelical pulpits, the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association announced that Mr.
Graham's 43-year-old son, Franklin Graham, had been elected by the organization's Board of Directors to the new position of first vice chairman, with the right of succession should his father  become incapacitated.


AT HOME WITH: Stephen Humphrey Bogart;Here's Looking at You, Dad
RIDGEWOOD, N.J.
WHO is Stephen Humphrey Bogart, and where has he been all these years?
And what does he want of us now?
Do we imagine him to be a chip off the old block?
Is he?


COLUMBIA-HCA HEALTHCARE CORP. (COL,N)
The Columbia-HCA Healthcare Corporation reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income rose 40 percent, but the results were below Wall Street's expectations.
Columbia said it earned $267 million, or 59 cents a share, compared with $190 million, or 44 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Analysts  had been predicting earnings of 62 cents a share.


U.S. Warns Banks Again On Risks of Lax Lending
Repeating his warnings against lax lending practices, the Clinton Administration's top bank regulator issued a new study today that suggested that the offers of credit cards and home equity loans pouring into the nation's mailboxes may indicate a worrisome willingness to ignore risks.
The figures show that banks have relaxed their credit standards for some consumer lending, said the regulator, Eugene A. Ludwig, the Comptroller of the Currency.


Sotheby's Stretches, and Van Gogh Soars
Sotheby's was pushing its luck last night, but its sale of Impressionist and  modern art served as a sobering reality check.
Yes, the market is strong, stronger than it has been for five years.
But the ingredients have to be right.
When an artwork is fresh and of excellent quality, buyers are willing to reach for the moon.
When it's not, no amount of slick marketing can disguise greedy estimates or stale merchandise.
Of the 88 works offered, 65 found buyers.
The sale totaled $113.6 million, below the house estimate of $126 million to $174 million.


U.S. JUDGE BLOCKS 25~ FARE INCREASE: SEES POSSIBLE BIAS
Ruling that the planned fare increases for the region's mass transit system appeared to discriminate against black and Hispanic riders in New York City, a Federal judge yesterday blocked a 25-cent increase in subway and bus fares that  was scheduled to take effect Sunday.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority quickly appealed the ruling, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit granted an emergency hearing, to be held today, on whether to reverse the order.


Investigation Sees Links of Fires in Housing Project Stairways
A fast-moving blaze that killed two people in an Upper West Side housing project on Saturday has been tied to the same problem that in recent years has caused 32 fires to flash through the stairwells of public apartment buildings with intense heat and horrifying speed, officials said yesterday.
The problem -- in which small fires are believed to feed off layers of paint  that act as an accelerant -- has set baffled city officials on an urgent quest to find a way to contain such fires, perhaps by attaching thousands of stainless steel firebreakers to stairwell walls.


Brazil's Senate Votes to Open Oil Industry
The Brazilian Senate voted today to end the state oil monopoly in exploring for oil, refining it and importing it.
The Senate vote, by 60 to 15, was the final step needed to amend Brazil's Constitution to allow private investment in the oil industry.
Petroleo Brasileiro S.A., or Petrobras, as the company is better known, has held the monopoly since 1953.


A Meeting With the Schools Chancellor


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
With a World Premiere, A Composer at Age 90 Da Capo Ensemble Miller Theater


Corrections
A picture in some editions on Sunday with the obituary of Yitzhak Rabin, showing him at a 1967 news conference, carried an incorrect credit.
It was by Charles Harbutt.


Pavarotti Walks Out Before an Opera Ends
When Luciano Pavarotti reclaimed the role of Tonio in Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" -- a part that carried him to stardom 22 years ago when he tossed off  nine high C's at the end of Act I -- it was a risky move.
The role of Tonio, the heartsick Tyrolean peasant who falls in love with Marie, is considered a difficult role for any tenor, but especially so for someone who just turned 60,  as Mr.
Pavarotti did last month.
Last night, at the Metropolitan Opera, the tenor stumbled on the role that he had not sung since 1973.


The Message of the Young
Grieving over the death of Yitzhak Rabin, young Israelis have set off something close to a spiritual fervor in their country.
Page A10.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Difficult Task For Froth and Charm New York Chamber Symphony 92d Street Y


On a Queens Campus, Words Reopen Wounds
KHALID ABDUL MUHAMMAD, the rancorous disciple of Louis Farrakhan, appeared at York College in Queens this week.
Speaking to celebrants of Black Solidarity Day for an undisclosed fee, he attacked whites in general, white women in particular and recycled his discredited theories about Jews having dominated the slave trade.
"If you believe that blondes have more fun," he said, "ask Nicole Brown Simpson." And he contended that Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, was killed "because he had sold the people out." He made that comment on the day that Mr.
Rabin was buried.
Mr.
Muhammad's audience was not large, about 300 of the 6,500 students at York, which is part of the City University.
But they laughed and cheered and applauded, and seemed to be having a grand old time.
The question is: Why?
Mr.
Muhammad has become such a familiar speaker to black student groups that his vitriol -- so harsh that even Mr.
Farrakhan made a show of slapping him on the wrist a few years ago -- has lost its shock value.
If York College administrators hadn't stirred things up by trying to keep him from the campus (they eventually relented), his appearance would probably have received even less notice than it did.
So what drew the students?


METRO DIGEST
JUDGE BLOCKS 25~ FARE INCREASE Ruling that the planned fare increases for the region's mass transit system appeared to discriminate against black and Hispanic riders in New York City, a Federal judge blocked a 25-cent increase in subway and bus fares.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority quickly appealed the ruling. [Page A1.]


Swastikas Found in Voter Books
Signing the voter registration book is usually a routine part of Election Day.
It wasn't in Passaic County, where a dozen people discovered swastikas drawn next to their names.
The prosecutor, Ronald S. Fava, vowed to prosecute the case as a bias crime.
He is trying to find out who had access to the books.
Usually, the county Elections Board distributes them to municipal clerks  several days before the election; poll workers receive them the day before.


F.D.A. Has Sharply Cut Drug-Approval Times, Report Finds
The Food and Drug Administration approves new drugs twice as fast as it did six years ago, according to a new report by the General Accounting Office.
The "drug lag," as it has been called over the last two decades, has been a source of complaint that the United States' competitive position in the world has slipped.
Conservative groups have often cited the lag as a major reason to overhaul or even eliminate the F.D.A.


SCOTT AND KIMBERLY-CLARK OFFER TO SELL SOME BRANDS
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation of Dallas and the Scott Paper Company of Philadelphia said yesterday that they had offered to sell some product lines and factories to win United States and European regulatory approval of their pending $6.8 billion merger.
The merger would create a consumer products company with about $12 billion in annual revenue and brand names that include Kleenex, Scott, Huggies, Kotex and Depend.
A Justice Department review has focused on competition in facial tissue, bathroom tissue, baby wipes and industrial wipers, the companies said.
A hearing on the proposals will begin in Brussels on Nov. 20.
Shareholders will vote on the merger on Dec. 12.


NBC to Share News Gathering
The German public broadcaster ZDF announced today that it and NBC had agreed  to cooperate on news gathering worldwide.
The two organizations will coordinate their reporting on major international  news events and make use of each other's studios, ZDF said in a statement, adding that the deal would formally be signed at the end of the month in New York.


John Patrick, Pulitzer Winner For 'Teahouse,' Is Dead at 90
John Patrick, who won a Pulitzer Prize for his 1953 play "Teahouse of the August Moon," died on Tuesday at an adult-care center in Delray Beach, Fla., where he had lived for two years.
He was 90.
He committed suicide, said a friend, Michael Hall, the artistic director of Caldwell Theater Company in Boca Raton, Fla.


Accounts
*
Stormont Trice Corp., Atlanta, to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., to handle advertising for the owner and operator of hotels, resorts and conference centers, previously handled by the Zimmerman Agency, Tallahassee, Fla.
The billings were estimated at more than $2 million.


Dole Loses a Main Competitor And Gathers an Endorsement
Gov.
Stephen Merrill endorsed Senator Bob Dole for President today, giving the Republican front-runner a coveted boost in the state with the nation's leadoff primary.
The Republican Governor pledged to deliver the Kansas Senator's message to voters across the country.
Mr.
Dole said Mr.
Merrill could begin his duties as national campaign chairman by traveling to Florida this weekend.


Fears for Safety Played No Role In Decision, Mrs. Powell Says
At his news conference in Alexandria, Va., yesterday, Gen.
Colin L. Powell and his wife, Alma, were asked whether fears about his safety were a factor in his decision not to run for President.
General Powell said he had traveled widely around the country, usually by himself, and had "no particular concerns" about security.


Extradition Is Set For German Fugitive
A Federal magistrate approved the extradition today of the fugitive executive Jurgen Schneider to Germany to face charges that he fleeced creditors of $3.6 billion in the country's biggest postwar real estate scandal.
United States Magistrate William Turnoff ruled that Mr.
Schneider, 61, and his wife, Claudia, 50, should remain imprisoned at the Federal detention center  in Miami until he signs the order next week.


Academics, Tradition and One Intense Football Rivalry
All around the room, alumni living and dead are staring at the kid.
On one dark, oak-paneled wall, a picture of the 1901 football team -- smallish players with their hair slicked back and parted in the middle in the style of the day -- looks down.
From the folding chairs crammed tight around tables, old  men with hair either gray or gone, look at him and nod.
In a clear, strong voice, the tailback addresses the room.


RJR NABISCO URGES SHAREHOLDERS TO REJECT 'GAMBLE'
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation is urging shareholders to reject a proposal for an immediate spinoff of its Nabisco food subsidiary, calling the move a "high-stakes gamble." In letter to shareholders mailed yesterday, the New York-based maker of Camel and Winston cigarettes said an immediate spinoff of its remaining 80.5 percent stake in the Nabisco Holdings Corporation, the cookie and cracker unit, would undermine shareholder value and entangle the company in litigation.
The letter from RJR's chief executive, Charles M. Harper, also castigated the financiers Bennett S. LeBow and Carl C. Icahn, who on Monday began soliciting shareholder votes and promised a proxy fight for control of the company if RJR delayed the spinoff.


Nebraska Tailback Avoids Trial
Two misdemeanor charges against Nebraska tailback JAMES SIMS have been dismissed because he entered a pretrial diversion program.
Sims, 24, was arrested July 3 after a disturbance involving his former girlfriend.
A trial scheduled for September on charges of disturbing the peace and vandalism had been delayed until this week because the 25-year-old woman did not show up in court.
Sims was one of three tailbacks on the Cornhuskers who have had brushes with the law this season.
LAWRENCE PHILLIPS played last week for the first time since Sept. 9, following his attack on a former girlfriend.
He is to be sentenced for  misdemeanor assault and trespassing on Dec. 1.
The backup DAMON BENNING was accused of pushing around a former girlfriend Sept. 9, but no charges were filed. (AP)


In Nassau, the Democrats Lick Their Wounds
When dawn broke early this morning, Republicans happily claimed Nassau's first Legislature as their own, leaving Democrats to curse the rain, family feuds, and those irritating Republican foot soldiers who they said would burrow  under pavement to reach a voting booth.
Since they could not do much about the Republicans' crushing victory on Tuesday in races for the new 19-member Legislature, Democrats preferred to discuss the weather today while Republicans stuck to politics -- particularly the impact of winning a 13-member veto-proof majority in the Legislature.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;A former Chiat/Day executive is turning his experience and skills to producing infomercials.
BOB WOLF, once the No. 2 executive at Chiat/Day, is opening his own shop, which will offer infomercials and other marketing programs for advertisers seeking to reach consumers in nontraditional ways.
After 24 years in the agency industry, half of them at Chiat/Day, Mr.
Wolf is opening the Wolf Company in Beverly Hills, Calif., where he will serve as president.
The shop will develop what Mr.
Wolf describes as infomercials centering on "marketainment" -- long-form television commercials infused with entertainment values, the better to reach specialized audiences with sales messages somewhat more complex than pitches for "Greatest Polka Hits," Ginsu knives or spray-on hair.


Gen. Powell's Publisher Loses Its Most Persuasive Sales Pitch
Shortly before announcing that he would not run for President, Colin L. Powell made a telephone call yesterday to Random House, to the office of its president and publisher, Harold Evans, to deliver the news.
"I was not surprised," Mr.
Evans said later of the retired Army general's decision.
He said he and other Random House editors huddled around televisions to watch the news conference.


Treasury Prices Rise On Optimism Over Budget
Treasury prices moved sharply higher yesterday, bolstered by optimism that an agreement on the Federal budget and debt limit could soon be reached.
The rally was also fueled by technical factors, including short-covering.


Abortion Foes Dealt Setback By the Senate
Abortion rights supporters in the Senate today dealt a setback to efforts to  ban a rarely used method of late-term abortion, sending a House-approved bill barring the procedure to the Judiciary Committee for further consideration.
Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, who led the fight to send  the bill to committee, said that he and others would try to amend it so the procedure could at least be used to save the life of the mother.


C-TEC MAY SPIN OFF SOME COMMUNICATIONS UNITS
The C-TEC Corporation said yesterday that it might spin off or restructure its local telephone, cable television and other communications businesses to maximize shareholder value.
The company, based in Princeton, N.J., said that its business mix had proved confusing to investors and that it had hired Merrill Lynch to evaluate options.
C-TEC Cable Systems is the country's 19th-largest cable operator, while its Commonwealth Telephone unit is the nation's 20th-largest phone company, the company said.
C-TEC's stock rose $2.9375, to $25.0625, in Nasdaq trading.


Spurs Hold The Grizzlies To 62 Point In a Rout


Cuba Allowing Citizens to Buy and Sell Foreign Currencies
In an attempt to challenge the flourishing black market for American dollars  and to soak up surplus pesos that have been fueling inflation, the Cuban Government is permitting its citizens to buy and sell foreign currencies on the  open market for the first time in more than 30 years.
Until July 1993, it was illegal for Cubans even to possess dollars, much less exchange them.
But since then American currency has come to play an increasingly important role in this Communist state, thanks to remittances from Cubans living abroad, the opening of special consumer good shops that accept payment only in hard currency and a boom in European and Canadian tourism, conducted largely in  dollars.


N.F.L. Is Quiet on Jones Suit
National Football League owners ended their meeting today without much discussion on the $750 million antitrust lawsuit by the Dallas owner, Jerry Jones, and under a cloud over the impending move of the Cleveland Browns to Baltimore.
The only business resolved by the owners was a decision to maintain the current division alignments for the 1996 season.
Despite all the talk of teams moving from one city to another, N.F.L.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said the league is healthy and stable.
But he acknowledged that the decision by the Browns' owner, Art Modell, to move from Cleveland to Baltimore had roiled N.F.L. waters.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Surges 55.64 to Peak On Budget Optimism Blue-chip stocks surged into record territory as traders expressed optimism that the budget impasse between Congress and the Clinton Administration would be resolved.


Lex Hixon, 53, Dies; A Mysticism Scholar
Lex Hixon, a scholar on the mystic traditions of the world's religions and formerly a host of a radio show on WBAI-FM, died on Nov. 1 at his home in Riverdale in the Bronx.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, said Cassia Berman, an associate.


Apathy Tinged With Anger In Cairo Over Mubarak Trip
In the heart of this sprawling capital's biggest slum, Sheik Mayhoub Nasser is not the only one still seething at the sight of President Hosni Mubarak standing on Israeli soil.


Medical Help for Sexual Assault
Every 45 seconds in America a woman is sexually assaulted -- for a total of 700,000 victims a year.
These women desperately need someone to confide in, and  many would like to talk to their personal physicians.
But doctors are often too  clumsy or insensitive to counsel victims of violence.
New guidelines just issued by the American Medical Association should help improve their skills.
Sexual assault is a "silent violent epidemic" that is "traumatizing the women and children of our nation," says A.M.A. president Lonnie Bristow.
Some 95 percent of the victims are women, most of them under age 18.
The assailant is most often a lover, friend, acquaintance or relative.


Ballet Troupes Bypass High-Cost New York
Where has all the ballet gone?
That's what aficionados are being heard to grumble as the New York dance season gets under way this month.
It seems an odd complaint, given the appearance by the San Francisco Ballet that has just ended at City Center, to be followed by Julio Bocca and the Ballet Argentino, starting next Tuesday.
True, the Joffrey Ballet has relocated to Chicago.
But the New York City Ballet will dance as usual at the New York State Theater this winter, though the company will open with "The Nutcracker" and not its usual week of repertory and has canceled its Sunday evening performances this year.


Cordova Named Top A.L. Rookie
Andy Pettitte was No. 1 among rookie starting pitchers in the American League this past season, but the Yankees' left-hander was left behind in the tight race between two left fielders for the league's Rookie of the Year award.
Marty Cordova of the Minnesota Twins won the award yesterday over Garret Anderson of the California Angels, 105 points to 99.
Each received 13 first-place votes, but Cordova gained 13 votes for second place to 10 for Anderson.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Contemporary Lament Laced With Intimations of Eternity Philadelphia Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Economic Scene;Frugality that could backfire: cutting U.S. research subsidies.
CONGRESSIONAL Republicans are putting Government on a diet.
But how much of the weight to be lost will be fat?
Take the case of science and technology.
Few areas of Federal spending can be as easily justified as basic research, where investments are too risky for most  companies and the fruits of their efforts cannot be protected by patents.
Yet according to President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, the Republican budget resolution would cut research financing by 30 percent over the next seven years.


What's Next In This Line, Scud Cola?
Until recently, Semtex was known only as an easy-to-use plastic explosive that found its way from a factory near Prague to the arsenals of evildoers around the world.
Now it is also a high-energy drink loaded with sugar and caffeine.
Semtex, the drink, is one of the most successful consumer products in the post-Communist Czech Republic.
In less than a year it has become popular as well in Slovakia and Hungary, and will soon go on sale in Austria and Russia.


A Voyage to Bedlam and Part Way Back;Yale law Graduate, a Schizophrenic, Is Encumbered by an Invisible Wheelchair
The most interesting feature of Michael B. Laudor's resume can only be glimpsed between the lines.
Sprinkled among the stellar nuggets of his life, from graduating summa cum laude from Yale University in three years to being awarded a coveted postdoctoral associateship at Yale Law School, are references to his work as a mental-health advocate and a consultant on ethics in psychiatric research.
Mr.
Laudor, 32 and by all accounts a genius, is a schizophrenic who emerged from eight months in a psychiatric unit at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center  to go to Yale Law School.
His success is about many things: the efficacy of new  drugs in treating mental illness, the support of family, friends and colleagues  and the steely refusal of a young man who became very sick at age 24 to be capsized by his disease.


CHRONICLE
Two former astronauts, both retired Navy captains, are involved in a new venture to get children excited about space travel.
CHARLES (PETE) CONRAD, who flew four missions including the second lunar landing, and RICHARD F. GORDON, who flew in the command module on that flight, appear in a series of 13 home videos for children produced by Gateways to Space in Pleasanton, Calif.
The first tape in the "Star Scouts Discover NASA" series will be available on Nov. 29 in supermarkets and drug stores.
The programs will also star two computer-generated animated characters, Cygy and Zendo, from the planet Kara, who will interact with the astronauts.


Human Bones Found Under House of a Killer
Human bones have been unearthed under a house once rented by a former police  officer who is now on death row for killing her former partner and two other people during a robbery, the police said.
Officers carried brown paper bags of bones from the small house where the former officer, Antoinette Frank, once lived.
Ms.
Frank's relatives still live in the house, neighbors said.


San Francisco Mayor's Race Goes Into Extra Innings
The best thing about the mayor's race in San Francisco, a place where politics is still fun, is that Tuesday's vote was inconclusive and so there is more to come.
No candidate won a majority in the nonpartisan contest, and that means a runoff on Dec. 12 between the top two finishers in the seven-candidate field: the former State Assembly Speaker Willie Brown and the incumbent, Frank Jordan.


Cuba's Problem Is Castro, Not U.S. Embargo;A Week in Havana
To the Editor:
Carl Rosenstein's Nov. 1 letter is a good example of how United States propaganda about Cuba can distort thinking.
After a one-week trip to Havana, Mr.
Rosenstein concludes there is prostitution everywhere, there is nothing to buy,  there is a food shortage and the architecture "is returning to its original state -- sand -- from years of neglect." What's more, he knows about "the state  of the society."


Bridge
Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., and Zia Mahmood of Manhattan have won the first Politiken World Pairs, which ended Sunday in Copenhagen.
They earned $4,000 each in prize money, outdistancing a world-class field of 16 invited pairs.
The standings were: 1st, Weichsel and Zia, 944 victory points; 2d, Massimo Lanzarotti and Andrea Buratti of Italy, 901; 3d, George Mittelman and Fred Gitelman of Toronto, 804; 4th, Jaggy Shivdasani and Santanu Ghose of India, 788.


After ets Drop Carter, 49ers Make the Catch
The Jets lost two symbols of their failed season yesterday: the quarterback who might have been, and the kick returner who never was.
Glenn Foley underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair ligament damage to his dislocated right shoulder in the morning.
The Jets could not do anything about that.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-15


Career of a Senator's Wife Is Derailed in a Council Race
The shadows of two prominent Republicans converged on Joan Specter on Tuesday night, helping end her career as a member of the Philadelphia City Council after 16 years.
Caught up in the Presidential aspirations of her husband, Senator Arlen Specter, a candidate for the Republican nomination, and the name recognition of  one of her opponents, Frank Rizzo Jr., son of the city's late Mayor, Mrs.
Specter was narrowly defeated in a bid for a fifth four-year term as an at-large member of the Council.


Kohl to Visit China; To Woo Trade, He Braves Rights Protests
Eager to find new markets for Germany's export-oriented economy, Chancellor Helmut Kohl is to go to China next week and become the first Western leader to visit a Chinese military base since the massacre at Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Human rights groups in Germany have protested Mr.
Kohl's plans, but business  leaders say they need his help if they are to profit from China's economic boom.
China has traditionally preferred to award large contracts to companies from countries that refrain from loud criticism of its rights record.


Navy Goats to Be Returned
Navy is getting its goats back.
Officials at West Point said yesterday that they had located the three mascot goats stolen from a Maryland farm over the weekend by a contingent of Army seniors.
"We know where the goats are," Lieut.
Col.
DON McGRATH of the West Point public affairs office said.
"Two of the cadets involved have come forward and met with the commandant."


Agency Withdraws From Mistic Review
Mistic Brands, which markets fruit-flavored juice drinks and teas, said that  Krimstein/Clapps in New York, its agency of only six months, had withdrawn from  a review for the creative portion of its account, leaving five agencies in the review.
The billings were estimated at $7 million.
Ken Gilbert, senior vice president for marketing at Mistic in New Rochelle, N.Y., a unit of the Triarc Companies, confirmed a report this week in Adweek about the withdrawal.
John Clapps, co-chairman at Krimstein/Clapps, attributed the agency's decision to a need to devote attention to other clients.


R. Tucker Abbott, an Intimate Of Mollusks' World, Dies at 77
Dr.
R.
Tucker Abbott, the master of mollusks who was better known as Mr.
Seashell, died on Friday at his home on Sanibel Island, Fla., where he was director of the new Bailey-Matthews Shell Museum.
He was 77 and also lived in Melbourne, Fla.
Museum officials said the cause was a stroke.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF


60 Minutes' Ordered to Pull Interview in Tobacco Report
In an atmosphere of heightened tension between cigarette manufacturers and the press, CBS's lawyers ordered the news program "60 Minutes" not to broadcast  a planned on-the-record interview with a former tobacco company executive who was harshly critical of the industry.
Instead, the program has substituted a revised report for this Sunday that will examine how cigarette manufacturers try to prevent information from reaching the public.


Harry Antoniades, 72, Professor And Top Biochemist at Harvard
Harry Nicholas Antoniades, a Harvard biochemist known for his work on growth  factors and the mechanisms of hormone transport, died on Nov. 1 at his home in Newport, Mass.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, according to the Harvard University School of Public Health, from which he retired in 1993 as professor of biochemistry and senior investigator, and then became a professor emeritus.


Munich Bank Considering Oppenheimer Acquisition
Bayerische Vereinsbank A.G. said today that it was in talks to buy Oppenheimer &amp; Company, which would give the Munich bank a foothold on Wall Street and end Oppenheimer's search for more capital.
"Bayerische Vereinsbank and Oppenheimer are in talks and examining the possibility of working together," Thomas Pfaff, a spokesman for Bayerische Vereinsbank, said.
An Oppenheimer spokesman, John Ryan, also confirmed the talks.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Devils Can't Snap Out of Their Deep Funk
Spread the word: The Stanley Cup champions are struggling.
They are slow, look tired and are playing with little intensity.
The Devils were so listless tonight, in fact, that they suffered a 2-1 loss to the Calgary Flames, a team with only one victory in their previous 14 games.
"You can't win with the kind of effort we put on," a remarkably calm Coach Jacques Lemaire said after the game.
"The guys are tired and I don't know why. They just can't skate."


Gallant Nets Fall In Three Overtimes
The Nets were embarrassed by the Toronto Raptors in their season opener.
On Tuesday night they bounced back and destroyed the Portland Trail Blazers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was difficult to determine which team would show up  here tonight to play the Orlando Magic.
Without their floor leader, Kenny Anderson, who was sidelined with a strained groin in the fourth quarter, the Nets refused to go quietly.
They battled the Magic basket for basket and period for period before falling in 3 hours 24 minutes, 130-122, in triple overtime in front of 17,248 at the Orlando Arena.


Briton, 34, Is Running For Money, Not Love
If he wins the New York City Marathon on Sunday, Paul Evans of Britain will have made an astounding progression from the unemployment line to the finish line.
Seven years ago, he was working in a shoe factory outside of Norwich, England.
His running career began, not out of an obsession, but out of economic  necessity.
He got laid off.
"What am I good at?" he asked himself when the Bally shoe factory closed in 1988.


The General Checks Out
The site of the press conference was a giveaway as to what was to come.
Presidential campaigns get announced at hometown rallies or in front of cheering students at the alma mater.
Candidacies get ended amid the crepuscular light and stack chairs of hotel conference rooms, a setting more identified with Amway and Mary Kay than with heroic figures rising to meet historic opportunity.
So Colin Powell picked the right place to just say no, and by his account, he did it for the right reason.
A run for the Presidency "requires a calling that I do not yet hear." Such a decision has to be respected.
The campaign trail, not to mention the Oval Office, is no place for conflicted feelings.
But what a disappointment that Mr.
Powell was not ready to grasp the cup the public was offering him.


Conservatives Split on How To Regulate The Internet
The debate over how to police cyberspace is sharply dividing the ranks of conservative Republicans, putting House Speaker Newt Gingrich at odds with traditional allies like Ralph Reed of the Christian Coalition and Phyllis Schlafly, the abortion opponent.
The dispute concerns rival proposals before Congress intended to shield children from pornography in words and pictures as well as from other material deemed objectionable that is distributed over the Internet.
The computer-network provisions are proposed as seemingly modest amendments to the sweeping legislation to deregulate the telecommunications industry, which a House-Senate  conference committee is rushing to complete.


Giants' Wooten Awaits Test From Raiders
Giants safety Tito Wooten is known for having a wild side.
Wooten is smart, outspoken and a good athlete, but his sometimes carefree attitude has driven the coaching staff and some of his teammates crazy.
However, he has a chance to be a superb player if he keeps his head on straight.
Wooten is one of the team leaders in getting fined for reporting late for meetings.
If a player is late, he is fined $200 and each subsequent time the fine is doubled.
Wooten has paid more than $1,000 in fines.


Editor Berates Himself In a Memoir of Modesty
NOT ENTITLED A Memoir By Frank Kermode 263 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Officer Guilty In Assault Case At a Grocery
In a case that drew attention in New York City's Korean-American community, a police officer was convicted yesterday of the attempted assault of a Korean immigrant at his Brooklyn grocery, but the officer was acquitted of a more serious assault charge.
Judge Micki A. Scherer of Criminal Court in Brooklyn announced her verdict against the officer, Rolando Baquadano, in a courtroom filled with fellow officers.


Team to Investigate Claims by F.B.I. Chemist
An international team will help investigate accusations by a chemist for the  Federal Bureau of Investigation that the bureau's crime laboratory is biased, the Justice Department's inspector general said today.
The team of forensic scientists, announced by the Inspector General Michael Bromwich, consists of two Canadians, two Americans and a Briton.


Advantages of a Nursery
To The Home Section:
As the owner of a large independent retail nursery in the state of Connecticut, I would like to add some information to your Oct. 5 article ("Go to a Nursery or to a Giant?") that would help your readers make a decision on choosing quality nursery stock.


Mason Finally Gets It: He's in Big Time Now
Anthony Mason has finally realized he is a big-time player and wants to shed  his small-time attitude.
The day after he was ejected from the Knicks' home opener for tossing some choice comments toward the replacement officials, Mason apologized to his teammates and to the fans for essentially being himself on the court.


Devotees at the Altar of Movement
Christopher House trusts movement and its power to delight the eye, pique curiosity and stimulate thought.
No wonder Toronto Dance Theater is always a welcome visitor to New York.
Mr.
House has been associated with this group since 1978, and he became its artistic director last year.
The Canadian troupe is presenting nothing but five works by Mr.
House in its  current New York engagement, which opened on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Some dancegoers might fear, and with reason, that programs by only one choreographer could lack stylistic variety.
But fortunately Mr.
House is gifted, and an evening of his dances enables an audience to follow the twists and turns  of his unusual choreographic imagination.


KLM Suing Investors in Deal for Northwest
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines sued investors in the 1989 leveraged buyout of the Northwest Airlines Corporation yesterday, saying that changes in the buyout agreement limited its power as Northwest's largest shareholder.
KLM denied that the suit was tied to Northwest's plans to approve a "poison pill" takeover defense and change rules of corporate governance.
Both moves would limit KLM's ability to buy more shares in Northwest and influence corporate decisions.


A Father's Old Toolbox
To The Home Section:
It's almost hard for me to believe that reading Pete Hamill's "Tools to Smooth the Grain of Life" (Oct. 26) brought back such a flood of memories.


Motivation Aplenty For Ailing Hostetler
Jeff Hostetler, the former Giant and current Oakland Raiders quarterback, has not been shy about expressing his feelings about his ex-team with former teammates.
He recently told one player that no matter how much his body hurt, he would not miss this game.
Hostetler has a broken left hand but will still play.
He was karate-chopped in the throat earlier this season against Denver.
If every bone in his body were broken, he would still try to play.
The Giants-Raiders game here on Sunday is Hostetler's chance to prove that the Giants -- specifically Coach Dan Reeves --  made a bad decision in releasing him and keeping Phil Simms.


W. M. Rountree, 78, A U.S. Ambassador From 1959 to 1973
William M. Rountree, who served as a United States ambassador in Asia, Africa and Latin America from 1959 to 1973, died on Friday in Shands Hospital in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 78 and lived in Gainesville.
He had been under treatment for cancer, family members said.


CHRONICLE
The actor ED BEGLEY JR., a leading environmentalist in Hollywood, has resigned from two environmental organizations, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"I've become my own worst nightmare, a petty bureaucrat shuffling papers as the ancient forests are destroyed, the frogs perish and the coral reefs die off," said Mr.
Begley, who drives an electric car and uses solar power in his home in Studio City, Calif.


Dow Chemical Gets Go-Ahead In East Germany
Giving the green light to one of the largest state subsidies in Europe for a  collapsing enterprise, the European Commission approved a plan today to allow the German Government to give the Dow Chemical Company $6.77 billion to rejuvenate a giant eastern German petrochemical complex.
The subsidy, approved earlier in the year by Bonn, is by far the largest bailout engineered under the vast privatization program for the former East Germany.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about an appearance by Colin L. Powell in Philadelphia omitted part of a paragraph in some editions.
The affected passage, about his speech to the American Society of Travel Agents, should have read, "His speech here was a compendium of inspirational themes and  contemporary parables that he thinks should guide Americans and give them hope."


2d Man Is Convicted In 6 Queens Killings
A Queens jury convicted a second man yesterday in the murder of six people in a College Point condominium last winter.
The man, Saul Angulo, 20, of 91-07 31st Avenue, Jackson Heights, was found guilty of six counts of intentional murder, as well as attempted murder, robbery and criminal possession of a weapon.


Bundesbank Cuts Rate
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, cut its minimum securities-repurchase rate yesterday to 4 percent from 4.02 percent.
The cut in the rate, which dictates the wholesale cost of money in Germany, was in line with expectations.
The Bundesbank lent German banks 67.6 billion marks, about $47.6 billion, under  15-day repurchase agreements, known as repos.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Both Parties Find Reasons To Celebrate in Elections
Both Democrats and Republicans found enough to like about the New Jersey elections to claim victory today.
Although the Democrats picked up three new seats in the Assembly on Tuesday,  the Republicans maintained solid control of the chamber and explained away their pre-election predictions that they would pick up five seats as campaign hyperbole.


World News Briefs;British Airways Ordered To Pay French Hostages
British Airways was ordered by a French court today to pay cash damages to 61 French passengers who were held hostage by Iraqi troops after the British jet landed in Kuwait on the day Iraq invaded the emirate.
The court ruled that the airline was "entirely responsible" for the passengers' plight by making an unscheduled stop in Kuwait on Aug. 2, 1990.
Iraqi forces seized the plane's 360 passengers and crew, holding some for as long as three months.


Stricter Rules Imposed at New York State Homeless Shelters
The Pataki administration has ordered homeless shelters across the state to charge rent to some homeless people and to eject those who do not follow a strict code of conduct.
When the State Department of Social Services first proposed the regulations in March, there was a storm of protest from homeless advocates, opening a long period of public comment.
But on Friday, with no public notice, the administration short-circuited the public review process and issued an emergency regulation putting the new policy into effect immediately.


Calendar: Exhibitions And a Talk
Antiques by the Hudson Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between 48 and 55th Streets; (212) 255-0020.


Few to Pursue Claims Against New York Life
The New York Life Insurance Company said yesterday that the vast majority of  its three million policyholders who were offered a settlement arising from claims of improper sales practices had decided not to fight the company.
An agreement was reached in August by the company and lawyers who had filed class-action lawsuits contending that New York Life had used improper sales activities.
Customers who bought life insurance policies with investment features between 1984 and 1992 were offered a choice: They could do nothing, which meant accepting the company's offer, or they could tell the company that they wanted to pursue their grievances before arbitrators hired by the company,  or, if they wanted, in court.
Under the settlement, customers who accepted the company's offer can choose between receiving loans with low interest rates or buying additional amounts of  life insurance or annuities at prices the company said were lower than its ordinary offerings.
Customers who wanted an arbitration hearing or a day in court were required to tell the company by Oct. 31 that they did not want to participate in the agreement.


Clutter Counseling: Just Say Throw
MICHELLE PASSOFF promises miracles in her "Free Yourself From Clutter" class.
But don't expect any burning bushes.
"Clutter cleaning is dealing with yourself," Ms.
Passoff told about 20 of us  at our first of three classes last month, at the New York Open Center in SoHo.
"The miracle is coming face to face with oneself."


Budget Ax Always Falls Outside Beltway
To the Editor:
Maureen Dowd's Nov. 2 column on incompetence in the Central Intelligence Agency, notes the "brazen careerism" that is such a part of the Washington scene.


Slim Win on Hartford Schools Doesn't End System's Trouble
The prospects for Hartford's experiment in private management of its schools  appeared little improved yesterday after Tuesday's bitter election in which union-endorsed candidates vowing to kill it fell short of winning a majority on  the Board of Education by 210 votes.
Opponents of Education Alternatives Inc., the for-profit company hired in 1994 to help manage the district, gained two seats on the school board, leaving supporters of the company a slim 5-to-4 majority, and they promised to continue their resistance.


Powell Move Disappoints Giuliani
Of all the politicians disappointed when Gen.
Colin L. Powell renounced Presidential politics yesterday, few had more at stake than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the most prominent elected official in America to have urged General Powell to run.
Last week the Mayor radiantly described General Powell as "a leader who can rise above politics" and described him as a powerful weapon for breaking open the closed New York State Republican primary controlled by his party rivals.
At  a broader level, he was also the Mayor's best hope for ending a virtually unbroken streak of endorsements for losing politicians.


Election Gains Allow Democrats To Dim G.O.P.'s Aura of Success
While the election results around the country on Tuesday were hardly proof of a Democratic revival, they shattered the sense of invincibility among Republicans that has grown in the three years since Bill Clinton's election.
By staving off Republican efforts to take over the Virginia and Maine legislatures as well as the Kentucky governorship, Democrats gave themselves more than a little hope that the party was not battered beyond redemption as the 1996 Presidential campaign was about to start.


Fiat Deal in Ukraine
Fiat S.p.A. said today that it had agreed to a joint venture to produce light and medium trucks in Ukraine with Kraz.
The joint venture will be capitalized at $40 million, rising to $60 million within the first two years of operation.
Fiat and Kraz will each have a 35 percent interest.


Rabbis and Settlers Dispute Their Own Culpability in Rabin's Assassination
At an anguished public meeting that echoed broader turmoil, leaders of right-wing Israeli religious and settler movements debated tonight whether they  bore any responsibility for the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.


Morris S. Schwartz, Professor, 78
Morris S. Schwartz, a retired professor of sociology at Brandeis University,  died on Saturday at his home in Newton, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause was Lou Gehrig's disease, The Boston Globe reported.


Excerpts From Ruling on Fare Increase
Following are excerpts from the ruling yesterday by Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan temporarily blocking the Metropolitan Transportation Authority from raising the bus and subway fare.


Currents;Inspired By a Dirigible Hangar
WHEN the architect James Stewart Polshek was a boy in Akron, Ohio, he often visited an old dirigible hangar at the airport.
"The building fascinated me," he said, and its parabolic walls became an inspiration years later when he designed Inventure Place, the new $38 million home of the National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron.
The striking building has a five-story arc of gleaming stainless steel that rises above a vast plaza like the sail of a ship.
"The plaza allows exposure of  the 'sail,' " Mr.
Polshek explained.


Europe Online to Start
Europe Online S.A. said today that it would begin its service on Dec. 15 despite being hurt by the defection of major publishing partners.
The Luxembourg-based company had originally planned an early 1996 starting date.
Its only major publishing partner appears to be Burda Verlag G.m.b.H. of Germany, the publisher of Focus and Bunte magazines.
Europe Online will begin offering its service in Germany and Britain and extend to other European countries next year, a spokeswoman said.


Probation for Killer of a Graffiti Sprayer
A man who killed a graffiti spray-painter and wounded another was placed on three years' probation today for carrying a concealed weapon.
Judge Lloyd Nash of Municipal Court also ordered the man, William A. Masters, to remove graffiti for 30 days and participate in a program in which he will observe gunshot victims in hospitals and the coroner's office.


Two Newark Officers Indicted
Two Newark police officers were indicted yesterday by an Essex County grand jury on charges of beating the driver of a Honda Civic that they suspected was stolen.
Lieut.
Carmine Russo, 52, and Detective Joseph Juliano, 30, are accused  of using excessive force in arresting Vidal Rodriquez Jr. on Jan. 17.
It turned out the car had not been stolen.


INTUIT TO BUY PROVIDER OF MUTUAL-FUND DATA ON INTERNET
IntuitInc., the maker of Quicken personal finance software, yesterday agreed  to buy Galt Technologies Inc. of Pittsburgh, a leading distributor of mutual fund information on the Internet, in a stock deal valued at more than $9 million.
Galt Technologies runs a service called Networth that distributes information of 65 mutual fund companies on the Internet's World Wide Web.
The acquisition would allow Quicken users to use their home personal computers to download prospectuses and other information for mutual funds through the Quicken Financial Network, Intuit's new Web site (http://www.intuit.com/quicken).


Stocks Drop in Japan
Stocks traded lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 17,821.04 points, down 42.25, or two-tenths of 1 percent.
On Wednesday, the index lost 157.93 points.


Samuel C. Bullock, 74, Psychiatrist and Educator
Samuel Carey Bullock, a Philadelphia psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, died on  Oct. 11 at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 74.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Governor Backs State Control
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will tell a group of business leaders today that  it is important for Congress to give states more control over social programs.
In a speech to the United States Chamber of Commerce, Governor Whitman will argue that state control of welfare and Medicaid is "more economic, more efficient," said Carl Golden, her spokesman.


COOPER INDUSTRIES TO BUY PART OF GERMAN COMPANY
Cooper Industries of Houston said yesterday that it had agreed to buy part of a German company that makes explosion-proof electrical equipment and emergency lighting systems.
Cooper, which makes tools, hardware and electric fixtures, said it would acquire the CEAG electrical products business of Asea Brown Boveri A.G. of Mannheim, Germany, for an disclosed sum.
CEAG has annual sales of $170 million.
Cooper's shares were up $1 yesterday, at $34, on the New York Stock Exchange.


An Appeal for Forgiveness
Following are the text of a letter of apology issued by the family of Yigal Amir, the confessed assassin of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, and Leah Rabin's oral response.
They were reported today in the Israeli press and translated from the Hebrew by The New York Times.
The Amir Family
To the Rabin family and all the people of Israel!


New Adoption Ruling Upholds Family Values
To the Editor:
The New York Court of Appeals's decision on Nov. 2 interpreting the state's adoption law to permit unmarried persons to adopt their partners' children (front page, Nov. 3) is a victory for real family values.


Violent Storms in the South


World News Briefs;Britain Tightens Rules On Pollution Emissions
Tough new standards on air pollution were announced today by the British Government in an effort to cut emissions of particulates to a third of those allowed in the United States.
Particulates are tiny particles carried in the air from diesel exhausts and domestic heating, and they can kill people who are already suffering from lung diseases.


Shelter Residents Say Rules Won't Help
Leona Dinkins has been there herself.
She used to drink and take drugs and laze around; she knows, from her own experience in the shelter system, that a person needs a push to straighten out.
But she does not understand how the Pataki administration could impose new rules that would evict shelter residents who do not follow a strict code of conduct.
To her, and to others at the working women's shelter in the Armory on Lexington Avenue and 25th Street, a person needs a push upward, not outward.


Appreciating Beverly Cleary
To The Home Section:
I couldn't stop smiling as I read your article about Beverly Cleary ("On Klickitat Street With Beverly Cleary: For 3 Generations, the Child's Choice," Oct. 26).
I could almost hear the scissors clicking as people cut it out to send to now-distant childhood friends and relatives.
I myself just mailed it off to my sister in Texas, who shared many hours with me comparing our lives with those of Beezus and Ramona.


COMPANY NEWS
DIAMOND SHAMROCK TO BUY CONVENIENCE STORES Diamond Shamrock Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire National Convenience Stores Inc. for $27 a share, or $260 million.
The agreement, which has been approved by both companies' boards, would thwart the Circle K Corporation's tender offer to  buy National Convenience for $20 a share.
National Convenience rejected the offer, and the companies were negotiating.
Diamond Shamrock, based in San Antonio, is a petroleum refiner and gasoline marketer that also operates convenience stores.
Its offer is conditioned upon acquiring at least two-thirds of National Convenience's shares and other terms.
National Convenience, based in Houston, operates 661 Stop N Go convenience stores in Texas.
Most of Diamond Shamrock's stores are in Texas.
(Dow Jones)


The Conservatives Strike Out
The New Jersey Conservative Party ran 59 Assembly candidates in Tuesday's election.
All 59 lost.
More important, the party needed 10 percent of all the votes cast for Assembly candidates to qualify as an official party in 1996.
It received 3.7 percent.


Sports of The Times;Mr. Stern, Please, Get Real Refs
THE replacement referee was confused.
Charles Smith had been fouled and now,  during a 20-second time out, the Knick forward was standing near the bench, blood flowing from his lacerated and broken nose while out near midcourt Coach Don Nelson was debating a lost and lonely man with a whistle, Lamont Simpson.
"Don, please," Simpson was heard to say, "give me a break."


The Pop Life


Higher Standards for Graduation
New York State's Education Commissioner set the right goal this week when he  proposed more challenging graduation requirements for the state's 2.7 million students.
The move by the Commissioner, Richard Mills, would build on pilot programs in place throughout the state -- and especially on the stiff new program in math and science education begun by Ramon Cortines, New York City's former Schools Chancellor.
But before Mr.
Mills proceeds, he and the Board of Regents need to state more clearly what they wish to accomplish, and provide a plan and resources for getting there.
The state now has a two-tiered testing system that leads to two classes of diplomas.
About 38 percent of high school students -- mainly those who plan to attend college -- take the more challenging courses that ready them for the Regents High School Examinations.
Those who pass earn the coveted Regents diploma.
But most students -- including about 80 percent of those in New York City -- take far less demanding courses and the Regents Competency Tests.
Those  who pass the competency test receive a local diploma.


Alan Bush, Composer, 94
Alan Bush, a British composer, pianist and conductor, died on Oct. 31 at Watford, just northwest of London.
He was 94 and lived in Radlett, near Watford.


Federated Tops Forecasts; Dillard's Earnings Are Flat
Federated Department Stores Inc. reported operating profits yesterday that exceeded Wall Street's expectations, although one-time charges resulted in a net loss in its fiscal third quarter.
Dillard Department Stores Inc., meanwhile, posted virtually no change in its  earnings, although its sales rose for the quarter.


It's Messier Once More Providing the Thunder
The script was familiar.
Spot the Tampa Bay Lightning three quick goals.
Fight back to tie.
The Rangers had been through this scenario before.


News Corporation Earnings Rise Slightly for the Quarter
The News Corporation reported a slight gain in first-quarter profit yesterday as strong results from its TV stations were offset by lower earnings from its film division.
Earnings were also hurt by the cost of operating Star TV in Asia and higher newsprint prices, the company, which is controlled by Rupert Murdoch, said.


A Death Sentence in Nigeria
Gen.
Sani Abacha's military dictatorship is moving quickly to execute Ken Saro-Wiwa, one of Nigeria's leading environmentalists and minority-rights leaders, after convicting him on trumped-up charges in a military court.
Yesterday Nigeria's ruling council confirmed Mr.
Saro-Wiwa's sentence.


Graciously, No Thanks
It was a great day for Bill Clinton and a very good day for Bob Dole, but of  course, that was not what was on Colin L. Powell's mind as he made his momentous decision not to seek elective office this year.
"During the book tour," a friend said tonight, "he would get turned on by the crowds, but then he would come home and say, 'It's just not me.' Again and again. He tried, tried, tried to feel the passion, but he didn't."


From Young Israelis, an Outpouring of Emotion
Perhaps it came at the moment when Yitzhak Rabin's teen-age granddaughter broke down and sobbed at his funeral.
Perhaps it was a phenomenon that was building all along in the peace songs and the rallies that preceded his assassination.


10-Year Plan for Education Makes Spotty Progress
Midway through the nation's ambitious 10-year program for setting and achieving educational goals, there is not nearly enough progress to indicate that many, or even any, of the goals will be met by the year 2000, according to  a national report to be released today.
"We are at the halfway point, and we have not made half the progress we need," said Michael Cohen, a senior adviser to Education Secretary Richard W. Riley.


Bronx Parents Plead for Chancellor's Help
Meeting parents in the first of five town hall assemblies, Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew last night challenged Bronx residents to work with him to improve the  city's schools.
But for the Chancellor, the get-together was more of an awakening to the frustrations of parents, who beseeched him to intervene and rescue their troubled schools.
About 900 people turned out for the meeting at Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Belmont section, many waiting in long lines for the chance to question the Chancellor.
Dr.
Crew, who took over as head of the New York City schools only last month, told the crowd that his first priority in his new job would be  to raise the level of expectations for the city's one million public school children.


Executive Changes
GRUNTAL FINANCIAL CORP., New York, a unit of Home Holdings Inc., said Howard Silverman, its chairman and chief executive, had resigned and was being replaced by Robert Rittereiser, the former head of E. F. Hutton &amp; Co.
Mr.
Silverman will  remain as a consultant to the firm until the end of the year.


Rangers Rally to Victory


F.D.A. Panel Endorses Another AIDS Drug
An advisory committee recommended today that the Food and Drug Administration give full approval to an AIDS drug for patients no longer responding to existing therapy.
It was the third recommendation made this week by the panel, the Antiviral Drugs Advisory Committee, for approval of drugs to treat H.I.V., the virus that  causes AIDS.
The drug agency is not bound by recommendations of its advisory panels but usually follows their advice.
AIDS advocacy groups back approval of all three drugs.


Jeffries Wyman, Molecular Biologist, 94
Jeffries Wyman, a molecular biologist and former science director of the Middle East office of Unesco in Cairo, died on Saturday at his home in Paris.
He was 94.
Dr.
Wyman, a native of Newton, Mass., held degrees from Harvard University and the University of London.
He taught at Harvard from 1928 to 1951, when he resigned to become the first scientific attache in the United States Embassy in  Paris.


Port Authority Is Selling Vista Hotel
Stepping up efforts to turn over some assets to private companies, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has reached a deal to sell the New York Vista Hotel in the World Trade Center to the Host Marriott Corporation, people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.
The agreement, which the authority's board is to vote on today, is the latest and biggest move in recent years by the authority to shed businesses that are not related to its core areas: transportation and commerce.
The authority is overseen by two Republican Governors, George E. Pataki and Christine Todd Whitman, who have cut its budget, causing large-scale layoffs.


Russia Agrees To Put Troops Under U.S., Not NATO
Russia and the United States agreed today on a face-saving way to allow about a thousand Russian combat troops to take part in a NATO peacekeeping force in Bosnia without reporting directly to NATO.
Instead, the troops will serve with an American division.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, the Russian Defense Minister, agreed in talks at NATO headquarters here that two or three infantry battalions could take part in the peacekeeping force this way without technically taking orders from NATO.


Market Place;Troubles for a parent company might be visited upon a spinoff.
FOR shareholders of Edison Brothers Stores, the last year has had almost nothing but bad news, culminating in last week's bankruptcy filing.
But there was one piece of good news: In June, Edison spun off a profitable and promising  subsidiary to its shareholders.
Now even that could be threatened.
With Edison in bankruptcy, it is possible  that creditors could challenge the spinoff retroactively.
At the worst, the ex-subsidiary, Dave &amp; Buster's Inc., a small chain of restaurant and entertainment emporiums, might be forced to help pay the claims of Edison's creditors.
Dave &amp; Buster's shareholders themselves could even be hauled into court.


Faucet Makers Will Cut Lead To Settle Suit
AS part of an out-of-court settlement with an environmental group, eight faucet manufacturers have agreed to sharply cut the amount of lead their products contribute to water.
The settlement is likely to supersede a less stringent voluntary standard developed by the plumbing-fixtures industry and public health officials just last year.
The Natural Resources Defense Council, a nonprofit group, brought the suit in California under the state's Proposition 65, a 1986 law that limits the introduction of toxic materials into drinking water sources.
The companies agreed that 95 percent of their faucets would meet the new guidelines by the end of 1999.
Faucets that do not comply will be labeled.
The lawsuit is proceeding against three manufacturers that did not settle.


A Chicago Democrat Is Quitting Congress
Representative Cardiss Collins, an Illinois Democrat whose 12 terms make her  the longest-serving black female member of Congress, said today that she would not run for re-election in 1996.
Representative Collins, 64, said she had no immediate plans for the future but would remain active in Democratic politics "until the day I die."


Mets' Brogna Has Knee Surgery
Mets first baseman RICO BROGNA underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday to repair a small tear in the cartilage that had bothered him during the season.
The 15-minute procedure was performed by Dr.
DAVID ALTCHECK and Dr.
DAVID DINES, the Mets' team physicians, at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.
Brogna, who had a .289 average, 22 home runs and 76 runs batted in last season, will start to run in about three weeks, the Mets said, and should be fine for spring training.
The Mets also said that the left-handed pitcher BILL PULSIPHER would have his left elbow examined today.
Pulsipher, bothered by sprained ligaments in the  elbow, missed the last three weeks of the season.


Bangkok Journal;King Knows His Rights: He'll Say What He Wants
His title is as long as it is exalted: Great King of Siam, the Chief Protector, Great Strength of the Land, Incomparable Power, the Most Renowned of the Mahidol Family and Refuge of the People.
But as King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand has reminded his devoted subjects, he is also a citizen of this troubled Asian land -- one with a right to speak his mind when something is wrong.


Nash Finch-Hackney Pact
The Nash Finch Company has agreed to sell its two North Carolina convenience  store wholesale subsidiaries to the H. T. Hackney Company of Knoxville, Tenn.
Terms were not disclosed.
Nash Finch, a Minneapolis-based food wholesaler, said  the two operations together have annual revenues of about $300 million.
The units are the Thomas &amp; Howard Company of Newton and T&amp;H Service Merchandisers Inc. of Hickory.


Reviving Old Favorite For Christmas
All too often, Americans realize that something they thought they had seen the last of years ago never really went away at all.
Peter Frampton, the blond curly-haired rock singer.
Synthetic fibers in plaids.
And then there are the Cabbage Patch Kids.
The license for the multistyle, puffy-face, chinless dolls, so popular in the mid-80's that grown people actually slapped each another to get to them, has been been picked up by Mattel Inc., the world's largest toy maker.
The company hopes to breathe new life into sales of the dolls, moving hundreds of thousands  of them onto the shelves just in time for Christmas.


The Morgan Tries to Unstuff the Shirts
Many people have regarded the Morgan as a small, elite club, with admission  only available to a Waspy few," Charles E. Pierce Jr., director of the Pierpont  Morgan Library, said recently, sitting in his oak-paneled office with its marble Renaissance fireplace and portraits of Shakespeare, Milton and Samuel Johnson. "There was no doubt that in an earlier time people were discouraged or refused entrance," Mr. Pierce added. "There were enough stories to be disconcerting to me."
Since his appointment in 1987, Mr.
Pierce has succeeded to some extent in raising public awareness of this hidden treasure, this cool, temple-like structure at 36th Street and Madison Avenue designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White and  built by the financier J. P. Morgan in 1904-5 as his private library. (Morgan disliked his first name, John, and even the initial, which is why it is the Pierpont Morgan.) In a kind of frenzy of acquisition, Morgan tried to recreate in America what he had seen in the ducal houses of Western Europe.


Discarded Credit Slips Abused
A Jersey City man dug a credit card slip out of a trash bin behind the Trader Horn appliance store and is now facing up to 10 years in prison.
Terrence Exum admitted yesterday in Federal Court that he used the account number and others he stole to order merchandise by phone.


MILITANT LEADER OF RIGHTIST GROUP SEIZED IN ISRAEL
The leader of a shadowy far-right group called Eyal was arrested today and the police searched for his deputy in connection with the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
The Cabinet also met under extraordinary security  to find ways to prevent political killings.
The leader of Eyal, Avishai Raviv, wearing the knitted blue yarmulke that is  a symbol of settler militants, was ordered held in custody by Tel Aviv Magistrate Court on suspicion of conspiring to kill Mr.
Rabin.


Iain Hardy, 37, Epidemiologist
Dr.
Iain Hardy, a medical epidemiologist in the National Immunization Program at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, drowned on Oct. 24 in France.
He was 37 and lived in Atlanta.
He drowned while swimming in a lake adjoining Veyrier-du-Lac, a village in southeastern France, Barbara Reynolds of the C.D.C. staff announced.


World News Briefs;Yeltsin Dismisses Head of Central Bank
President Boris N. Yeltsin dismissed the acting chief of the Central Bank today in a move aimed at appeasing Parliament, but which raised questions about  the Russian Government's commitment to lowering inflation.
The banker, Tatyana Paramonova, had been credited with tight monetary policies that have helped reduce Russian inflation and stabilize the ruble for the first time since 1992.
She was temporarily replaced by her first deputy, Aleksandr Khandruyev, who is seen by some as less committed to her policies.


Corrections
A book review yesterday about "The Politics of Rage," a biography of George Wallace, misstated the title of a book about the civil rights movement by Taylor Branch.
It is "Parting the Waters," not "Parting the Waves."


Excerpts From Powell's News Conference on Political Plans
Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday in Alexandria, Va., at which Gen.
Colin L. Powell announced that he would not run for President.
The event was recorded and transcribed by The New York Times.


Showalter Could Get Offer Today
BUCK SHOWALTER could learn today if the Detroit Tigers want him as their new  manager.
RANDY SMITH, the Tigers' new general manager, said yesterday that he had completed interviewing his four candidates for the job and planned to make a recommendation to JOHN McHALE JR., the club president, last night or today.
Smith declined to divulge his thinking, but when asked specifically about Showalter, he said: "There's no question that Buck was high on Oakland's list and apparently made a very favorable impression in Arizona. But we think we have a lot to offer in Detroit."


Labor Talks Continue
Dinner time came, dinner time went, and still the talks went on between the state and its largest employees union.
"Everybody is working very hard," Labor Commissioner Peter J. Calderone said last night.
He declined to comment further on the talks with the Communications  Workers of America, whose 38,000 members have been working without a contract since June 30.


M. A. HANNA TO BUY CIMCO'S SHARES AND SELL SOME UNITS
The M. A. Hanna Company said yesterday that it would acquire all outstanding  shares of Cimco Inc. for $10.50 a share, or about $31 million.
Shares of Cimco,  based in Costa Mesa, Calif., were up $1.25 yesterday, to $9.625, in Nasdaq trading.
Hanna, a specialty chemicals company in Cleveland, said that after the  acquisition, it would sell Cimco's plastics and molded components businesses and retain its plastics compounding operations.
Hanna said that Russell T. Gilbert, Cimco's chief executive, has offered to purchase the molded components  business.


Pittsburgh Blacks to Protest Man's Death
Angered by the announcement that five police officers accused of suffocating  a black motorist will not be charged with first- or second-degree homicide, blacks here have begun organizing marches for Sunday and Monday to push for the  severest possible charges.
District Attorney Robert Colville said on Monday that he would not bring the  severest homicide charges because the officers' testimony at the coroner's inquest showed they had not intended to kill the man, Jonny Gammage, on Oct. 12.


Not Just a White Man's Game;Blacks in Business Master the Art of Networking
When Warrington Hudlin needed capital to stage a film festival, he telephoned an old Ivy League chum, Alrick Nembhard, senior vice president at L. M. Capital, a Manhattan investment firm.
Immediately, the old-boys network cranked into high gear.
Mr.
Nembhard agreed to look for financing, and called a fellow Harvard graduate, Jerylle Kemp, general counsel at the New York State Mortgage Agency, for her advice.


COMPANY BRIEFS
THERMO ELECTRON CORP., Waltham, Mass., which makes health and environment monitoring systems, said its Thermedics Inc. unit in Woburn, Mass., had agreed to acquire Moisture Systems Corp., Hopkinton, Mass., and Rutter &amp; Co. of the Netherlands, for $20.5 million.


Nigeria Rulers Back Hanging Of 9 Members Of Opposition
Nigeria's military rulers yesterday confirmed the death sentences passed on Ken Saro-Wiwa, a prominent Nigerian writer, and eight other environmental and human rights campaigners who were convicted of murder last week in a trial widely seen as flawed.
The nine defendants were found guilty of killing four pro-Government chiefs in the rebellious Ogoni region.
The defendants were campaigning for a better deal for the Ogoni people, who say that they have not received their fair share  of the region's mineral wealth and that their traditional homelands are suffering serious environmental damage.


Currents;Brooklyn Architecture


Market Deregulated In Johannesburg
The Johannesburg Stock Exchange began the biggest shake-up in its 108-year history today, throwing open its doors to foreign and corporate members.


Focus of Closing Is King Paper Trail
To the prosecutor in Don King's Federal wire-fraud trial, the boxing promoter is a liar and a thief capable of duping Lloyd's of London and Julio Cesar Chavez.
But to the promoter's defense lawyer, King is someone worth shedding a tear for.
In his closing argument yesterday, Craig Stewart, an assistant United States  Attorney, dramatically distilled a month's worth of testimony about checks, insurance, missing fax cover sheets and altered contracts into a trail that he said led to King's culpability in a scheme to fraudulently collect an insurance  claim from Lloyd's of London on a canceled Chavez-Harold Brazier bout in 1991.


Yale Editors Served Fruit Punch This Year
To the Editor:
A year ago you published a piece by my friend Christopher Buckley, who endured appalling indignities by agreeing to speak to the Yale Daily News banquet in New Haven (Op-Ed, Nov. 22, 1994).
On that occasion staff members of The Daily News apparently fulfilled their annual quotas for alcohol in a single  evening, rendering themselves incapable of listening to Mr.
Buckley's speech, and in some cases incapable of opening their eyes.
Mr.
Buckley cast his piece as a warning to the person invited to speak to the next Yale Daily News banquet (which took place last Saturday night in New Haven).


McDonnell Picks McCann-Erickson
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that it had named McCann-Erickson Los Angeles to handle its account, which had been at J. Walter Thompson Chicago for the last 50 years.
Though the billings have not been determined, executives familiar with the account and who spoke on the condition  of anonymity estimated them at $12 million to $15 million.
Frederick Wells Hill, senior vice president for communications and community relations at McDonnell Douglas in St.
Louis, who is responsible for the company's advertising, said that McCann Los Angeles, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, was awarded the account after a five-month review that was narrowed to three finalists: McCann Los Angeles; Thompson Chicago, a unit of the WPP Group, and Ketchum Advertising in Pittsburgh, part of Ketchum Communications.


LADD FURNITURE SELLS TWO UNITS AND OFFERS OTHERS
Ladd Furniture Inc. agreed yesterday to sell the Brown Jordan Company, an outdoor furniture unit, for $28.6 million in cash.
Ladd, which makes furniture under the American Drew, Barclay, Kenbridge and Lea brand names, will sell the unit to BJCL Inc., a company controlled by Hancock Park Associates, an investment firm in Los Angeles.
The sale is part of a plan to concentrate on making wood-frame and upholstered indoor furniture for the residential and contract markets, Ladd said.
The company, based in High Point, N.C., said Brown  Jordan was one of four units it planned to sell.
On Tuesday, Ladd said it had signed an agreement to sell its Lea Lumber and Plywood division.


Guilford Mills Acquisitions
Guilford Mills Inc. has agreed to buy the privately owned Hofmann Laces Ltd.  and its affiliates: Raschel Fashion Interknitting Ltd. and Curtains and Fabrics  Inc.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
Hofmann Laces makes lace and stretch-knit fabrics for apparel and home furnishings.


A Tribute Along the Hudson River


Events: Architecture In Words and Drawings
Contemporary Architecture Wood Auditorium in Avery Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.


Coding-Export Limits Opposed
The political right has joined the opposition to the Clinton Administration's proposed restriction on the export of data-coding systems.
A group of 12 conservative organizations -- including the National Rifle Association, Americans for Tax Reform and the Competitive Enterprise Institute -- sent a letter yesterday to House Speaker Newt Gingrich protesting Administration efforts to limit the export of cryptographic software and hardware.


Pharmacia Profit Drop
Pharmacia, the Swedish arm of the newly merged company Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc., said yesterday that its earnings had fallen 23 percent in the first nine months of the year as product-development costs grew.
The company, reporting results as a separate entity for the last time, said its pretax income from operations dropped to 3.42 billion Swedish crowns, or $513.3 million, from 4.43  billion crowns a year earlier.
Total sales fell 2 percent, to 19.46 billion crowns.
(Reuters)


U.S. Announces Holdup In Aid Package to Haiti
The United States is holding up $4.5 million in aid to Haiti because Haiti has failed to make progress in selling off state enterprises and in reforming its civil service, the State Department said today.
The money is the only undisbursed portion of a $45 million aid program for Haiti for 1995.


Restaurants
Five years ago, a restaurant like Katana would have been unimaginable.
This is not because there was no interest in kaiseki food.
This exquisitely refined food of the Japanese tea ceremony is an ancient tradition that could certainly have found an audience.
But it would have been very different from the one it has at Katana in the heart of SoHo.


Sears May Sell Prodigy Stake
Sears Roebuck &amp; Company is seeking a buyer for its stake in the Prodigy Services Company, the on-line service it owns with I.B.M., industry analysts said yesterday.
Sears tried to sell its 50 percent share to the International Business Machines Corporation, which turned it down three times.


Risky Styles Pay Off For New Ranger Combo
Putting center Mark Messier and right wing Aleksei Kovalev together isn't exactly a new Ranger coaching concept.
It worked for Mike Keenan in Game 6 of the Stanley Cup semifinals of 1994, when Messier scored three goals and Kovalev  scored once in a victory over the Devils that tied the series at three games each and eventually helped the Rangers win a championship.


They're Adults, And Sound It
IN the title song of Abbey Lincoln's profoundly beautiful album "A Turtle's Dream," this 65-year-old jazz singer and songwriter imagines that she is a sea creature moving slowly through the ocean.
Swimming alone and unnoticed, the turtle has fantasies of flying like an eagle and walking like a lion, but understands that these dreams can never be realized.
"But I can swim the ocean/And it's deep and wide," Ms.
Lincoln concludes in a voice that brims with a calm, joyful self-acceptance.
"And in the house above me, abide."
The song could be read as a metaphor for Ms.
Lincoln's own career and for the artistry of other "turtles" like her.
The antithesis of pop music's more celebrated burnouts and flashes in the pan, these are musicians who keep plugging away year after year, getting better and better until maybe somebody notices.


Christian and Jewish Groups Call for Veto of Welfare Bill
The National Council of Churches and Reform Judaism's national political office called on President Clinton yesterday to veto any legislation that would  end welfare and Medicaid entitlements for children and substitute block grants to the states.
Leaders of Conservative Judaism and a group of African-American churches also endorsed the statement.
"The very moral fabric of our nation would be torn," the leaders said in a statement, if the Government renounces its "60-year-old promise to be protector  of last resort for poor, disabled and abused children."


American Reporter Acquitted in Turkey
An American correspondent for Reuters was acquitted today of charges that she had violated Turkey's laws on freedom of expression for reporting on the military campaign against rebel Kurds.
On the recommendation of the prosecutor, the three-member State Security Court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to convict the correspondent, Aliza Marcus, 33, of Westfield, N.J.


Coming to Midtown: The Nation's Parade
More than 30,000 veterans will march in a special Veterans Day parade tomorrow to mark the 50th anniversary of World War II's end.
Beginning at 11:05  A.M., some 3,000 World War II soldiers will join the parade at 48th Street and march to the reviewing stand at 59th Street.
Going the whole route will be veterans form the Korean, Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars, with 40 bands, 20 floats and 73 antique military vehicles.
At 7 A.M. tomorrow, the vehicles will leave Floyd Bennett Field, head up Flatbush Avenue, and go across the Manhattan  Bridge to Fifth Avenue.
The parade is part of an attempt to revitalize Veterans  Day.
Article, page B3.


Death Penalty Weighed in Dragons Case
Federal prosecutors said yesterday that they were considering seeking the death penalty for at least three of the five men charged with kidnapping and murder conspiracy in the killing of a Chinese immigrant woman in Brooklyn in September.
The three men, described by the authorities as members of the Fujianese Flying Dragons, pleaded not guilty yesterday at their arraignment in Federal District Court.


Machado to Go Distance This Time
If Manuela Machado, the world champion from Portugal, can be sure of one thing at Sunday's New York City Marathon, it is that the course will measure the required distance of 26 miles 385 yards.
Three months ago, at the world championships in Goteborg, Sweden, Machado finished first in 2 hours 25 minutes 39 seconds, which appeared to be the second-fastest time in the world this year.
It was not announced until the next  day that the race had been 400 meters short.
Instead of running four laps inside Ullevi Stadium before hitting the streets of Goteborg, the 43 women marathoners  had run only three.


Ernest Gellner, a Philosopher On Nationalism, Dies at 69
Ernest Gellner, an expert on social anthropology, philosophy and politics at  universities in London, Cambridge, England, and Prague, died on Sunday at the Prague airport.
He was 69 and had led an academic institute in Prague since 1993.
The Guardian and The Financial Times of London said the cause was a heart attack.
He had long suffered from osteoporosis, a bone disorder.


ABC Suspends '20/20' Producer Over Pay for Access to Subject
A producer for the ABC News prime-time magazine program "20/ 20" has been suspended without pay for signing a contract committing ABC to pay $3,000 for access to chimpanzees for a segment about the scientific use of those animals that aired on "20/20" last May 5.
The producer, whom ABC declined to name, signed a contract on Feb. 7 with the Chimpanzee and Human Communications Institute at Central Washington University in Ellensburg, agreeing to pay $3,000 "as a consideration" to the institute and  the chimpanzees for one day "for the purpose of filming footage for an educational program."


Regional School Vote Approved
Voters in six Union County communities have won the right to decide whether to dissolve their regional school district.
A state review board yesterday approved a referendum on a 60-year-old arrangement that has sent students from Berkeley Heights, Kenilworth, Springfield, Mountainside, Clark and Garwood to three regional high schools.


Official's Conviction Voided
In October 1993, Hilda Hidalgo, a state education official, set out to inspect the Morton Street School, accompanied by some Newark reporters.
Ms.
Hidalgo ended up in handcuffs, facing charges of creating a disturbance and resisting arrest.
On Wednesday, a Superior Court judge said she never should have been arrested, and he threw out her conviction in Municipal Court earlier this year.


Executive Changes
LAWTER INTERNATIONAL INC., Northbrook, Ill., a specialty chemicals maker, said Daniel J. Terra, its chief executive, and Richard D. Nordman, its president and  chief operating officer, would resign on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Terra will continue as chairman.
John O'Mahoney, vice president for European operations, was named chief executive and vice chairman, a new position, and John P. Jilek, vice president for sales, was named president and chief operating officer.


Drinking Water Accord Isn't Without Flaws
To the Editor:
"At Last, a Watershed Agreement" (editorial, Nov. 3) correctly credits the drinking water accord announced last week by New York State, New York City and upstate watershed officials with staving off the short-term pressure to construct a multibillion-dollar filtration plant for the city's water supply.


Climbing Cartier's for Christmas


Coke Account Follows Ovitz to Disneyland
The Coca-Cola Company is shocking Madison Avenue again by forming a joint advertising venture with one of its biggest marketing partners, the Walt Disney  Company.
They will operate an agency with a single client, Coca-Cola, and a singular asset, an account with spending of more than $500 million annually around the world.
The deal, announced yesterday, was brokered by Michael Ovitz, who left this summer as chairman of the powerful talent agency, the Creative Artists Agency, to join Disney as president.
Coca-Cola stunned the advertising industry four years ago by hiring Mr.
Ovitz -- often described as the most important man in Hollywood -- and Creative Artists to help reverse its then-flagging fortunes after a series of weak campaigns.


GTE SEES LOSS IN QUARTER FROM PLANNED CHARGE
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it would take a charge of $4.7 billion in the fourth quarter to change the way it accounts for depreciation of  its plant and equipment.
The charge, which amounts to $4.83 a share, will result in a loss for the fourth quarter and for the year.
In 1994, GTE posted profit from operations of $2.29 billion, or $2.38 a share, on sales of $19.9 billion.
The charge makes GTE the eighth large local phone company to write down the value of its equipment, allowing for faster introduction of new technology.


Ruling Favors Bruno-Tyson
The World Boxing Council ruled yesterday that its heavyweight champion, FRANK BRUNO, should make his first title defense against MIKE TYSON.
The decision, made at the W.B.C.'s annual meeting in the northern Thai city of Chiang Mai, came amid legal moves by the former champion LENNOX LEWIS to force Bruno, a fellow Briton, to fight him first.


McCarthyism in Tel Aviv
The collective agony and shock now traumatizing Israel are a natural reaction to the horror of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assassination.
Such a trauma can bring the nation together, strengthen its resolve to combat violence, and persuade it to conduct its national debate with reason and civility.
But it can also give birth to political vilification which aims at stifling debate.
Signs of such a trend are now rearing their ugly head.
The Likud opposition in Israel is being subjected to an extraordinary barrage of calumny.
The charges range from "not doing enough" to curb the extremists, to abetting the mood of violence by heckling the Government in the Knesset.
Some Labor Party leaders, naming me and my colleagues, have said "the blood is on your hands," a not-too-subtle euphemism for "murderers."


Parking Rules
In observance of Veterans Day, which is tomorrow, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended today and tomorrow.


The G.O.P.'s Legislative Blackmail
Republican Congressional leaders plan to extort political concessions as the  price of meeting two budget deadlines next week.
They are playing an ugly game of political coercion that will force President Clinton to accept dubious programs that he would otherwise veto or else risk endangering the Government's  credit rating.
One deadline is looming on Wednesday, when the Government is expected to reach its legal limit on borrowing.
There will be no instant default because current law gives the Administration a limited ability to tap trust funds to pay off bondholders.
But eventually the Government will default unless Congress  raises the debt ceiling.
Default would be treacherous because it could unsettle  capital markets and drive up interest rates on future debt, socking the taxpayers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Budget Volleying Continues As a Breakdown Looms With the Government facing a financial breakdown, in theory at least, Republicans in Congress and Democrats in the White House continued to fire charges and countercharges, but moved not an inch toward resolving their differences.


Volkswagen Returns To Black for 9 Months
Volkswagen A.G. reported yesterday that it posted strong results for the first nine months of this year, helped by a jump in sales.
Volkswagen, Germany's largest car maker, earned 185 million marks ($130.2 million), compared with a loss of 73 million marks for the comparable period a year earlier.
The company, based in Wolfsburg, said its January-to-September sales rose 11 percent, to 65.21 billion marks ($45.9 billion) from 58.80 billion.
Volkswagen's production in the period climbed to 2.5 million vehicles from 2.2 million vehicles.
(AP)


Mexico: Absent From the White House Crisis List
Peso? What peso?
Last winter, a plunge in Mexico's currency threw the Treasury Department into weeks of emergency meetings and crisis planning.
This week, the peso has seen its most serious slump since then, but Clinton Administration officials are saying little and doing nothing.


SETTLEMENT APPROVED OVER LEAKY PLUMBING
The Shell Chemical Company and the Hoechst Celanese Corporation received approval today for a $950 million settlement of claims over leaky plastic plumbing.
The Tennessee Chancery Judge Michael Maloan approved the agreement under which Shell Chemical, a unit of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, and Hoechst Celanese, a subsidiary of Hoechst A. G. of Germany, will pay at least $950 million, plus interest, to homeowners whose plumbing leaked.
Judge Maloan's approval sets in motion a broad claims process under which property owners with  polybutylene plumbing installed after 1977 can apply for damages if the plumbing leaked.
Shell, Hoechst Celanese and the Du Pont Company provided plastic resin and some parts for polybutylene plumbing, a flexible plastic system used in millions of houses, apartments and mobile homes in the 1970's and 1980's.
Plaintiffs' lawyers said the plumbing tended to develop leaks after contact with the chlorine in tap water.
The litigation spawned multiple class actions and thousands of individual lawsuits and caused the plumbing's main manufacturer, the U.S.
Brass unit of Eljer Industries Inc., to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy  protection last year.
Eljer also agreed today to pay $23 million and give plaintiffs 17.5 percent of its stock as part of an overall settlement of plumbing claims.


House and Senate Act to Avert a Default
With the Government only a few days away from a theoretical financial breakdown, Republicans in Congress and Democrats in the White House fired volleys of charges and countercharges at one another today but moved not an inch toward resolving their differences.
At nightfall, the House of Representatives approved a bill that would extend  the Government's authority to borrow money until mid-December.
But the measure was cast in such a way that it cannot pass the Senate, much less be signed by the President.


Corrections
A brief review in some copies yesterday about a work at the Players Theater in Greenwich Village misstated its title.
It is "Zombies From the Beyond," not "Zombies From Outer Space." The review also misstated the year in which the play is set.
It is 1955, not 1995.


Daiwa Bank Pleads Not Guilty to U.S. Charges
Daiwa Bank pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that it conspired to conceal from United States regulators $1.1 billion in losses at its New York branch.
The bank's case was assigned at random to Judge Kimba M. Wood, who sent Michael R. Milken, the junk bond financier, to prison.


Knicks Are Still at the Top of Miller's Enemies List
Playing with the psyche of the Knicks is nothing new for Reggie Miller; he has nearly perfected the art the past three years, whispering sweet little insults into their ears and dropping 3-point bombs on their heads.


McDonald's Hires Davis, Ball Executive
The McDonald's Corporation said yesterday that Brad A. Ball, a longtime agency executive, would join the company at the end of the year in the new position of senior vice president for marketing at the McDonald's U.S.A. division.
Mr.
Ball, 45, is a partner and co-president of Davis, Ball &amp; Colombatto Advertising in Los Angeles, which has been on the McDonald's roster for the last 25 years, handling regional advertising for McDonald's cooperative restaurant associations in California and several other Western states.


Torture Killing of Youth Stuns Small Town
Among the horror costumes, no one could tell that the battered 16-year-old boy limping through the twilight at the Halloween block party in Athens, Ohio, was truly the walking dead.
Abdullah al-Qahtani's bloodshot eyes, peering from behind a ski mask, only hinted at the cuts, burns and fist-sized welts marring his face.
The dangling left arm he awkwardly clutched with his right hand was truly broken.
The straw man look came from gauze stuffed into his shirt and pants after most of the skin had been whipped off his back in mid-October.


Market Place;A United offer for USAir may be close; a deal may be far away.
THERE is a 50-50 chance that on Monday, the UAL Corporation will make an offer, with many significant strings attached, to acquire USAir Group, people familiar with UAL's deliberations say.
A United offer would no doubt revive jitters that investors expressed in early October, when they responded to USAir's announcement that it was talking with UAL, the parent of United Airlines, by bidding UAL shares down more than $6.
The stock has since recovered and traded yesterday at a 52-week high of $187.375 before ending the day at $186.50, down 50 cents.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section yesterday about an exhibition of 16 Brooklyn architectural projects at the Rotunda Gallery in Brooklyn Heights misstated the closing date.
It is Dec. 21, not Dec. 31.


Ashkhabad Journal;Noble Steed Gallops Back From the Soviet Abyss
Stalin is usually associated with the most brutal Soviet crimes, but in Turkmenistan it is the memory of Khrushchev that makes people shudder.
In this sand-swept Central Asian republic, Khrushchev is reviled as the Communist Party boss who ordered the slaughter of thousands of Akhal-Teke horses, a breed that had been ridden by desert nomads for thousands of years.


Custody Ruling Is Voided
A state appeals court has overturned a decision that would have awarded custody of a 4-year-old girl to her father because the mother was leaving the child in day care.
The State Court of Appeals on Wednesday sent the case back to the Circuit Court and told it not to consider day care in deciding custody of the child, Maranda Ireland Smith.
The appeals court ordered a new judge to hear the case.
The first judge, Raymond Cashen, said in July, 1994, that Maranda would be better with her father, Steven Smith, 21, than with strangers in day care.


Inside Art
Teaming Up to Sell Rembrandts


Americans Too Tall or Short For Russian Space Program
Too tall, too small, too heavy, too chesty -- one by one, America's astronauts are dropping out of the international space scene.
They may have the  right stuff, but they are the wrong size.
In the last month, two NASA astronauts have been disqualified from training for long stays aboard the Russian space station Mir.
One was two inches too tall, the other one and one-half inches too short.


SMALL COLLEGES, BIG GAME -- The Amherst-Williams Week.;Where Linemen Muse In Between Hard Hits
The wind is gusting and eddies of fall leaves twist in little tornados of color.
On this very early and very cold autumn morning, the sun has barely climbed above the bleachers at Pratt Field, but Amherst College football practice is at full boil.
Coaches are hollering, whistles are blowing, receivers are sprinting, with puffs of breath shooting like steam from beneath their face masks.
It seems an odd place and moment to be discussing a novel.
These are supposed to be serious football times, what with the season-ending game against unbeaten  rival Williams College coming on Saturday, with the Little Three Championship and eternal bragging rights at stake.
But Greg Schneider is more than happy to oblige, since he's between drills right now.
He slides his helmet back off his forehead and smiles.


2 Copley Shows: Split in Work, City and Approach
A pair of exhibitions, "John Singleton Copley in America" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and "John Singleton Copley in England" at the National Gallery of  Art in Washington, reopen one of the perennial questions of American art: how to fit together the two halves of this remarkable painter's career.
Even in his own lifetime, it was widely considered that the portraits Copley painted before his  1774 departure for Europe were superior to his later work.
His 19th-century critics saw the hardness and plainness of his early pictures as reflecting the blunt, forthright character of his American subjects; they condemned the more painterly portraits he did in England as a betrayal of his native American genius.
Not until the mid-20th century did critical opinion relent, granting Copley's English paintings rough parity with his American ones.
The cultural inferiority  complex that led earlier scholars to insist on the moral superiority of American art could be abandoned after the United States outstripped England in military and political power.


Sentence in Sons' Deaths
A 21-year-old mother was sentenced today to an 18-year prison term for letting her two little boys die in a sweltering car while she was with four men  in a motel room.
Judge Charles Haston said he was not convinced that the mother, Jennie Bain Ducker, was remorseful over the deaths of her sons, Devin, 2, and Dustin, 1.
She will have to serve at least six years before she is eligible for parole.
Ms.
Ducker was convicted on Oct. 3 of aggravated child abuse in her sons' deaths.
They died on June 6 outside a motel in McMinnville, 60 miles southeast of Nashville, while Ms.
Ducker was partying with a boyfriend and three other men.


Mets Interested in Trading for Knoblauch
The Mets jumped into the off season riding good fortune brought by a host of  youngsters like Jason Isringhausen, Carl Everett and Bill Pulsipher.
The team knows that if it is to improve on its good fortune -- and a 69-75 record -- it must add some experience, preferably at second base, third base or  left field, in the leadoff spot or the cleanup position.


CHRONICLE
It was a packed house on Wednesday as 350 students at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University turned up for a class that has an enrollment of 22.
The draw was the panel of guest lecturers, which included Hootie and the Blowfish, the wildly popular rock group.
The four band members had been invited  by MICHAEL L. REINERT, a music industry executive who teaches a class in contract drafting and negotiation in the music industry.


A Gun Ban at Gun Shows
Two major gun promoters in Texas have decided that the state law allowing people to carry concealed weapons after Jan. 1 is not a good idea for their gun  shows.
The promoters, Todd Bean of Houston and Bob Norman of Fort Worth, both told The Fort Worth Star-Telegram that they would ban concealed guns at their events  despite the law.
Concealed weapons would create "a dangerous situation," Mr.
Bean said.


GAP INC. (GPS,N)
Gap Inc. said yesterday that its profit rose 25 percent in the third quarter, as its dressed-up casual look of corduroy and wool attracted shoppers tired of flannel and blue jeans.
And those customers paid full price rather than wait for a sale -- lifting the company's gross profit margin by 1.3 percentage points, in strong contrast to most competitors, which have had to resort to profit-eroding sales to move merchandise.


Similar In Instrument, Not Style
Jazz guitarists, like singers, have always been pulled by different musical languages; so many traditions beckon.
Modern jazz guitarists tend to have rock and blues on their minds, and how they absorb it tends to define them.
And some  guitarists don't even think as guitarists.
Two of the best modern guitarists shared a bill on Tuesday night at the Blue  Note.
John Scofield led his quartet, and John Abercrombie showed up as part of the Gateway Trio.


Greater Poverty Tolls Is Seen in Wefare Bill
The Clinton Administration acknowledged in a new report to Congress today that a Senate bill to restructure the nation's welfare system could push as many as 1.2 million more children into poverty.
But White House officials still held out the possibility that President Clinton could sign the Senate bill if it were somehow to emerge intact from a House and Senate conference committee.


Rodman Injures His Calf
Chicago Bulls forward DENNIS RODMAN said yesterday that he would be out about a month with a leg injury, but the team said his status was day to day.
Rodman told Chicago radio station WSCR-AM that he "ripped" his left calf muscle trying  to jump on the last play of Tuesday's game against the Toronto Raptors.


Comparing the Piano Works of Schubert and Schoenberg
The important distinction between virtuosity and flashiness may seem self-evident, but many pianists overlook it, and so do many keyboard aficionados who place a high premium on a pianist's ability to dazzle.
Mitsuko Uchida's pianism is unquestionably virtuosic, and within the first few moments of her program of Schubert and Schoenberg at Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday evening, she showed that speed, precision, power and the full arsenal of coloristic effects are fully at her command.
Yet barnstorming in the grand Romantic tradition is not the point of her pianism.
She dazzles her listeners in other ways, not least through an extraordinary delicacy of texture.
Ms.
Uchida's recital was the first installment of her three-part Discovering  Schubert and Schoenberg series; the others are on Sunday afternoon and on Nov. 19.
Focusing on the distinctiveness of these two seemingly irreconcilable composers is easy enough, and to some degree Ms.
Uchida's choice of works extended the differences.
Schoenberg's aphoristic "Six Little Pieces" (Op. 19),  for instance, are quite distant in spirit from the expansiveness of Schubert; and there is nothing in Schoenberg's piano music quite like the Beethovenian drama of Schubert's Sonata in C minor (D. 958).


F.D.A. Is Eliminating Special Restrictions on Biotechnology Drugs
The Food and Drug Administration said today that it was eliminating special restrictions on drugs made by biotechnology companies in a step that could save  the industry hundreds of millions of dollars and speed drug development.
"We're wiping away the cobwebs and bringing our partnership with the biotech  industry into the 21st century where it belongs," said the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala, who oversees the F.D.A.


Why Should Taxpayer Bear Cost of Lobbying?;Watchdogs Muzzled Too
To the Editor:
The proposed Istook amendment is even more far-reaching than Frank Rich (column, Nov. 1) and your Nov. 2 editorial point out.
It would restrict the free speech of organizations that serve as watch dogs on health and safety issues in an unprecedented way.


Sony Back to Profitability But Hurt by Hedge on Yen
The Sony Corporation said today that its group operations returned to profitability in its fiscal second quarter and first half, although earnings were reduced by an incorrect bet on the direction of currency rates.
The first-half earnings exceeded analysts' expectations.
Analysts said they were also surprised by the amount that Sony increased its earnings forecast for  the full fiscal year.


GEORGIA-PACIFIC TO BUY DOMTAR WALLBOARD UNIT
Cementing its status as North America's third-largest wallboard manufacturer, the Georgia-Pacific Corporation agreed yesterday to buy Domtar Inc.'s gypsum wallboard business for $350 million in cash.
Georgia-Pacific, the Atlanta-based paper and forest product concern, will acquire Domtar's 18 plants in the United  States and Canada and almost double the size of its wallboard operations.
The Domtar gypsum business employs 1,350 people.
Domtar, which is based in Montreal, has annual sales of about $300 million.
Georgia-Pacific's wallboard business reported sales of $320 million in 1994.


BASF Earnings
BASF A.G., the German chemical and pharmaceutical company, said yesterday that its third-quarter pretax profit more than doubled to 1.07 billion marks ($754 million) from 526 million marks in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
Growth at this pace will not continue into the fourth quarter and the first  quarter of 1996, according to the company's chief executive, Jurgen Strube.
Prices have been under pressure since June, Mr.
Strube said, so "we have to expect a slowdown in the growth rate -- sales as well as profit growth." Still, he said BASF would have "further steady progress at a high level" in 1996.
Third-quarter sales rose 3.5 percent, to 11.06 billion marks from 10.69 billion marks.
(Bloomberg Business News)


About Real Estate;In the Hamptons, the Rich Are Buying Houses to Tear Them Down
As the market grows for kingly villas in blue-chip areas of the Hamptons, more people are buying multimillion-dollar houses and tearing them down to build exactly what they want in the spot they want.
"There are more tear-downs than ever before, especially at the top of the scale," said Frank Newbold, a partner in Braverman, Newbold &amp; Brennan, a real estate company in East Hampton, L.I.
"There was an old house on Lee Avenue and Hedges Lane, a charming shingled carriage house that sold for $2.75 million in March. They bulldozed it flat to the ground. It ended up in a couple of dumpsters."


Abroad at Home;Why Not the Best?
America is a country rich in people of accomplishment and character.
It dominates the Nobel Prizes in science.
It has great artists and writers and doctors and creative business leaders.
And for the highest political office in the land, it is apparently going to offer its citizens a choice between Bill Clinton and Bob Dole.


Softbank Agrees to Buy Ziff-Davis PC Magazine Group
The Softbank Corporation said today that it had agreed to buy the Ziff-Davis  Publishing Company for $2.1 billion in a deal that would make the Japanese concern the world's largest publisher of computer magazines.
The purchase, from the American investment firm Forstmann Little &amp; Company, had been expected.
In mid-October, Softbank and Ziff-Davis said the Japanese company was holding final negotiations to make the acquisition.


SHARED TECHNOLOGIES TO ADD FAIRCHILD COMMUNICATIONS
Shared Technologies Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire the Fairchild Communications Services Company for $300 million.
Both companies provide telecommunications services to commercial buildings.
Fairchild Communications is a unit of the Fairchild Corporation.
Shared Technologies said it would assume $224 million of Fairchild's debt as part of the purchase.
Shared Technologies will also issue 6 million common shares and $45 million in preferred shares.
Fairchild will have a 42 percent interest in the merged entity.


Arafat Honors a 'Hero of Peace,' a Friend


In America;The Wrong Crowd
It was a moment to indulge in fantasy.
There was Colin Powell, looking more Presidential than anyone we have seen in ages, masterfully conducting his press  conference in the crowded Washington Ballroom of the Ramada-Plaza Hotel in Alexandria, Va.
Everyone knew that he had called the nationally televised press  conference to say that he would not run, but still, watching this honest, graceful, strong, intelligent, modest and resolute man, millions of Americans could feel, yes, he's the answer, he could do it, he's the one to pull us together, he's the one we want.
And then the press conference was over and we were back in the real world of  Clinton, Dole, Gramm, Gingrich et al.


An Artist Finally Gets a Stamp
For almost 20 years, Wilhelm Goebel, a wildlife artist from Somerset, has entered the Fish and Wildlife Service's duck stamp contest.
This year he finally won.


Bullets Planning To Change Name
The Washington Bullets will change their nickname because of its connotation  to street violence and will hold a contest to choose a new name, the club owner, Abe Pollin, said today.
"Unfortunately, far too often these days 'bullets' in the news does not have  anything to do with basketball," Pollin said.
"I realized we should consider changing our name."


Our Jury System May Have Seen Its Day
To the Editor:
Public disenchantment with the jury system, your Nov. 4 news article points out, has generated various proposals for reform.
But the reforms you mention --  reducing exemptions from service and permitting nonunanimous verdicts -- are trivial and will not come even close to solving the problem, for the problem is  that the jury system as we know it is a fundamentally anachronistic institution.


96 Aspirants Filling Breach Left by Powell
For months Gen.
Colin L. Powell cast a thick, icy crust over the political waters, freezing much of the activity as contributors, consultants and many voters awaited his decision.
But with his declaration on Wednesday that he would not seek the Presidency next year the ice cracked, allowing others today to try  to take advantage of the breach.


Brown Adds Chin Strap and Padding to His Protective Gear
At one point in the Seattle game last Sunday, Dave Brown was hit up under his helmet.
It was a stinging blow and it's a wonder Brown wasn't knocked out.
As he almost always does after a tough hit, Brown got right up, went back to the huddle and called the next play.
But this time there was a problem: He could barely talk.
"I didn't even realize my jaw was hurt until I tried to call the next play,"  Brown said today.
"When I tried to talk, it hurt. It was a wonder the guys could understand me."


After Kevorkian-Aided Suicide, Clash Over How Ill Woman Was
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's lawyer clashed today with a county medical examiner over the latest assisted suicide, with the examiner asserting that the suicide victim, 58-year-old Patricia Cashman, was "definitely not terminally ill" and the lawyer calling that "an outrageous, mendacious lie."
The body of Mrs.
Cashman, the owner of a travel agency in San Marcos, Calif., was found on Wednesday morning in the back seat of a Renault Alliance that had been left in the medical examiner's parking lot.
Dr.
Ljubisa Dragovic, the chief medical examiner for Oakland County, ruled the death a homicide resulting from carbon monoxide poisoning.
Geoffrey Fieger, Dr.
Kevorkian's lawyer, soon confirmed that his client had been present at Mrs.
Cashman's death.


Safety Board Urges Government To Monitor Pilots' Job Records
The National Transportation Safety Board recommended today that the Government keep employment records on pilots to keep bad ones from jumping from  job to job.
The recommendation came after the board blamed the crash of an American Eagle turboprop last November on pilot error; the pilot had been hired a few days before he was to be dismissed by his previous employer, but American did not know that.


Robbers Kill Son of Their Victim
When Howard Lewis arrived at his mother's house Wednesday to take her to the  doctor, he was accosted by robbers.
About three hours later, Lillian Lewis called 911.
When the police arrived, they found Mr.
Lewis bound, gagged and dead.
Mrs.
Lewis, 86, was admitted to a hospital for bruises and shock.


Dinner to Honor Taylor
Lawrence Taylor, the Giants' former All-Pro linebacker, will be honored at a  dinner to benefit the Tomorrow's Children Fund and the C J Foundation for Sudden Infant Death Syndrome next Friday at the Glenpointe Marriott Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.
Scheduled to be on hand are his former teammates Mike Sherrard, Rodney Hampton and Karl Nelson, plus former catcher Yogi Berra and the former boxing champion Joe Frazier. (212) 244-2583.


Phone Line in New York City Raises Funds for Rabin's Assassin
A telephone hot line aimed at raising money for the legal defense of the man  accused of assassinating Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel has been set up  in New York City.
Moshe Gross, who is directing the telephone line, said the fund-raising effort had been started by Orthodox Jews who regard Yigal Amir, the confessed assassin, "a hero."


Veterans Day Parade Tries for a Comeback
Herbert W. Young, who is 109 years old, last marched in a Veterans Day parade in 1924.
Tomorrow, he will do it again, using a cane.
"I'm proud to be a part of this," said Mr.
Young, a Harlem resident, who was  in the 807th Pioneer Infantry Corps.


Lawyer for Mafia Shot to Death in Sicily
A leading Sicilian lawyer who had defended several top mobsters was shot and  killed late today in what appeared to be a Mafia attack, the police said.
The lawyer, Serafino Fama, 57, who defended a local Mafia boss, Giuseppe Pulvirenti, was gunned down while getting into his car in central Catania, on Sicily's eastern coast, the police said.


From a Museum of Wonders, A New Depth of Perspective
MR. WILSON'S CABINET OF WONDER By Lawrence Weschler 163 pages. Pantheon Books. $21.


METRO DIGEST
COURT CLEARS WAY FOR FARE INCREASE


Britain Agrees to Sell Rail Car Companies
The British Government said today that it had agreed to sell the three leasing companies that own the Government railway's 11,000 passenger cars for nearly L1.8 billion, or $2.8 billion.
"This is Britain's largest-ever privatization by direct sale," the Transport  Minister, Sir George Young, said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14


Art in Review
Marcel Broodthaers 'Musee d'Art Moderne, Departement des Aigles, Section Publicite' Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan


For Twins, Double Jackpot on the S.A.T.
Twila Salthouse has the following advice for overstressed parents cramming their personal organizers with Suzuki violin training, French lessons and enriched reading tutoring so their preschoolers will get into Harvard 14 years from now: Calm down and relax.
She should know.
Earlier this week, her 17-year-old twins became what are believed to be the first twins ever to earn simultaneous scores of 1600 -- the highest possible score -- on their Scholastic Assessment Tests.


Why Should Taxpayer Bear Cost of Lobbying?;Beer-Lobby Testimony
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's Nov. 1 column on the Republican proposal to silence the "political advocacy" of Federal grant recipients notes the inherent bias in a rule that would, for example, restrict Mothers Against Drunk Driving from speaking out in favor of highway safety measures but leave beer wholesalers free to lobby without restraint.


Ace Ventura, a Tribal Dance And a Hunt for a Sacred Bat
When Ace Ventura finds himself trapped naked inside a mechanical rhino during "When Nature Calls," he slugs his way out through a hole beneath the rhino's tail.
A tourist family stops to watch, cooing over the prospect of a baby rhino  being born.
When they see Ace emerge instead, the parents are aghast, but their  little boy says, "Cool!" And there's Ace Ventura in a nutshell: silly and proud  of it.
Cheerfully gross.
Best if you're under 12.
When Jim Carrey achieved instant stardom playing this mad comic dervish, Ace  looked like a more innocent figure than he does today.
The first "Ace Ventura" film had the slap-happy nuttiness of a casual effort, but now there's much more  riding on Mr.
Carrey's future.
All the king's horses ought to be available to him by now, so that a clever, polished-looking movie could be shaped around his  gleefully frenetic talents.
Instead, Mr.
Carrey turns up in a sloppy second Ace  Ventura film that's little more than an echo of the first.
A two-minute trailer  wouldn't miss many of its highlights.


Charles A. McManus Jr.; Political Consultant, 68
Charles A. McManus Jr., a former president of Americans for Constitutional Action, died on Wednesday after a stroke.
He was 68 and lived in Bowie.
Mr.
McManus retired in 1991 after more than 35 years in public affairs, serving in three Republican administrations.
He spent 16 years with Americans for Constitutional Action, which promotes and assists conservative candidates for Congress.
He also served in the Departments of Agriculture, Energy and Interior.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Princeton


Portrait Of a Man Losing His Beliefs
There's a gnawing feeling of imbalance in the Playwrights Horizons production of "The Monogamist," Christopher Kyle's self-conscious comedy of self-conscious  manners in the age of George Bush.
Even as you're diverted by the slick, inventive and endlessly busy presentation the play has been given, you may find your thoughts drifting to the question of what exactly is out of kilter here.
The answer turns out to be simple: the director has more to say than the playwright.


Concern Over U.S. Default Trims Prices
Treasury prices fell yesterday after a White House statement on a possible default by the Government unnerved the market.
The selloff came even after a report on producer prices showed moderate inflation growth, which ordinarily would have heartened the market.


Agassi Out of Tournament
Andre Agassi, recently deposed as the world's top-ranked tennis player, has pulled out of the season-ending ATP Tour world championship in Frankfurt with an injury.
The withdrawal of the second-ranked Agassi because of a chest-muscle injury  shatters the excitement of a three-way race with the current No. 1 Pete Sampras  and the third-ranked Austrian Thomas Muster to end 1995 as world No. 1. (Reuters)


A Mysterious Stranger With a Score to Settle
Like its arch, genteel heroine, "Splendora," the Sondheim-tinted musical that opened at the American Place Theater last night, is pale, slender and determinedly quaint.
Staged at the Bay Street Theater (which continues as the show's producer) in  Sag Harbor, L. I., last summer, this diffident fable of sexual identity in a small Texas town was adapted from Edward Swift's 1978 novel, which has developed a small cult following over the years.


Islamic Rebels in Egypt End Lull in Attacks
After a 10-month lull in attacks on tourists, Islamic militants in southern Egypt have twice opened fire this week on trains carrying foreign visitors.
After an attack Tuesday night that left 12 Egyptians wounded, a Dutch man and a French woman were wounded late on Wednesday when their train was raked with gunfire about 300 miles south of Cairo.


Despite a Republican Edge, Democrat Wins in an Upset
Edward Oppenheimer is an unlikely political giant-killer.
A 43-year-old accountant and emergency medical technician, his only previous  run for office was for a seat on the local library board.


Pavarotti Plans to Sing The Remaining 'Filles'
Luciano Pavarotti plans to sing the five remaining performances of Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" at the Metropolitan Opera, including tomorrow's  matinee, Met officials and the tenor's manager said yesterday.
Mr.
Pavarotti, singing the role of Tonio with the notoriously difficult high  notes already adjusted slightly downward, missed one of them at the end of Act I during Wednesday night's performance and withdrew, citing a fever and congestion.
His cover, Jean-Luc Viala, took over in Act II.


2 Nations Join Panel For Rights in Europe
By ratifying the European Convention on Human Rights and accepting the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, Ukraine and Macedonia joined the Council of Europe today, bringing the group's membership to 38.
The council, which promotes democracy, monitors human rights and fosters cultural diversity in Europe, includes several Eastern and Central European nations that see membership as a stepping stone to admission to the European Union.


Nomo Edges Jones for N.L. Rookie Award
The Dodgers continued their supremacy over the National League award named for perhaps the game's most memorable first-year player when pitcher Hideo Nomo  was voted yesterday as winner of the Jackie Robinson rookie of the year award.
Nomo, 27, only the second Japanese-born player in the majors and a crowd-pleasing sensation, edged out Atlanta Braves third baseman Chipper Jones in voting by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Price Data Help to Push Stocks Higher
Stock indexes set record highs for a second consecutive session yesterday, as stocks were spurred by a slip in the Producer Price Index and a resurgence in technology shares.
"The combination was a real bright spot for stocks," said Barbara G. Marcin,  vice president of Citibank Global Asset Management.
"The weakness in producer prices confirmed the scenario of low inflation.  And since technology has been leading the stock market, the strength in the group was good for stocks."


FIRE SPURS SONY PLAN ON BATTERY PRODUCTION
The Sony Corporation is accelerating plans to shift production of its lithium-ion batteries to its Tochigi Prefecture plant after a fire damaged its Koriyama City plant on Saturday, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The company's Koriyama subsidiary, Sony Energytec, provides more than 50 percent of  Japan's lithium-ion battery output.
Sony is the world's biggest manufacturer of  lithium-ion batteries, and in August it projected that it would increase output next year to about 72 million units from a projected 48 million this year.
No injuries were reported after the Koriyama plant was damaged by an early morning fire, whose cause remains under investigation.


TDI to Handle Irish Advertising
TDI, the American transit advertising company that has handled ad sales for London Transport Advertising since July 1994, said yesterday that it had been hired by Ceras Iompair Eireman in Dublin, the sole transportation agency in the  Republic of Ireland, to handle outdoor and out-of-home advertising.
The terms of the five-year agreement were not disclosed.


Bill Stroppe; Indy-Car Developer, 76
Bill Stroppe, a developer of Ford Motor Company's motor racing program for Indy-car races and road races, has died after surgery resulting from a fall.
He  was 76.
Mr. Stroppe, who had Alzheimer's disease, died Tuesday in Long Beach.


Mellon Account To Stay at Poppe
Poppe Tyson WCP in Pittsburgh, formerly Werner Chepelsky &amp; Partners, said yesterday that the Mellon Bank Corporation, a client for the last five years, had decided to keep its account at the agency.
The billings were estimated at $9 million.
Poppe Tyson WCP, part of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, retained the account after a three-month review that had been narrowed to that agency and three other finalists: Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York, and Marc Advertising in Pittsburgh.


Jets' Haselrig Is Arrested
Carlton Haselrig, a starting offensive guard for the Jets, was arrested early Monday morning in Bayonne, N.J., and charged with disorderly conduct, tailgating and driving without a license.
He was released on $150 bond.
According to the police report, when Haselrig was asked to get out of his car, he "began to act in a violent and tumultuous manner." A police spokesman said yesterday that no drugs or alcohol were involved.


Iridium, a Satellite Company, Now Looks Overseas for Financing
Iridium Inc., a start-up satellite company owned partly by Motorola Inc., is  looking to governments worldwide for money after plans to sell $300 million in junk bonds were canceled in September.
The company, based here, said it planned to sell equity stakes of $275,000 each to entities selected by governments around the world.
The stakes, which will represent 275 shares at $1,000 each, will also qualify owners for sales tied to their use of the planned Iridium system of global wireless hand-held phones and pagers.


I.B.M. WILL ELIMINATE 1,200 MORE JOBS TO CUT COSTS
The International Business Machines Corporation notified about 1,200 employees yesterday that they were being dismissed.
The step was part of a broader cost-cutting action the computer company announced last month, when it said it would take a charge of about $800 million in the fourth quarter for restructuring.
The money will pay for severance, real estate and other short-term expenses.
It is the first cut since I.B.M. completed a downsizing that took its work force from 302,000 at the beginning of 1993 to 220,000 at the end of last year.


Wheat Prices Slump on Report Predicting Larger Foreign Crops
Wheat prices slumped today after a report from the Agriculture Department that predicted larger foreign crops raised concern that United States grain was  too expensive to lure buyers.
On other markets, corn, soybeans and cotton fell, while copper rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities fell 0.54 point, to 243.38.


SPYGLASS SHARES RISE ON LICENSING AGREEMENT
The shares of Spyglass Inc. soared yesterday after the company said that it would license to the Infinet Company software that helps publishers provide services on the Internet.
Infinet, a joint venture between Knight-Ridder Inc. and Landmark Communications Inc., will license the Spyglass browsing software, called Spyglass Mosaic Web, which helps users navigate the Internet's World Wide Web.
Terms were not disclosed.


TRIBUNAL INDICTS 3 SERBIA OFFICERS
A United Nations tribunal indicted three senior officers in Serbia's Army today, bringing its investigations into war crimes in the former Yugoslavia closer than ever before to the Serbian political leadership and President Slobodan Milosevic.
The indictments, the first handed down for officials in Serbia rather than Bosnian Serbs, were announced by the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague as the Clinton Administration said a trade embargo on Serbia would be slightly eased.


A Runaway Slave and a Helpful Man
If good intentions guaranteed good movies, "The Journey of August King" would be more than it is: a decent, earnest, carefully researched story about a runaway slave in North Carolina and the white widower who breaks the law to help win her freedom.
Indeed, John Duigan's film finds room for so many commendable sentiments and background details that it would be ideal for schoolchildren, except for one quick, grisly shot depicting the awful fate of another slave.
Despite the kind of overproduced look that has minor characters dancing around a Maypole or doing the Virginia reel, "The Journey of August King" is essentially a three-character story.
It concerns August (Jason Patric), a laconic farmer returning from a long trip to market; Annalees (Thandie Newton),  the very beautiful runaway who begs him to help her, and Olaf (Larry Drake), the powerful slaveholder who can't bear to let Annalees escape.
"I demand her back unsullied," booms Olaf, using the quaint locutions that color John Ehle's screenplay, which is based on his own novel.
The characters' accents are correspondingly thick, so that "corn bread" becomes almost one long vowel.


Astros' Owner Denies It
The Houston Astros' owner, DRAYTON McLANE JR., denied a report yesterday that he would move the team after next season or was considering suing other major league owners.


Valujet Airlines Sues T.W.A. and Delta Over Landing Slots
Valujet Airlines, a rapidly growing carrier based in Atlanta, sued Trans World Airlines and Delta Air Lines yesterday over landing slots at La Guardia Airport in New York.
Valujet said it had entered into an agreement to lease 10 slots from T.W.A. that would have allowed it to start nonstop service between Atlanta and La Guardia.
Because of the demand for air service into La Guardia, it is one of four slot-controlled airports in the country -- meaning that there is a limit to the number of time slots available to airlines for taking off from and landing at the airport.
Carriers that hold these slots are allowed to sell or lease them.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
ROBERT GUILLOT, Jack Shainman Gallery, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
Some of Robert Guillot's sculptures look like biomorphic shapes that have escaped from 1930's paintings; others seem to be fragments of brick walls that have been cut into abstract shapes.
There's a pleasantly clunky, Philip Guston feeling to the whole affair (Pepe Karmel).


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stock prices were higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 22.52 points, or 0.13 percent, at 17,843.56.
On Thursday, the Nikkei fell 42.25 points.


Ex-Official Spars With Whitewater Panel
Republicans on the Senate Whitewater committee today criticized Lloyd N. Cutler, the former White House counsel, over a report he prepared last year that became the Clinton Administration's main defense against accusations that it had meddled in an investigation at the center of the Whitewater affair.
With no significant new revelations, the hearing slid from its earliest moments into partisan wrangling and harsh exchanges.
At one point, the committee's Republican chairman, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, cut off Mr.
Cutler in the middle of a response, yelling that his answer could not be believed.
That prompted the committee's ranking Democrat, Senator Paul S. Sarbanes of Maryland, to coach Mr.
Cutler to "let Mr. D'Amato do his explosions  and then you respond."


At the Whitney, A Celebration Of Beat Culture (Sandals and All)
TO paraphrase William S. Burroughs, it was the movement that launched a million Gaps.
The beats are cool again, and the Whitney Museum of American Art,  an institution that is forever surfing the nation's Zeitgeist, has caught the latest wave.
"Beat Culture and the New America, 1950-1965" is a tribute to the days before Starbucks, when cats and chicks wore black turtlenecks and sandals, drank espresso and read confessional poetry by the light of candles stuck in Chianti bottles.
It has been 50 years since Jack Kerouac met Allen Ginsberg, and 40 since Mr.
Ginsberg read "Howl" to a cheering, wine-drinking crowd at the 6 Gallery in San Francisco.
A couple of years later, "On the Road" was a pop sensation, and one generation after another since then has rediscovered the beats for itself.


Closing Arguments In King Trial
Don King's monthlong wire-fraud trial yesterday was reduced to one question:  Whom do you trust, King or Joseph Maffia, his chief accuser?
The question has been essential to the case since May 1992, when Maffia took  his accusations to the United States Attorney in Manhattan that King filed a fraudulent insurance claim with Lloyd's of London for a canceled Julio Cesar Chavez-Harold Brazier bout on June 28, 1991.


Casino Plan May Not Be a Pipe Dream
IT looks like a regular parking lot.
Two and a half acres of blacktop, a few  weeds and the remnants of a beer bottle or two behind Phil &amp; Eddie's Bar and the Rusty Rudder Restaurant off the boardwalk.
But to many people here, the lot could be, should be, sacred territory.


On Stage, and Off
Amazing-if-True Recoup


Memento Dealer Held In Sale of Fake Medals
Consumers craving a little extra prestige used to be content with a faux Gucci bag or Cartier watch.
But today, the F.B.I. announced the first arrest in  what agents said was a growing phenomenon: the sale of fake Medals of Honor.
With medals fetching about $500 at military paraphernalia shows around the country, the F.B.I. said its agents started an inquiry this year covering 13 companies or individuals believed to be trading in the medals in 10 states.


Agents Seize Cash In Raids on Aide To Newark Mayor
Escalating their inquiry into corruption in Newark, Federal agents raided the home and the City Hall office of a top aide to Mayor Sharpe James yesterday, and officials said they found tens of thousands of dollars in cash that the aide had been keeping.
The home and office of the city's Police Director were also searched.
Beginning in the morning and continuing into the night, the agents searched the offices and homes of Jackie R. Mattison, who is chief of staff to Mr.
James  as well as a member of the State Assembly, and of the Police Director, William R. Celester.


The Spoken Word
GALWAY KINNELL, Posman Books, 1 University Place, at Waverly Place, Greenwich Village.
A reading by the poet.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 533-2665.


6 to Study Federal Aid Changes
As if to underscore the message she delivered in a speech in Washington yesterday -- that states can govern themselves -- Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman named six cabineased on the direction Congress is going, is that states will get a lump sum rather than money appropriated for specific programs.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Girl, 14, Kills Father
A 14-year-old girl has confessed to killing her sleeping father with a baseball bat after he threatened her mother, the police said.
The girl, Jennifer Van Nunen, struck her father, Joseph Van Nunen, 40, on the head at least four times on Saturday as he dozed on a couch, the police said on Tuesday.


Muslim Guards To Stop Work In Baltimore
Federal officials have ordered Baltimore to sever its contract with the Nation of Islam Security Agency and award it to another company, Mayor Kurt Schmoke said today.
It was not welcome news for the Mayor, who said violent crime had fallen in the last two years at the public housing units, where the securityagency has been patrolling.


Plane Crashes In Argentina; 53 Aboard Die
An Argentine Air Force plane on its way to an aviation school ceremony crashed in a remote mountainous area during a rainstorm late Wednesday, killing  all 53 people on board, the police said today.
"There are no survivors," said Jose Carreras, the police chief of Villa Dolores, a central Argentine town 15 miles from the crash site and 425 miles northwest of Buenos Aires.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about the tenor Luciano Pavarotti's inability to complete his performance in Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" at the  Metropolitan Opera on Wednesday night referred incorrectly to tomorrow afternoon's performance of the work.
It will not be broadcast.
Saturday broadcasts from the Met begin on Dec. 2.


Early Peso Loss and Budget Fear Drag Down Dollar Against Yen
The dollar fell sharply yesterday against the Japanese yen and other currencies, dragged down by early losses of the Mexican peso.
The dollar began to slide against the yen in Tokyo trading overnight, and the resumption this morning of the peso's recent losses hastened the fall.


Bass Delivering Beer to Homes
Bass P.L.C. has become the first brewer in Britain to deliver beer directly to consumers, offering its Premium Beer Direct here and similar services in Nottingham and Birmingham.
Bass said it was testing a service that allows customers to order a crate of Bass beer by telephone and get delivery to their home within 48 hours.
A crate,  or 24 cans, is the minimum order and costs L17.99, about $28.40, plus a delivery charge of L1.99.
Eight premium beers are available in London, but only the Carling Black Label beer is available in Birmingham and Nottingham.


National Steel Settles USX Suit
The National Steel Corporation has agreed to make charitable donations in the name of a rival, the USX Corporation, to settle a lawsuit over the hiring of six top managers from USX.
Details of the settlement, announced today, were not disclosed.


Corrections
An article yesterday about an appeals court ruling on the free speech rights  of foreigners in this country included a Jewish organization incorrectly among defenders of the rights of eight immigrants who were ordered deported because of their support for the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
A detailed  account of the immigrants' case was published in 1987 in Present Tense magazine, formerly published by the American Jewish Committee; the committee did not come  to the defense of the eight.


Weakness Shows in Producer Prices and the Job Market
The fifth straight decline in energy costs helped push producer prices lower  in October, and another report released today suggested weakness in the job market.
Some analysts said the combination would give the Federal Reserve the latitude to cut interest rates, if needed, to stimulate the economy.
The Labor Department reported that the Producer Price Index fell one-tenth of 1 percent in October, the third drop in five months.
The decline was led by energy prices, but even excluding the volatile food and energy categories, the core index showed no increase in prices.


Nintendo Shares Fall On Report of Delay
Shares of the Nintendo Corporation fell 4 percent on reports that the company would delay introducing its next-generation video game player until early next year.
The video game company's stock dropped 340 yen, or 4.1 percent, to 8,000 yen ($78.15).
Nintendo will not release its 64-bit player, Ultra 64, until spring, when more game software is available for use on the machine, the newspaper Nihon Keizai reported.
A company spokesman declined to comment on the  report.
In June, company officials said that Nintendo might have to postpone the release beyond a planned debut late this year.
Missing the year-end sales season could be a serious blow to Nintendo as it fends off challenges from competitors  Sega Enterprises Ltd. and the Sony Corporation.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Intervening, Mexico Halts Slide in Peso
Mexico's central bank stepped in today to stop the plunge of the peso, signaling that it would not allow a speculative frenzy to erode the currency further.
Officials confirmed that the bank had made a peso purchase in the final hour  of trading, but did not specify the amount.
Traders estimated its value at $200  million, large enough to halt the peso's downward momentum and to turn it around, amid very low volume on the market.
The central bank intervened after the peso plunged early in the session below 8 to the dollar, another record low  and a psychological threshold.


British Telecom Profit
British Telecommunications P.L.C. reported yesterday that it raised its second-quarter pretax profit by 3 percent despite enforced price cuts of L250 million ($380 million) and continued loss of market share to cable TV companies.
Pretax profit for the dominant British telephone company was L732 million, compared with L712 million in the quarter a year earlier, as charges for staff reduction and interest payments fell.
Sales increased 3 percent, to L3.6 billion from L3.5 billion.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Drug Makers' Managed-Care Ties Questioned
Congressional investigators focusing on competition in the drug industry said yesterday that Merck &amp; Company had profited from the relationship with its Medco drug distribution and managed-care unit in ways that merited close attention from the Federal Trade Commission.
Merck, as well as SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. and Eli Lilly &amp; Company, paid billions of dollars over the last two years to acquire managed-care businesses, and securities analysts said the drug makers would have to increase  sales of their own products to justify their investments.


Tobacco Doesn't Make Good Drug-Policy Model
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's "End the War" (column, Nov. 3), advocating the decriminalization of narcotics, cites the example of cigarettes and reminds us we do not approach tobacco with "criminal prohibition."


Transactions
Baseball


On My Mind;The Powell Point
Colin Powell made five grievous errors during his press conference announcing he was not a candidate for the Presidency.
He was graceful, decisive, courteous, warm, also candid.
For exhibiting those characteristics, the Washington political industry will  not forgive him.
Taken together they are a portrait of what Americans dearly desire in a President, but which does not exactly fit any of the major candidates selected by the industry.


Sports of The Times;Refs Need Some Backup To Survive
THE National Basketball Association may fob off replacement referees on us, but at least the league hasn't tried fobbing off replacement villains on the discerning patrons of Madison Square Garden.
For the two opening games at the Garden this year, the league gave us the sneering Charles Barkley, who strutted his stuff on Tuesday night, and the scornful Reggie Miller, who disdainfully strode onto the court last night only to lose to the Knicks, 103-95.


Keep the Fare Out of Court
A Federal appeals court panel has given the Metropolitan Transportation Authority permission to raise the price of a New York City subway token by 25 cents while litigation over the fare hike continues.
The M.T.A. would be wise to turn down the opportunity.
It should take the filing of this provocative lawsuit as a timely warning to reduce the fare increase voluntarily, thus correcting an  obvious injustice and heading off any judicial involvement.
The New York Urban League and the Straphangers Campaign are suing to stop the fare hike, claiming that the M.T.A. violated the Federal Civil Rights Act by imposing heavier burdens on city subway users than on suburban train commuters.
The idea that the cost of a token is a matter of racial discrimination seems, at first glance, a stretch.
Mass-transit advocates have complained for years that the State Legislature favored the suburbs when allocating transit aid.
Until now, no one had seriously raised the possible legal implications arising from the fact that the ridership being shortchanged was heavily minority.


SHRINKING THE CITY: Parks;Losing Playgrounds in the Parks
It would be hard to find a city park in sorrier shape than the Speradeo Brothers Playground at Atlantic Avenue and Linwood Street in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
All the swings, both for toddlers and older children, have  been stolen.
Four of eight basketball hoops, backboards and supports -- the whole works -- have been stolen.
The 40-foot-high flagpole has been stolen, and  the American flag lay wadded up on the ground recently.
But the biggest problem appears to be neglect.
Some benches are ripped out entirely, some have rotted planks and others exposed bolts.
Boards are missing from the wooden play structure, and in some places nail heads are exposed.
A jagged sheet of aluminum is nailed to the wood in one spot -- a dangerous-looking fix-it job.


Seles to Miss Special Night At Garden
They even named a night for her at next week's WTA Championships, the year-ending event to anoint this season's world champion of women's tennis.
But  Monica Seles, the injured three-time champion, announced yesterday that Tuesday's "Welcome Back Monica" extravaganza will be Monica-less after all.
"I'm so disappointed," Seles said from her home in Sarasota, Fla., where she's continuing therapy prescribed by Dr.
Richard Steadman, the noted Vail, Colo., orthopedist.
"I was so looking forward to returning to Madison Square Garden for the championships."


Group Urges More Scrutiny For Lawyers
Moving to counter growing dissatisfaction with the legal profession, a committee assembled by New York State's highest court recommended major changes  yesterday to improve lawyers' treatment of their clients and subject their behavior to closer public scrutiny.
Key proposals by the Committee on the Profession and the Courts were aimed at holding New York lawyers more accountable to clients, by subjecting fee disputes to binding arbitration and by opening up some long-secret disciplinary  hearings.


House G.O.P. Is Split on Plan To Curb Gifts
A House committee today postponed action on a proposal that has split Republicans over provisions to restrict free meals, trips and other gifts that members of the House may accept from lobbyists.
The disagreements surfaced in a closed-door Republican conference meeting on  Wednesday at which opposing representatives criticized each other's efforts and  motives, according to Republicans familiar with the session.


LaRossa to Seek Bradley's Seat
Looking ahead to 1996: State Senator Dick LaRossa announced yesterday that he will seek the Senate seat being vacated by Bill Bradley.
Mr.
LaRossa, a Republican, made a name for himself as "the lottery guy" who read daily numbers for the state.


Home Video
Delivery Via Satellite


INSIDE
House Passes Spending Bill


Art in Review
Print Fair Park Avenue Armory Park Avenue at 67th Street 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. today; to 7 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Admission: $10; $20 for a three-day pass.


Francis Cleveland, Ex-President's Son And a Director, 92
Francis Grover Cleveland, an actor, producer and director in summer stock as  well as the nation's senior Presidential offspring, died on Wednesday at Huggins Hospital in Wolfeboro, N.H.
He was 92.
Mr.
Cleveland, who lived in Tamworth, a resort center in eastern New Hampshire, in the southern foothills of the White Mountains, was a founder of the Barnstormers, a troupe that traveled in New Hampshire starting in 1931.
The  company found a permanent home in a remodeled barn in Tamworth after World War II.


One Word to Describe Smith: Super
Dallas receiver Michael Irvin is convinced that if Emmitt Smith had not been  slowed by a pulled hamstring in the National Conference championship game against San Francisco last season, the Cowboys would be talking about a four-peat right now.
"I'd have to say he's right," Smith said without a hint of arrogance.


After New Incident, Navy Chief Calls for Day to Focus on Order
In the aftermath of a series of embarrassing disciplinary incidents, the Navy plans to suspend fleet operations for one day within the next month to address how to keep its people out of trouble.
In the past month, the promotion to admiral of the Navy's former top equal-opportunity officer was canceled because the officer harassed a woman who  worked for him and the United States Naval Academy implicated 24 midshipmen for  selling or using drugs.


COURT CLEARS WAY FOR TRANSIT FARE TO RISE ON SUNDAY
A day after a Federal judge blocked a 25-cent transit fare increase, a Federal appeals court said yesterday that it would let the fare rise to $1.50 on Sunday and remain there at least until the court reconsiders the matter next week.
But the court ordered transit officials to figure out how they would reimburse riders if the fare was rolled back to $1.25.
The decision yesterday by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan creates the unusual possibility that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority will raise the fare, with a new token, and alter the thousands of turnstiles that accept them -- only to have to turn the entire process around and somehow refund riders' money a few days or weeks later.


COMPANY BRIEFS


German Is Arrested In Race-Hate Charge
Germany's most notorious neo-Nazi has been arrested on charges of inciting racial hatred in a book that denies that the Holocaust happened, the police said today.
The neo-Nazi, Gunther Deckert, was arrested on Wednesday and appeared before  a magistrate today in Mannheim.


Diner's Journal
There is a downside to using an invented spelling of a well-known city for your restaurant's name.
I discovered that the night the friend I invited to Tapika never showed up.
"Where are you?" wailed the message she left on my answering machine.
"I forgot the address and I couldn't get it from Information  because I couldn't figure out how to spell the name of the place. I knew it sounded like that city in Kansas, but that didn't help."
Actually, Tapika, which occupies the site that once housed Symphony Cafe, is  easy to find.
And once you're there, easy to like.
David Walzog is cooking what  the owners, Penny and Peter Glazier, call cowboy cuisine.
It is not unlike the inventive Southwestern fare he served at Arizona 206.
Salmon cured in tequila on corncakes.
Spicy fried polenta sticks with chipotle chili sauce.
Black bean puree with chorizo and crumbled goat cheese.
Wild mushroom tamales and shrimp enchiladas.


GE Aircraft Engine Gets U.S. Approval
GE Aircraft Engines received Federal Aviation Administration certification today for its GE90 engine -- a new powerful and lightweight jet engine made for  the Boeing 777.
The long-awaited certification is the last hurdle GE Aircraft had to overcome before being able to sell the engine.
Problems with the fan blades delayed testing this summer for about six weeks.


Major State Union Accedes To a Pared-Down Contract
Apparently scoring another victory in her campaign to reduce state spending,  Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced yesterday that the largest union of state  workers had tentatively accepted a four-year contract that in some key respects  was much like one they rejected four months ago.
The pact was reached with the Communications Workers of America, which represents 34,000 state workers in New Jersey.
It would freeze wages two years and would for the first time require workers to pay for part of their traditional medical coverage.


Art in Review
Rebecca Purdum Jack Tilton Gallery 49 Greene Street SoHo Through Nov. 18


OGDEN SEEKING BUYERS FOR NONCORE BUSINESSES
The Ogden Corporation will restructure to refocus on three operating groups representing its entertainment, aviation, and energy businesses.
Ogden said that it would seek buyers or merger partners for its noncore businesses -- including  facilities services operations, with revenues of $357 million in 1994; the technology services business, with $212 million in revenues in 1994, and the environmental services business, which had revenues of $142 million in 1994.
The company expects earnings will be hurt in the fourth quarter because it is likely to record charges related to the restructuring, including possible asset  write-downs and revaluations.


People
Salome Yilma, Eastern regional director at Business Travel News, New York, a unit of CMP Publications, was promoted to associate publisher.


STEWART &amp; STEVENSON REACHES NEW PACT WITH AIR FORCE
Stewart &amp; Stevenson Services Inc. said yesterday that it had reached an interim agreement with the Air Force that ends a six-month-long prohibition on the company's doing business with agencies of the United States Government.
Stewart &amp; Stevenson, a Houston-based maker of turbine-powered equipment, and four employees were indicted in May on charges of conspiracy, fraud and false statements.
The indictment relates to a 1987 subcontract to supply diesel generator sets for radar sites in Saudi Arabia.
Since the indictment, the company has been suspended from contracting with Federal agencies.
The agreement permits Stewart &amp; Stevenson to bid for new Government contracts, pending the conclusion of criminal matters.


Viking to Pay $4.2 Million For Book by Marcia Clark
Marcia Clark is getting a raise.
After a day and a half of frenetic bidding against other publishers, Viking agreed yesterday to pay the lead prosecutor in the O. J. Simpson murder trial $4.2 million for the world rights to her story, the highest price yet for one of the scores of trial- related books and one of the largest sums ever paid for a nonfiction book.


Home Values Are Higher in All Regions
Helped by lower mortgage rates that spurred demand, the value of most homes rose sharply in the third quarter in all regions of the country, the National Association of Realtors said today.
The median price of existing single-family homes rose 4.6 percent in the third quarter to $116,200, from $111,100 in the second quarter.
The third-quarter price was 4.3 percent higher than the third quarter of 1994, when  the median price was $111,400.
The median is the midpoint; half the homes sell  for more and half for less than that price.


Singapore to Hang Briton
A 35-year-old Briton, John Martin, was sentenced today to be hanged for the killing of a South African, Gerard George Lowe, on March 8.
Mr.
Martin is the first Westerner to draw Singapore's mandatory punishment for murder.
Mr.
Martin has also been charged in Thailand with killing two Canadian tourists in March.


3 Cheers for a Key Player of the Junior Varsity
RUDY CREW is on a hot streak.
Within a month of becoming Schools Chancellor of New York City, Crew has got  off to peaceful beginning with the Mayor and the Board of Education.
He has declared war on absenteeism, taken over 16 problem schools and vowed to raise reading scores two levels.


China Helps Iran Develops Arms Despite U.S. Plea to End Trade
Chinese companies are helping Iran develop chemical weapons, and the Clinton  Administration is having only mixed success in getting the Chinese Government to halt such cooperation, a Pentagon official said today.
"Chinese firms have provided some assistance, both in terms of the infrastructure for building chemical plants and some of the precursors for developing agents," Bruce Reidel, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, told  a House committee.


Hot Under the Collar For the 'Coolest Game'
The future coolest man on earth flashed professional righteousness.
"Hockey is no beer hall, and it's unfair to stereotype our crowds as blue-collar. . . ." He paused just long enough to shift weight and avoid a check, a finesse skater sweeping down ice.
". . . although there's nothing wrong with blue collar. We have the most affluent and best-educated fans of the four major sports. It's those video jocks who are always putting up the fights on local TV, not us."
Behind him, through a 47th-floor window facing south, is the past, the old Empire State Building, still jabbing a tired stick at the puck in the sky, and off to his right is the future, his boyhood neighborhoods in Queens and Long Island, now swarming with kids on in-line skates pretending they are Mark Messier and Eric Lindros and any Lemieux.
If those kids grow up according to long-range market plans and if this smooth glider, Gary Bettman, fulfills his promise as commissioner, then the National Hockey League's current slogan, "the  coolest game on earth," may have global resonance.
After all, the European stars coming into the game are from countries that are N.H.L.-ready.
But first, America.


Gas Kills 3 Workers
Three workmen died today when they were overcome by gas at a construction site, and three others were injured.
One of the injured was hospitalized in serious condition and two others were  treated and released after the accident at an excavation site at a plant of the Reynolds Metals Company in this Chicago suburb.


Presidents Got 11 Tainted Reports, Senator Says
Adding details to the damage done by the spy case of Aldrich H. Ames, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said today that from 1986 to 1994  the Central Intelligence Agency passed on to Presidents and Pentagon officials a total of 95 reports from foreign agents whom it knew or strongly suspected were  controlled by Moscow.
In 35 of the cases the C.I.A. was sure that the source was a double agent, said Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the committee.
Mr.
Specter said 11 questionable reports went to Presidents, and at least one went to Bill Clinton shortly before his inauguration in 1993.


Folding Worlds of Trees and Concepts
It is beyond doubt that some of the most perfectly beautiful paintings in existence were made in Japan between the 15th and 17th centuries.
If proof is required, however, a visit to the galleries of the Asia Society should do the trick.
"Worlds Seen and Imagined: Japanese Screens From the Idemitsu Museum of Arts" is the largest treatment of its subject to be seen in this country since the early 1970's, although its 32 screens, dating from the 15th to the 19th centuries, will be seen here in two installments, with the second 16 arriving in December.
Some visitors may initially experience, as I did, an urge to push the  gallery walls outward to accommodate the entire show.
But soon it becomes clear  that a meal as rich as this is better savored in two courses.


Triple-Double For Pippen
Michael Jordan overcame a lackluster first half and scored 29 points tonight, and Scottie Pippen had a triple-double as the Chicago Bulls beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 106-88.
Pippen had 18 points, 13 rebounds and 12 assists for the Bulls, off to their  first 4-0 start since 1987.
The Cavs have lost their first four games for the first time since 1989.


To Riders, 25 Cents Worth of Confusion
Vincent Rone, a data communications manager from Bayonne, N.J., turned from one Times Square subway tollbooth where he could buy only the new $1.50 tokens he will need beginning Sunday, and made his way toward another booth, where tokens to get him home yesterday still sold for $1.25.
"They are making this so complicated!" he said.
"If I ran a business this way, I'd be out of business."


25 and Under
Of the half-dozen or more Greek restaurants that opened in New York City this year, Agrotikon is by far the most interesting.
The name, pronounced ah-GROW-tee-kahn, means "of agricultural origin," affirming that the cuisine of  Greece is intimately tied to the rhythms of nature.
The owner and chef, Costa Tsingas, is committed to displaying the breadth of Greek regional cooking, from  Macedonia to Crete.
So Agrotikon's menu makes great reading, full of delectable dishes that are far less common than the typical Greek selections: kebabs, moussaka and grilled  swordfish.
Artichoke and tarama dip ($3), a creamy puree of artichokes, salty fish roe and yogurt served in portions large enough for three people, is perfect for nibbling with bread or while scanning the menu.
It is so good you might be tempted to make it a meal.


Puckett Will Remain a Twin
KIRBY PUCKETT will not invoke his option to become a free agent this winter.
Instead, the 34-year-old outfielder will return to the Twins for a 13th consecutive season.
"Kirby is a Twin," said RON SHAPIRO, the outfielder's agent.
"The Twins are  Kirby." Puckett could have gotten out of the last two years of his contract, which guarantees him $13 million over the next two seasons, by notifying the Twins next week. (AP)


Arafat Visits Israel to Give Condolences to Leah Rabin
On his first known visit to Israel, Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, flew to Tel Aviv late tonight to pay a condolence call on Leah Rabin, the widow of Israel's slain Prime Minister.
Though other Palestinian leaders have been to Israel, a visit by Mr.
Arafat has been seen as too politically sensitive, and he has not set foot in Israel since arriving in Gaza in July 1994.


Apples and Elegance: Litchfield's Allure
THE plan was impeccable.
On a weekend in late October, my wife and I would spend a weekend in tony Litchfield County in Connecticut, where the country homes of the rich and powerful sit alongside apple orchards on tree-lined country roads.
It's a place where overt ostentation is just not done; the esthetic calls for old-money understatement and decorum.
Litchfield County offers a storybook New England countryside of rolling hills and white frame houses, green-gray brooks and old stone walls, all of it preserved through assiduous zoning.
For a weekend, we would live like the landed gentry, staying at the Boulders Inn, a country lodge on Lake Waramaug in New Preston.
According to plan, we'd make the 95-mile trip to the town of Litchfield.
We would revisit its boulevard (Route 63 North) of stately white New England mansions and its fastidious green.
Then we'd settle in at the Boulders.
Perhaps  we'd take one of the inn's canoes out for a paddle on the lake; perhaps we'd stroll the private trail up Pinnacle Mountain.


Anderson Hurting After Long Night
The Nets, looking to come back from a grueling triple-overtime defeat, will be without Kenny Anderson for at least one game.
Anderson will miss Friday night's game in Miami against the Heat with a strained left groin and he is also doubtful for Saturday night's home game against the Sacramento Kings.
The injury occurred during the fourth quarter of Wednesday night's 130-122 triple-overtime loss to the Orlando Magic.
Vern Fleming, who finished the Orlando game in place of Anderson, will probably start at point guard against Miami.


New York Attorney General Remakes Staff by Patronage
Soon after Dennis C. Vacco was sworn in last January as New York State's first Republican Attorney General in 16 years, he ordered all 450 lawyers in his office to reapply for their jobs, assuring them that his decisions on staffing would be based only on merit.
Then Mr.
Vacco began to replace some of them.
Among the new lawyers he hired  was Elaine M. Barraga, for his office's Suffolk County branch.
A lawyer for just over a year when she was appointed, Ms.
Barraga is the daughter of Assemblyman Thomas F. Barraga, Republican of Suffolk County.


Critic's Choice/Film;Star-Crossed in Ukraine
There are hallucinatory sequences in Sergei Paradzhanov's 1964 film "Shadows  of Forgotten Ancestors" when this eruptively colorful movie feels more like a folkloric tapestry sprung to life than a film about flesh-and-blood people.
Set  in the Carpathian mountains of Ukraine in the mid-19th century, the film is a surreal folk fable strewn with larger-than-life characters whose faces and body  language speak more eloquently than any words.
The movie bursts with rhapsodically dizzy images of nature (there are moments when the camera literally spins around in the forest), and the sounds of hunting horns, church bells and peasants chanting crude, rustic folk songs fill the soundtrack.


Why Should Taxpayer Bear Cost of Lobbying?
To the Editor:
"Muzzling the Nonprofits" (editorial, Nov. 2) embraces a comment by Senator Carl Levin that calls efforts to reform the insidious practice of taxpayer-subsidized lobbying "a blatant attempt to silence dissent and to muffle the diversity of opinion in the forum of public policy debate."


Energy Secretary Used Fund to Monitor Reporters
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary faced a storm of criticism today and the possibility she could lose her job after it was disclosed that she had spent thousands of dollars in Government money for a consulting firm to monitor the reporters who cover her department and to rank them as to how favorable they were.
Senior Clinton Administration officials said they were appalled by what they  called her lack of judgment in paying $43,500 to Carma International, a Washington firm, to identify unfriendly press outlets.


For Children
Craving some Uruguayan cookies?
La Uruguaya Bakery, at 77-07 37th Avenue, in  Jackson Heights, Queens, bakes them.
Such information, along with the names of other ethnic food emporiums, churches, cultural institutions and restaurants is  in a new pamphlet published by the Queens Council on the Arts.
It's called The International Express, after the nickname of the No. 7 subway train, which travels between Manhattan and Queens.
The council decided that it was time everyone knew how much diversity thrives beneath the seven elevated miles this train travels in Queens. (For your own pamphlet, you may send $1 and a self-addressed envelope to the Queens Council on the Arts, 79-01 Park Lane South, Woodhaven, N.Y. 11421-1166.)


Butler Staying With L.A.
Center fielder BRETT BUTLER agreed to a contract for 1996 with the Los Angeles Dodgers worth $2 million, the same amount he earned in 1995.
Butler, 38, who began the season with the Mets after four years with the Dodgers, hit .300 in 129 games. (AP)


A 'Lonesome Dove' Sequel by McMurtry Himself
Lonesome Dove" (1989) was followed by "Lonesome Dove II" (1993). But unlike  the first mini-series, the second was not based on a novel by Larry McMurtry. Now the real McMurtry sequel has been made as a five-hour production called, pointedly, "Larry McMurtry's 'Streets of Laredo.' " CBS is broadcasting the first three hours on Sunday and the rest on Tuesday. It's big, sprawling, violent and initially uneven, but finally, thanks largely to James Garner, quite splendid.
In the new sequel, a couple of decades have passed since "Lonesome Dove." Capt.
Woodrow Call (Mr. Garner in the role originally played by Tommy Lee Jones) has retired from the Texas Rangers, and is not too happy about age setting in.
He has a touch of arthritis, his eyesight is fading and it's something of a chore just to get on a horse.
But he keeps on working.
As a freelance bounty hunter, he sets out after some vicious train robbers, the worst of them a 17-year-old blond, blue-eyed Mexican boy named Joey Garza (Alexis Cruz, formerly of "Sesame Street").
As someone says, Joey is less interested in the robbing than in the killing.


Senate Joins House in Voting to Raise Medicare Premiums
The Senate followed the House tonight in voting, largely along party lines, to increase Medicare premiums.
In doing so, both chambers forged ahead without waiting for an overall agreement on how to redesign the Medicare program, which  provides health insurance for 37 million people who are elderly or disabled.
It appears likely, but not certain, that Medicare premiums will actually increase in January.
The issue is one of many tangled up in a huge confrontation between President Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress.


CHRONICLE
The book circuit seems to produce much speculation these days about Presidential politics, perhaps as a result of Gen.
Colin L. Powell's recent flirtation with a candidacy on his book tour.
At a lecture on Wednesday night in Arlington, Va., LAWRENCE K. GROSSMAN, a former president of NBC News and PBS, remarked that during his recent book tour  he had harbored some yearning for a Vice-Presidential nomination.
He is the author of "The Electronic Republic: Reshaping Democracy in the Information Age"  (Viking) and was addressing the Freedom Forum, a foundation devoted to first amendment issues.


MCCRORY TO CLOSE SOME STORES AND OPEN NEW ONES
The McCrory Corporation will close 118 of its variety stores and open 60 new  ones, according to court documents.
The bankruptcy court overseeing the company's reorganization has given it approval to conduct going-out-of-business  sales at the 118 stores, McCrory's bankruptcy lawyer, Ira S. Sacks, said yesterday.
Mr.
Sacks said the closings were the last needed for McCrory to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings.
The company, a subsidiary of the Riklis Holding Corporation, operates about 560 variety stores under the names J. J. Newberry Co., TG&amp;Y Stores Co. and GC Murphy Co.


Lawyers Link Campaign Mail to Vacco's Wife
One day several weeks ago, Attorney General Dennis Vacco's wife, Kelly, came  by the Buffalo branch of his office and got a list of home addresses and telephone numbers of staff members, said several lawyers who work there.
In the weeks afterward, the lawyers, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said they received two invitations at their homes to attend fund-raising events  for an Erie County Court judge who was running for re-election.


Why Ansel Adams Stays So Popular
It is tempting, but too easy, to think of Ansel Adams as simply the Norman Rockwell of landscape photography: immensely popular but critically negligible.
Every year brings another lavishly produced book recapitulating some aspect of his long career; every holiday season another calendar or two appears featuring  his breathtaking black-and-white views of Yosemite Valley in California.
Adams's majestic photographs are so familiar that it's hard to see them with  fresh eyes.
Still, a show at the James Danziger Gallery offers Adams aficionados a chance to see top-quality prints of some of his most famous images, along with a selection of lesser-known landscapes.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Port Authority Sells Hotel
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced as expected yesterday that it was selling its New York Vista Hotel in the World Trade Center to the Host Marriott Corporation.
Host Marriott will pay $141.5 million for the 820-room hotel, which reopened  a year ago after a $65 million renovation made necessary by the bombing of the Trade Center in February 1993.


Looking for Blame
Israelis are debating whether the religious xenophobia that spawned the killing of Yitzhak Rabin was fed by the savage political struggle over making peace with the Palestinians.
The immediate focus of the accusations has been the Likud party and its chairman, Binyamin Netanyahu.
Article, page A8.


Sematech Forms Global Group
Sematech, the semiconductor research company, will form an international research group for the first time, to jointly design next-generation wafers used for computer-chip production.
The new group, called the 300 Millimeter Initiative because of the size of the new wafer, will consist of companies from the United States, Asia and Europe.
The joint research on larger-format, 12-inch wafers is a sign of the growing cost of making computer chips.
Bigger wafers make the chip manufacturing process more efficient because more chips can be placed on each wafer.
Most production now uses 6-inch wafers, although the most advanced manufacturers use  8-inch wafers.


2 More Held in Rabin Slaying; Israeli Police See a Conspiracy
The police said today that they had arrested two more suspects in the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and made their strongest statement yet that they believed his death was the result of a conspiracy.
Contradicting the assertions of the confessed assassin, Yigal Amir, that he acted alone, the police said they believed the killing was organized by a group  of Israelis fired to extremism by what they saw as Mr.
Rabin's determination to  trade biblical land for peace.


Now the Finger-Pointing Begins
Almost from the moment Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was shot, Israelis have been locked in bitter debate on whether the savagery of the political struggle over making peace with the Palestinians fed the religious zeal and xenophobia that spawned the assassination.
There had been many warnings from politicians and commentators that the dispute was boiling beyond the limits of democratic debate.
But it was only when a religious nationalist killed Mr.
Rabin that the country fully realized how dangerous the confrontation had become.


Air Noise Is Subject of Hearing
A lot of people in New Jersey think the Federal Aviation Administration has been less than helpful in a long-running dispute about air traffic noise.
"The F.A.A. claims that they listen to the people," said Representative Bob Franks at a House subcommittee meeting yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL


No Headline
Americans don't understand the role foreign students can play when they go back home and have a very positive influence on shaping public opinion.
For the  cost of a B-1 bomber, America can do a better job." -- GORDON Y. S. WU, Princeton benefactor, encouraging aid to foreign students. [B6:2]


Art in Review
Juan Usle Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 25


Vestiges of Dictatorship
The Latin American delegation at the recent United Nations anniversary consisted of Fidel Castro and the representatives of 16 freely elected governments.
That Latin America is home to only one clear dictatorship is a real success story.
But as in former Communist Europe, elections in Latin America do  not mean that true democracy is here to stay or even, in many places, here at all.
The democratization of Latin America is a sad song, and an old one.
The end of the dictators was first heralded in the 1940's with elections in three nations.
By the next decade, two of those had fallen to military dictatorship.
In 1960 Paraguay was South America's only dictatorship.
By 1976, in all of Latin America, there were only four democracies.
Today military officials have made coup threats in Honduras, Guatemala, Chile, Peru and Venezuela.


Hong Kong Builder, Graduate of Princeton, Gives It $100 Million
One of Hong Kong's richest businessmen, Gordon Y. S. Wu, a Princeton-trained  engineer who built China's first superhighway, announced yesterday that he is giving $100 million to his alma mater.
The donation, which will go to Princeton's School of Engineering and Applied  Science, is the biggest cash gift by a foreigner to an American university.


Miami Herald Strategy Reckons With Future
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 23 Media column on The Miami Herald suggests that a Herald strategy to enhance coverage in nine subject areas would result in diminished coverage of all other subject areas.


There's a New Sheriff in Town
In tiny White Hall, Ala. (pop. 814), Mayor John Jackson printed $45.9 billion in bogus municipal bonds, intending, the Securities and Exchange Commission says, to line his own pockets.
Mr.
Jackson is now facing securities fraud charges in Federal court.
In Oklahoma, Stifel, Nicolaus &amp; Company, a Midwestern regional broker, just paid $1.4 million to settle S.E.C. charges that three of its employees were involved in a scheme in which millions of dollars flowed to Stifel from brokers  wanting a piece of lucrative municipal-finance deals.


Showalter Out Of Tigers' Post As Bell Lands Manager's Job
George Steinbrenner, who during the season seemed to be doing his best to discourage Don Mattingly from remaining with the Yankees, reiterated yesterday his strong desire to have Mattingly back next season.
The Detroit Tigers, on the other hand, decided they wanted Buddy Bell and not Buck Showalter to be their manager next season.
The Tigers announced their decision last night after a late-afternoon meeting between Bell and John McHale Jr., the club president.
Randy Smith, the Tigers' general manager, had recommended Bell, the Cleveland Indians' infield coach, to  McHale earlier in the day.


AIDS Virus's Genetic Armor May Have a Vulnerable Spot
Australian scientists have discovered a rare strain of the AIDS virus with an unexpected chink in its genetic armor that could suggest new opportunities for developing vaccines and drugs to combat the disease.
The strain was found in a small cluster of people in Australia who share a remarkable property -- none have developed AIDS, despite having carried the virus for up to 14 years.


Electrolux Profit Gains
Electrolux A.B., the Swedish company that is the world's largest household-appliance maker, said yesterday that its third-quarter pretax profit rose 3 percent.
Pretax profit before income from minority holdings rose to 677 million kronor ($101 million) from 650 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
Operating profit in the third quarter fell 3 percent, to 955 million kronor, because of rising material costs in all divisions, the company said.
The earnings were in line with expectations.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Man, 35, Is Critically Injured Jumping Onto Subway Train
A man was critically injured last night when he tried to jump onto an accelerating train in a crowded Times Square subway station and was caught between two cars as the train went into the tunnel, the authorities and a witness said.
The man, identified as Eugene Kitt, 29, had picked a wallet from a woman on the platform and was trying to flee, said Officer John Giammarino, a police spokesman.
His address was not known.


Essex Hemphill, 38, Poet and Performer
Essex Charles Hemphill, a poet and performance artist whose work focused on life as a black homosexual, died on Saturday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 38 and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Wayson R. Jones, a friend.


C.I.A. Heeds Only Biggest Customer
To the Editor:
Re "The C.I.A.'s False Intelligence" (editorial, Nov. 2), on the agency's misleading of Congress: Why argue that it is the responsibility of John M. Deutch, the Director of Central Intelligence, "to insure that such an appalling  performance is never repeated"?


Vacco Concedes That Wife Obtained List for Campaign
Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco acknowledged yesterday that his wife had obtained personnel information about lawyers in his office's Buffalo branch and  used it to try to raise money for the election campaign of one of Mr.
Vacco's best friends.
In an interview last week, Mr.
Vacco strongly denied that his wife, Kelly, had gone into the Buffalo branch and picked up a list of home addresses and phone numbers for the lawyers who work there.


Pupils Collect Tons of Money, a Penny at a Time, for Charity
Kristina Santos may be only 8, but she is old enough to know that money is fairly tight in her Bronx household and that her mother is on public assistance.
Still, there she was yesterday, emptying the contents of her tiny purse -- about 50 pennies that she had scoured from her apartment -- into a white canvas  bag at the front of her third-grade classroom.
The bag, filled with donations from all of her classmates, will be distributed to various groups in need around the city, including a population much on Kristina's mind: the homeless.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
3-7 NIGERIA EXECUTES DISSIDENT Defying a strong outpouring of international calls for clemency, Nigeria's military Government executed one of the country's leading environmentalists and  authors.. 1


Bridge
The 1995 Greater New York Bridge Association's Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship, which began a year ago, finished on Wednesday night at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
The result was a victory for Lapt Chan, Uday Ivatury, Elizabeth Reich, Brad Moss, Phillip Alder and Jim Krekorian, representing the Manhattan Club.
They won by 37 imps against a group led by Robin Kay, the assocation's president, and finished unbeaten.
In a three-way final playoff, they had previously won by 41 imps against a team headed by Robb Gordon.
On the diagramed deal Moss as South landed in four spades after the bidding shown.
After his overcall of one spade, Reich as North contributed a jump cue-bid of three diamonds.
This was a "mixed raise," showing a spade fit with invitational values or better, and South bid the game.


Mexican Stocks and the Peso End Day Largely Unchanged
Stocks ended largely unchanged today, buoyed by a surprising show of peso stability against the dollar but held back by fears that turmoil will again rock Mexico's fragile markets.
The stock market's index of leading shares ended down 0.99 of a point at 2,310.10.
Gainers outpaced decliners by a slender 32-to-28 margin.


Helen Duprey Bullock, Historian, Is Dead at 90
Helen Duprey Bullock, a historian who specialized in preserving the nation's  architectural, romantic and culinary heritages, died on Nov. 1 at her home at the Thomas House retirement community in Washington.
She was 90.
In a long and varied career, Mrs.
Bullock maintained a singular focus.
Whether working as an archivist in Colonial Williamsburg in the 1920's and 30's, cataloguing Thomas Jefferson's papers at the University of Virginia and the Library of Congress in the 1940's or serving as a historical architectural specialist and information officer at the National Trust for Historic Preservation in the 1950's, 60's and 70's, she kept her sights on early American history.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Eurydice Replaces the Chorus, With Strange Consequences 'Antigone' Pearl Theater Company


World News Briefs;Main Army Base Bombed In Sri Lanka and 15 Die
Two bombs exploded today at the entrance to Sri Lanka's army headquarters, killing at least 15 people, witnesses said.
The heavily fortified base is on Colombo's seafront and surrounded by luxury hotels.


New York, on Ice Again


NEUBERGER &amp; BERMAN STUDIES PARTNERSHIP SALE
Neuberger &amp; Berman L.P. is considering a plan to sell all or part of its $36  billion money-management partnership, the company said yesterday.
Neuberger &amp; Berman, which oversees money for mutual funds, pension funds and wealthy investors, hired investment bankers from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Putnam, Lovell &amp; Thornton Inc. to help the company decide how to proceed, said Lawrence  Zicklin, managing partner of the closely held firm.
The 56-year-old firm might be worth as much as $700 million, or 2 percent of assets, if it was sold outright, according to The Wall Street Journal, which first reported Neuberger &amp; Berman's plan.


NATIONS PROTEST
Nigeria's military Government today executed Ken Saro-Wiwa, one of the country's leading environmentalists and authors, provoking international protests and calls for punitive measures against Nigeria.
Mr.
Saro-Wiwa, 54, a prominent critic of the Government who was arrested last year on charges of murder that he had steadfastly denied, was hanged with eight  co-defendants at the prison in the eastern city of Port Harcourt at 11:30 A.M.,  the official Nigerian press agency said.


DAVE &amp; BUSTER'S DOUBTFUL ABOUT A POSSIBLE CLAIM
Dave &amp; Buster's Inc., a restaurant and entertainment chain that was spun off  from Edison Brothers Stores in late June, said yesterday that it did not believe that creditors of Edison Brothers could have a claim on the assets of Dave &amp; Buster's as a result of the Edison Brothers bankruptcy filing.
The possibility of such a claim was raised on Thursday in the Market Place column of The New York Times, in which a bankruptcy expert said creditors might claim the spinoff  of Dave &amp; Buster's to Edison Brothers shareholders constituted a fradulent conveyance.
Dave &amp; Buster's said that even if that happened, its legal advisers believed the creditors would have no claim on Dave &amp; Buster's assets or on shareholders who bought shares after the spinoff.


Haselrig's Problems Concern the Jets
Even the bye week has been hazardous for the problem-plagued Jets.
The future of their right guard, Carlton Haselrig, became clouded today because on Thursday he missed his mandatory weekly drug test as well as an unrelated date in court.


COMPUTER CONCERN SAYS BUYBACK IS 69% COMPLETE
Sun Microsystems Inc. said yesterday that it had bought 8.4 million, or 69 percent, of the 12.2 million shares authorized under its share buyback program.
The maker of computer servers and work stations said it bought the shares between July 18, when it announced the program, on Oct. 1, at an average price of $53, or a cost of $445 million.
Sun shares closed up $4.75, at $89.875, in Nasdaq trading of 10 million shares yesterday.


Moscow and U.S. Are Singing Same Tune: Yeltsin Is Better
To hear Russian officials, every day, in every way, President Boris N. Yeltsin is getting better and better.
American officials are now singing the same tune, echoing the reports of the same Kremlin officials.
In the last few days, Russian officials have announced that Mr.
Yeltsin, hospitalized since Oct. 26 with his second episode of heart disease in four months, has been busy guiding the nation: providing his humiliated Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, with a new deputy; dismissing the acting head of the Central Bank, who was soon to go in any case; vetoing a parliamentary bill urging a unilateral lifting of the United Nations sanctions against Serbia.


Hunsicker Leaves Mets for Houston Job
Gerry Hunsicker, the Mets' assistant vice president of baseball operations since 1991, was named the general manager of the Houston Astros yesterday.
The Astros also announced that they would continue to reside in Texas in 1996 rather than be sold and moved to northern Virginia.


MARATHON GROUP UNIT TO TAKE AN EARNINGS CHARGE
The USX Corporation's USX-Marathon Group will take pretax fourth-quarter charges of $400 million to $600 million for the adoption of a new accounting standard on the depreciation of some assets.
The Pittsburgh-based steel and energy producer said its USX-U.S.
Steel Group expected to take a charge of up to $15 million for the same reason.
The company disclosed the planned charges in a  quarterly report filed at the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The charges at Marathon may lead to a fourth-quarter loss at the company, the publicly traded oil unit of USX.


Perot's Party Will Skip Primaries After All
Ross Perot's Reform Party will skip next year's Presidential primaries, but will field a candidate in the November election who is selected in a high-tech convention, a spokeswoman said today.
"We don't intend to participate in any of the existing primaries," said Sharon Holman, a spokeswoman for Perot's political organization, United We Stand America, which is based in Dallas.


Commonwealth Opposes Major on French A-Tests
With thousands of antinuclear protesters pouring into the streets and marching beneath banners that read "Major Disgrace," Prime Minister John Major of Britain had little reason to feel welcome today in a land that is traditionally a bastion of Anglophile good will.
Mr.
Major's refusal to condemn the resumption of French nuclear testing in the South Pacific has created a serious rift between Britain and most of the rest of the Commonwealth of Nations, the 52-member association that opened a summit meeting today here.


Natural Gas Prices Driven Up By Forecasts of Cold Weather
Natural gas rose to its highest price in nearly a year on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday after forecasts for cold weather in the Midwest raised expectations of increased demand.
On other commodity markets, gold prices surged and wheat rose.
The Commodity  Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities rose 0.49 point, to 243.87.


Figure in Fraud Leaves Prison
The convicted penny-stock king Meyer Blinder has been released after completing a 40-month prison term for securities fraud.
Mr.
Blinder was released on Thursday from the Federal Correctional Institution in Littleton.


Dedication for Mental Hospital
The Forensic Psychiatric Hospital, a new $21 million hospital for the criminally insane, will be dedicated Thursday by Human Services Commissioner William Waldman on the grounds of Trenton Psychiatric Hospital, where it will replace a nearly century-old hospital known as the Vroom Building.


State Legislators Agree to Restore Arrests for Minor Offenses
Yielding to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, state legislative leaders have agreed  to make a change in the budget sought by New York City police officials to restore their ability to fight minor offenses like drinking on the streets and urination in public as full-fledged crimes.
"We're prepared to repeal the entire law the first week of the session," said the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, Democrat of Manhattan.
He and several Democratic and Republican leaders of the State Legislature said in interviews this week that they had not been aware that a provision enacted in June would affect fundamental police strategies.


N.C.A.A. Restructuring Advances
The reform-minded Knight Commission yesterday endorsed a proposed new governing structure for the National Collegiate Athletic Association that would  give college presidents greater responsibility over athletic programs.
The plan, approved by the N.C.A.A.
Presidents Commission in June, will come to a vote at the N.C.A.A.'s annual convention in Dallas in January.
"If we do pull it off, I think we're going to save academic-amateur sports for America," said the Rev.
THEODORE M. HESBURGH, commission co-chairman and president emeritus of Notre Dame.
"If we don't, I would just as soon see them drift off into the sunset." (AP)


Fares' Divergent Tracks
In 1980, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority raised subway and bus fares 20 percent, to 60 cents, and it also raised commuter railroad fares 20 percent.
The suburban fare increases also matched the city's in 1981, 1984, 1986 and 1990.
But in January 1992, the M.T.A. raised the city transit fare to $1.25 from $1.15, while leaving fares on the suburban railroads untouched.
The notion of tandem increases will take another blow tomorrow, when the city fare will rise 20 percent, to $1.50, while the suburban fares will go up just 9 percent on average.


Boggs Files for Free Agency
Wade Boggs filed for free agency yesterday, but he has no desire to leave the Yankees, his agent said.
"Wade has never been happier in his life," said Alan Nero, the third baseman's agent.
"He loves the Yankees. He's very, very happy. His intent is to  stay in a Yankee uniform until he retires. Our assumption is he'll be back with  the Yankees."


HOLIDAY SCHEDULE


Police Say Rabin Killer Led Sect That Laid Plans to Attack Arabs
The Israeli Police Minister said today that the man who killed Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was the leader of a band of young religious nationalists dedicated to assassinating Mr.
Rabin and attacking Palestinians in areas they control in the West Bank.
The assassin was influenced by militant rabbis who effectively issued a death warrant for Mr.
Rabin by invoking the "pursuer's decree" of Jewish religious law, the Police Minister, Moshe Shahal, said in an interview on the Israeli television.
The law holds that a Jew is morally obligated to kill someone who poses a mortal danger to him.


Wilkins Expected to Miss 8 Weeks
Vancouver Grizzlies guard GERALD WILKINS underwent surgery Friday to remove a fragmented herniated disk from his lower back.
Wilkins, a former Knick, was placed on the injured list before the start of the season earlier this month.
He had the operation at Centinela Hospital in Los Angeles and is expected to miss at least eight weeks.
Wilkins, 32, missed all of last season with a ruptured Achilles' tendon. (AP)


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Taking Stock in Third World;A World Bank Unit Tries to Jump-Start Capitalism
Nearly two years after it opened for business, the Lusaka Stock Exchange is not exactly humming.
Thanks to a series of setbacks -- including the murder of the organizer's brother, the delayed privatization of Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines and other state-owned businesses and the continuing malaise of the local economy -- the exchange's four employees don't have a great deal to do.
On a typical day, 20,000 shares change hands, the equivalent of about 2 seconds of trading on the  New York Stock Exchange.


Previous Government Shutdowns
Since 1981, the authority of Federal agencies to spend money has lapsed nine  times after the Oct. 1 start of the new fiscal year.
The gaps have ranged from a few hours to four days.
On four occasions, some Federal workers were sent home.
NOV. 23, 1981 -- President Ronald Reagan, in a struggle with Congress, ordered the furlough of 241,000 of the Government's 2.1 million employees, those deemed nonessential to protect life, national security or Federal property.
This was the first time a chief executive had ordered so large a shutdown of Federal  operations.
The Subcommittee on Civil Service of the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service estimated that the one-day furlough cost taxpayers $80  million to $90 million in back pay and related expenses.


The Governor Comes Through
In a move that benefits all citizens of New York City, Gov.
George Pataki has vetoed a police labor relations bill that would have driven up the costs of crime prevention, undermined the city's ability to negotiate sensible labor contracts and thwarted the recent police merger.
The Governor deserves credit for finally standing up to a powerful union that contributes heavily to state election campaigns.
But he would have earned even more praise if he had not started the whole mess in the first place.
The original bill was drafted by Mr.
Pataki's staff, and introduced as part of the Governor's legislative program.


Harper Beats the Buzzer, and Knicks Overcome
If they needed excuses, the Knicks had them at their disposal tonight.
Three  games in four nights.
Three fouls and no rebounds for Patrick Ewing with 11 minutes left in the third quarter.
And John Starks losing his dribble early and  often.
But then, these were the Washington Bullets, without Chris Webber and Mark Price, and without a home victory over New York in six games or any victory over the Knicks in their last 13 meetings.


Dollar Higher in Thin Trading, As Fears of a U.S. Impasse Ease
The dollar rose in thin trading yesterday as currency traders in Europe and the United States grew slightly more confident that an agreement on the United States budget could soon be reached.
The dollar was also helped by a steadying of the Mexican peso, which slid the two previous days in volatile trading.


As Crisis Looms, Essential Services Are Assessed
If the Government closes down Tuesday morning, as looks increasingly likely,  people may find it hard to complain to their congressmen about a delayed Veterans Administration check or the Statue of Liberty turning them away.
That is because 9 of the 15 telephone operators in the House of Representatives will be told to stay home, the first time in the history of Government shutdowns that Congress itself has had to share the consequences of the Government's failure to complete a Federal budget.


Journal;The Music Man
When historians look back at the national fantasy of a Colin Powell run for the Presidency, will they find tragedy or farce?
My vote is for farce, because now that the dream has ended, it already seems like one of those all-American fables -- a classic Preston Sturges comedy like "Hail the Conquering Hero" perhaps, or one of General Powell's own favorite Broadway musicals, "The Music Man" -- in which Anytown, U.S.A., gives its heart, soul and wallets to a magnetic, dashing interloper in uniform who comes out of nowhere and promises to make the citizenry feel better about itself.
The press coverage will surely, with hindsight, make for hilarious reading.
As the public, politicians and journalists alike jumped on the bandwagon, the will to believe in General Powell as a savior ballooned so rapidly that his candidacy soon became a miracle elixir -- an instant balm for every ailment in American civic life.


Rivals Call Out the Lobbying Troops in a Different Kind of Drug War
Four former Senators, two former trade representatives, a former Surgeon General and two former White House press secretaries are among those deployed in a battle between two of the fiercest institutional rivals in Washington.
The fight illustrates how modern lobbying campaigns are waged when there are billions of dollars at stake.
The rivals are the two wings of the American pharmaceutical industry, the brand-name companies that develop and patent drugs and the generic manufacturers that market lower-priced copies when the patents expire.
Their fight is over an  obscure patent provision in a trade treaty and among their weapons are threats,  blandishments and coalitions of convenience.


Unilever Earnings Stable After Period of Declines
Unilever P.L.C., the British-Dutch food and household products maker, reported yesterday that its third-quarter profit was about the same as in the corresponding period last year.
The company earned 1.224 billion guilders ($775  million), compared with 1.225 billion guilders for the corresponding period last year.
The stable earnings followed a 4 percent drop in the second quarter and a 7 percent drop in the first quarter.
Unilever said third-quarter profit would have risen 4 percent had exchange rates been unchanged.
It rose 8 percent when expressed in pounds and 10 percent, expressed in dollars.
The company said sales rose 6 percent, to 22.71 billion guilders, and operating profit 9 percent, to 2.31 billion.
The biggest improvement in operating earnings came from the United States and Canada.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Javits Center Downsizing Benefits Exhibitors
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 29 news article reporting that despite the shake-up at New York  City's Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, exhibitors complain that labor costs are still high:


AMERICAN GREETINGS STOCK SHOWS A RETREAT OF 12%
The stock of the American Greetings Corporation dropped 12 percent yesterday  after it said its earnings would be reduced in the current quarter and fiscal year because the company was writing down some assets of its struggling Creata Card business.
The greeting card company said that it was also lowering sales forecasts for Creata Card, which provides in-store kiosks that customers can use to create personalized greeting cards.
The asset write-down will reduce American Greetings' net income by about $35 million, or 47 cents a share, for the third quarter ending Nov. 30.


Religion Journal;Pushing Peace to Honor a Slain Leader
On rare occasions, an event takes place so unexpectedly and wrenchingly that  history itself seems to take an abrupt and frightening turn.
In such circumstances, even the most carefully laid plans are easily scrapped.
What matters most is bringing people together, to try to help them find a measure of understanding or purpose in what seems a markedly changed world.


Energy Chief Expresses Chagrin Over Monitoring Reporters
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary said today that she was "chagrined and embarrassed" that her department had hired a company that ranked reporters who cover it, but the White House said that, despite the furor over the practice, Mrs.
O'Leary could keep her job.
Mrs.
O'Leary said the contract with the consulting firm, Carma International, had been requested without her knowledge last year, by the then-head of the department's press office.
That person, Michael Gauldin, was Bill Clinton's press secretary when Mr.
Clinton was Governor of Arkansas.


SYNC RESEARCH STOCK UP SHARPLY AMID STRONG DEMAND
The shares of Sync Research Inc. more than doubled yesterday on the first day of trading amid strong investor demand for shares of the computer networking company's $78 million initial stock sale.
The stock, priced at $20, closed at $24 on volume of almost 4.4 million shares on the Nasdaq.
The offering price was well above the original range of $12 to $14 a share.
The company's software and  equipment networking products allow mainframe computers to communicate with personal computer networks.
Frank Dzubeck, president of the consulting firm Communications Network Architects Inc. in Washington, said Sync stood to benefit from the increasing popularity of the Internet, the global computer network.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Piano Student, His Teacher, Passion, Loss and the Holocaust 'Old Wicked Songs' Jewish Repertory Theater


11-Alarm Fire in Southwest Baltimore


CAROLCO PICTURES FILES FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Carolco Pictures Inc. said yesterday that it had filed for bankruptcy protection and agreed to sell most of its assets for $50 million to 20th Century Fox, a unit of the News Corporation.
Carolco also said that its chairman and chief executive, Mario Kassar, had resigned as part of the sale agreement.
The sale must be approved by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Los Angeles.
Carolco, based in Los Angeles, said the sale of its film library, assets and projects in development would not be enough to offset its liabilities.


Rights Groups Say Shell Oil Shares Blame
Human rights advocates and environmental organizations in the United States and Britain angrily criticized the Shell oil group yesterday after the hanging of the Nigerian writer Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other activists, saying the company had damaged the executed men's reputation with Nigeria's military rulers and could have done more to secure their reprieve.
A group led by Mr.
Saro-Wiwa, the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni Peoples, had protested environmental damage by Shell and other oil companies in  the Ogoni region in the Niger Delta, as well as human rights abuses there by the Nigerian military against the Ogoni and other ethnic groups.


Finnish Driver's Condition Improves
The condition of the driver MIKA HAKKINEN, seriously hurt after crashing in the opening qualifying round of the Australian Grand Prix, has improved significantly, medical officials said today in Adelaide.
Hakkinen, who lost control of his McLaren yesterday at an estimated 110 miles per hour, could now move all his limbs and understand what was being said to him. (Reuters)


Flash Stairwell Fire in Harlem Hurts at Least 20
At least 20 people were injured yesterday when flames from a burning mattress raced with terrifying speed up the stairwell of a Harlem apartment building.
Investigators said the blaze was the latest in a string of stairwell fires at housing projects in which old layers of paint are believed to have acted as fuel.
The blaze, in the General Grant Houses at 55 La Salle Street, came the same day that city officials said they would try to find a retardant that would prevent the quick-moving fires, many of which, like yesterday's blaze, are believed to be the work of arsonists.
Last Saturday, a similar blaze at a nearby housing project took two lives, after which city officials acknowledged that they began to suspect last spring that layers of paint acted as an accelerant in flash stairwell fires last spring.


A Windy Day on the Sound


Old Tunes and Odd as Ever
For its first New York show in 21 years, on Wednesday night at Tramps, Big Star wasn't too rusty.
The strange thing was that the band was performing at all.
Big Star, a Memphis band that lasted from 1971 to 1974, was the best-known nonhit band of the 1970's.
It played an unlikely combination of Beatles-style pop and Southern boogie, love songs and undercurrents of resentment and cynicism.
Unlike such 1970's Beatles followers as Badfinger or the Raspberries,  Big Star gave its songs a dazed, druggy recklessness.


BUSINESS DIGEST
House Votes Budget Bill, But a Veto Is Threatened The House voted to give President Clinton ways to avoid a Government shutdown and default, but only on terms he has promised to veto.
On a party-line vote, the House adopted a four-week extension of the debt limit, then passed and sent  back to the Senate a two-week spending bill.
Passage there is expected on Monday, and a promised veto could close Government offices Tuesday.


Jerry Franklin Daniels, Ink Spots Member, 79
Jerry Franklin Daniels, a member of the original Ink Spots, died on Tuesday.
He was 79.
Mr.
Daniels was a tenor and guitar player when the group began singing on Indianapolis street corners in 1931.
Originally called King Jack and the Jesters, the group changed its name to the Ink Spots in 1932, and first recorded on the Victor label in 1935, without much success.


Comcast Reports Narrower Quarterly Loss
The Comcast Corporation's third-quarter loss from operations narrowed as the  cable television operator's revenue more than doubled, reflecting its acquisition of the QVC Inc. home-shopping network.
Comcast, based in Philadelphia, reported a loss before extraordinary items of $1.95 million, or 1 cent a share, far less than a loss of $17.25 million, or 7 cents, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.


CBS-TV Station Drops Commercial Critical of Smoking
A television station owned by CBS killed a commercial critical of the tobacco industry on Thursday, the same day it was disclosed that the CBS News program "60 Minutes" had dropped a planned interview with a former industry executive.
The commercial had been broadcast for about a month on KCBS, the station owned by CBS in Los Angeles.
It was also sold to 20 other television stations in California, none of which have dropped it, said Bruce Silverman, the president of Asher/ Gould Advertising, the Los Angeles-based firm that produced  the commercial and placed it on television stations throughout the state.


Expect Long Lines for Tokens
For subway and bus riders, the legal morass confronting the New York City Transit Authority's 25-cent fare increase has led to a weekend of confusion.
But one thing seems certain: those who have not bought the new $1.50 tokens by Monday morning can expect long lines at the token booths.
The fare increase will go into effect, if only temporarily, at 12:01 A.M. tomorrow.
The new token is different from the current $1.25 version, which will  be rejected by turnstiles.


Four-Footed Clients and Futile Cases;A Rutgers Law Professor Fights to Expand the Animal Kingdom's Rights
The manager of a New York City animal shelter calls, seeking to explain why the shelter accidentally executed a pit bull.
Another man frets that new rules in his Manhattan co-op will force him to part with some of his dogs.
Other callers question the legality of ceremonial sacrifices.
Almost 200 plaintive calls a week are logged on the answering machines at Rutgers University's Animal Rights Law Center, the only one of its kind in the United States.
Law schools have long used legal clinics to give their students practical experience and to provide free counsel to those typically underserved  by the legal profession: immigrants, homeless people, prisoners.
The Rutgers clinic, however, takes this concept several steps further.
It represents animals, and considers their abuse akin to enslavement.


Japan Plans Improved Supervision of Its Banks Overseas
Apparently trying to improve its image abroad, the Finance Ministry said today that it would begin drawing up proposals next week to improve the supervision of Japanese bank branches in foreign countries.
Most of the measures are expected to focus on the inspection of overseas branches of Japanese financial institutions.
But Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura also hinted today at fundamental problems in the close ties between his ministry and the institutions it oversees.


A Deal in Timber
Harrisons &amp; Crosfield P.L.C. said yesterday that it had sold K &amp; B Forest Products, its timber importing and processing subsidiary, to Meyer International P.L.C. for L32.6 million ($51 million). (AP)


Striking Newspaper Workers Out in Cold in a Union Town
Nearly four months into a newspaper strike here, the companies that own this  city's two daily papers appear to be defeating their unions.
Here, in the city that is sometimes called the labor capital of the country,  the papers have published a newspaper every day since the strike began on July 13.
Since September, the two papers have each been publishing their usual separate daily editions.


The Rangers Get a Victory and a Bit of Revenge
Touche, Mike Milbury, is what Colin Campbell seemed to be saying last night at Madison Square Garden.
Milbury had called Campbell's Rangers arrogant during the preseason.
After the Rangers dominated Milbury's Islanders for the last 40 minutes of a 4-1 victory, Campbell showed that he had not forgotten what Milbury had said.


Nets Start Horribly And Then Get Worse
Without Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman in tonight's lineup, the Nets were worried about their offense.
After the game, the Nets were even more worried.


This Year's Fashion Statement: Wear Layers
After two years of temperatures in the 70's, the New York City Marathon faces a different concern tomorrow: cold and wind that could leave runners susceptible to hypothermia, the race's medical director said yesterday.
As a cold front pushes through the area, rain is expected to stop before the  10:50 A.M. start of the race.
The temperature is expected to be in the low to mid-50's at the start and then drop into the upper 40's as the race progresses,  the Penn State University weather service said.
A brisk northwest wind from 15 to 25 miles an hour could result in a wind-chill factor that falls below freezing, the weather service said.


U.S. Official Presses Bosnia Serbs on War Crimes
Assistant Secretary of State John Shattuck said today that he had pressed Bosnian Serb leaders in Banja Luka to allow international war crimes investigators into their territory and to promise to find missing Muslims, who are thought to have been killed, detained or pressed into hard labor.
"My message was clear," said Mr.
Shattuck at the United States Embassy in Sarajevo.
"There is accountability here and the guilty will be found."


Clearcutting Plan For Adirondacks
Over the objections of some environmentalists, the Pataki administration has  decided to allow owners of private woodlands in New York's Adirondack Park to clearcut tens of thousands of acres where trees were damaged in a windstorm last summer.
The largest previous permit for clearcutting involved 55 acres.
Article, page 25.


INSIDE
Progress in Talks on Bosnia


Hill Bruised Spinal Cord in Accident
TYRONE HILL, injured in a hit-and-run accident while driving to Tuesday night's Cleveland Cavaliers home game, sustained a bruise on his spinal cord.
The bruise was the cause of weakness in Hill's right arm and right leg, the team said in a statement yesterday.
His X-rays and magnetic resonance imaging scans were normal and he could be released from the Cleveland Clinic by the weekend.
He will not play for at least two weeks. (AP)


More Names on Free Agency List
FERNANDO VALENZUELA of San Diego and DANNY DARWIN and JEFF RUSSELL of Texas filed for free agency yesterday, raising the total to 136.
Two eligible players  reached agreement with their teams.
JEFF KING accepted a two-year, $5 million contract with Pittsburgh, and RON KARKOVICE agreed to a two-year contract for $3,675,000 with the Chicago White Sox.


M.T.A. Outlines Refund
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority outlined yesterday how it will compensate bus and subway riders if a court reinstates the $1.25 fare after the  new $1.50 fare takes effect Sunday.
In a proposal to those who have sued to block the increase, the M.T.A. offered to give two days of free service for every seven days that the new fare  was in effect, according to those familiar with the plan.
Riders would get one free weekday and one free Saturday or Sunday; no two days would run consecutively.


Jefferson-Pilot Plans Unusual Securities
The Jefferson-Pilot Corporation said today that it would sell about $104 million in unusual senior debt securities to pay for last month's acquisition of the Alexander Hamilton Life Insurance Company.
Jefferson-Pilot, a life insurer based here, said it would repay purchasers of the approximately 1.5 million automatic common exchange securities, or aces, either in shares of the Nationsbank Corporation or in cash.


What's Cooking? 67,000 Beans
Dorcas Reilly knew she had a keeper when she came up with the famous baked green-bean casserole in 1955 at the Campbell Soup Co. test kitchen where she worked for 20 years.
"We thought it was a recipe that would be around," said Mrs.
Reilly, now retired and living in Haddonfield.
Campbell said it gets 10,000 requests a year for the recipe, its most popular ever.
On Tuesday, to mark the 40th anniversary, a hotel chef in Peoria, Ill. (whose residents are the champion per-capita consumers of the casserole), will whip up an 800-pound batch.
You take 67,000 green beans, 50 gallons of cream of mushroom soup, 64 pounds of canned french-fried onions . . .
JOE SHARKEY


Whitman Has Surgery to Remove a Cyst
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman underwent 90 minutes of surgery today for the removal of a benign cyst on her right ovary.
"There's absolutely no evidence of malignancy," said Dr.
J.
Eric Christman, who performed the operation at Morristown Memorial Hospital.
"There's absolutely no evidence of anything else at all."


In 1998, the Nashville Oilers
Local officials and the Houston Oilers are working out some final details and should be ready early next week to say for certain that the National Football League is coming to the Music City in 1998.
"We hope that we'll be able to sign on Monday and certainly before the Metro  Council filing deadline on Tuesday," a Nashville negotiator, Byron Trauger, said today.


Ruling Spins Off a Murder Trial
Against prosecutors' wishes, Richard Feaster, a 24-year-old Woodbury Heights  man charged with murdering two Deptford gasoline station attendants in separate  incidents in 1993, will receive two trials.
A Superior Court judge reversed an earlier decision to combine the charges in a single trial and ruled that evidence for the second trial cannot be presented in the first.
The defendant will stand trial first in the shotgun slaying of Keith Donaghy, 30.
Jury selection is scheduled to start Dec. 4.
Mr.
Feaster will then be tried in the slaying of Richard Pine, 55, who was stabbed and had his throat slashed about a  half-mile from the first killing, The A.P. reported.


U.S. Warned on Debt
Standard &amp; Poor's, a leading credit agency, warned that the budget impasse in Washington had already damaged investors' confidence.
Business Day, page 37.


Capital's Kennedy Center Gets $50 Million, 15-Year Overhaul
The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington will undergo a $50 million overhaul beginning next summer, the Washington Post reported today.
Lawrence I. Wilker, the president of the Kennedy Center, said the project to  renovate and reconstruct all of the center's theaters, could take as long as 15  years.
Mr.
Wilker said the financing for the project had been authorized by Congress for five years.
The Kennedy Center is a Federal building and a Presidential monument.


CHRONICLE
KITTY CARLISLE HART will find herself in unaccustomed company when the Nov. 20 issue of People magazine hits the stands on Monday.
There she is, smiling broadly, in an evening dress and stole, as one of the magazine's "Top 10 Party Girls."


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
Long Island


Peter B. Flint, 67, A Times Reporter
Peter B. Flint, a former reporter for The New York Times who specialized in obituaries of film and theater figures, died on Thursday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
Mr.
Flint, who lived in Glen Ridge, N.J., was 67.


Consider Harsh Reality of Legalizing Drugs
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis (column, Nov. 3) argues for decriminalizing our drug laws as a  partial answer to the questions: "What can be done to break the cycle of despair in our inner cities? What, especially, can be done for their lost young men?" Like many others who are caring but frustrated, Mr.
Lewis has been seduced by decriminalization.
But it would fail miserably.


Philatelic Funnies
To the Editor:
The notion of the United States Postal Service devoting a commemorative stamp series to comic-strip characters, as you report in "Dagwood, Meet the Mailman" (Business Day, Nov. 6), should strike a Popeye-worthy blow to the chins of snobbish philatelists.


Energy's Friends-and-Enemies List
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary stepped well beyond the bounds of propriety when her department paid a consulting firm for a project that ranked reporters on how positive or negative their articles were toward her and her department.
She should have been fired to make it clear that such conduct cannot be tolerated in the Government.
The White House responded too casually yesterday by simply rebuking her and warning all departments that rating reporters is unacceptable.
Mrs.
O'Leary, a former utility company executive, and her public information  officers were apparently concerned that they weren't getting their "message" across at a time when they are engaged in a host of controversial issues.
So the department paid $46,500 to Carma International to monitor and analyze press coverage.
It was a flagrant misuse of taxpayer money by a department with plenty of its own propaganda specialists.
The firm's reports included a ranking of articles, broadcasts and journalists on a scale measuring how favorable, unfavorable or neutral they were.


2,000 Are Evacuated From a Complex in Yonkers
More than 2,000 people were evacuated from an apartment complex in Yonkers yesterday after an improbable series of events on Thursday night -- an underground fire that caused an electrical short that ruptured a water main -- left the building without heat, power or water, officials said.
The problem began about 8:30 P.M.
Thursday, when a fire started in an electrical vault beneath the Riverview Apartments on Riverdale Avenue, causing smoke to billow from manhole covers and fill stairways.
Fire Department officials said the blaze destroyed several large electrical panels and caused the electrical system for all the buildings and for a public school within the complex to short out.


Alaska Legislators' Oil Vow Gets Different Play at Home
In trying to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling, Congress is banking on a promise from Alaska political leaders that all money earned from oil leasing will be split evenly between the state of Alaska and the Federal Government.
But members of Alaska's powerful Congressional delegation, all Republicans, have been saying one thing in Washington and quite another back home.
The lawmakers have told their constituents that the promise of a 50-50 split is a ploy to win approval in Congress.
Once the refuge is opened, they said, Alaskans will sue to get 90 percent of the royalties.


S.&amp; P. Strongly Warns U.S. on the Danger of a Default
One of the world's leading credit-rating agencies issued a strongly worded warning today to the United States Government, saying that the faith of investors "has, to some degree, been diminished" by the threats of imminent default on its debt.
The unusual statement by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the rating agency, said that it was not reducing the United States' triple-A credit rating, the highest grade -- and one granted to only about a dozen countries.
But it clearly left open that possibility if the country failed to meet any of its payments on United States Treasury obligations because of the budget impasse.


Corrections
A sports chart yesterday comparing the rushing statistics of Dallas's Emmitt  Smith with those of other great football runners misstated those for Jim Brown.
He rushed for 12,312 yards on 2,359 attempts in his career.


Sega Blames Sales Lag For Earnings Decline
The Japanese game machine maker Sega Enterprises Inc. reported yesterday that it had a decline in earnings in the first half of its business year, blaming sluggish sales of video game hardware and software in the United states and Europe.
Sega said its current profit in the six months that ended on Sept. 30 fell to 11.04 billion yen ($110 million) from 16.33 billion yen in the corresponding period last year.
Current profit is before taxes and includes gains and losses on investments and other nonoperating activities.
(Reuters)


Terms of Muslim-Croat Alliance Are Set at Dayton Talks
A wide-ranging agreement to invigorate a tenuous Muslim-Croat alliance in Bosnia was announced today by senior Administration officials and portrayed as an important step toward an overall Bosnian peace settlement.
But the effectiveness of the accord and the strategy behind it remain uncertain.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, on a one-day visit to the peace talks  here, said the accord would bring the Muslim-Croat federation established last year "to life" and described it as "an essential building block of peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina as a whole." Up to now, the federation has done little more than stop the fighting that raged in 1993 between Muslims and Croats.


Artifacts of Dance
Photographs, letters and artifacts from 12 years of dance productions, presented by Dancing in the Streets, are on view until Jan. 6 at the Amsterdam Gallery of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
The free exhibition includes documentation of performances in parks, museums, gardens and ruins.
The gallery is open Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 P.M. and Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday from noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


In Wake of Inquiry, 200 Officers Face Transfers in Philadelphia
The city's Police Commissioner has transferred about 200 of his department's  6,100 officers, a move attributed by senior commanders to a continuing inquiry into police corruption here.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Wednesday about an appearance by Colin L. Powell in Philadelphia omitted part of a paragraph in some editions.
The affected passage should have read, "His speech here was a compendium of inspirational themes and contemporary parables that he thinks should guide Americans and give them hope."
A correction in this space on Thursday misidentified the organization he addressed in some copies.
It was the American Society of Travel Agents, not the  General Society of Travel Agents.


At the U.N., Anger Over Executions
The hanging of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight co-defendants in Nigeria today touched off spontaneous outrage in the Security Council.
The Council had convened to approve a resolution on peacekeeping in Liberia when word of the executions was received.
Nigeria sits on the 15-member Council and led the West African regional peacekeeping force in Liberia.


Parents Seek Slayer's Records
A Superior Court judge will soon decide whether the parents of a slain 6-year-old girl will be able to use psychological and medical history records in a $25 million civil case against the parents of the killer, Kevin Aquino.
The slain girl's parents, Ron and Karen Wengert, said that the records will prove that Hector and Carmella Aquino knew of their son's aberrant behavior and psychological problems and were "negligent and careless" in not warning the Wengerts, their neighbors and friends, the A.P. reported.
Kevin Aquino, 21, is serving 55 years to life in prison after admitting in July that he kidnapped Amanda Wengert the night of March 6, 1994, because he "wanted sex," and murdered her while her parents were at his parents' anniversary party.


A Week of Lukas Foss At Avery Fisher Hall
It is hard to see why it should take a Composer Week to get Lukas Foss's music performed by the New York Philharmonic.
Mr.
Foss is, after all, a New York institution as composer, conductor and pianist, and he has written many attractive pieces of a type unlikely to offend conservative Philharmonic audiences as well as a few that might give them a welcome jolt.
At any rate, here it is, Foss week at Avery Fisher Hall, and it is nice to hear some of his music: two works that in divergent ways evoke a comfortable past, led by Kurt Masur.


A Test for Welfare Fraud Is Expanded to Families
New York State is sharply increasing the number of people it electronically fingerprints to detect welfare fraud by expanding the program to include families, state officials said yesterday.
The finger imaging program -- which state and city officials say is essential to weeding out and deterring fraud and which advocates for the poor say is needlessly degrading -- was started statewide this year for recipients of Home Relief, a welfare program serving about 285,000 single adults.


Bradley Becomes a Triple Threat for 76ers
76ers 104, Hornets 90


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Reprise on the Lament For the Woman Who Got Away Chris Isaak Beacon Theater


Sports of The Times;A Change In Attitude And Altitude
HALF an hour before the Knicks' game with Indiana on Thursday night, Anthony  Mason emerged from the dressing room at Madison Square Garden, where a dozen players from both teams had attended a pre-game chapel service.
He spoke about the challenge of his new role with the Knicks, going from treasured sixth man to starter.
But the key change, Mason said, was not so much adjusting to a new role but assuming a new mind-set.


Protest Sets Off Rioting in Zimbabwe's Capital
Downtown Harare erupted in riots this afternoon as a student-led demonstration against police brutality was breaking up.
The riots, however, were more a product of adrenaline than politics: A pickup truck full of outnumbered police officers drove around causing stampedes by firing tear gas canisters into crowds of shoppers and workers.


NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR SELLS DYNA-CRAFT SUBSIDIARY
The National Semiconductor Corporation said yesterday that it had sold its Dyna-Craft Inc. lead frame unit to Malaysian Pacific Industries' semiconductor division.
National Semiconductor, a computer chip maker based in Santa Clara, Calif., said the agreement included the division's 1,550 employees and all of Dyna-Craft Inc.'s sites in Santa Clara; Murrysville, Pa., and Penang, Malaysia.
The unit makes the metal part of the housing for semiconductor chips.
The division represents 3 percent of National Semiconductor's total trade sales, and the company expects no material financial impact from the transaction.
In the year that ended on May 28, National Semiconductor had sales of $2.4 billion.


Death Penalty Mistakes Will Haunt New York
To the Editor:
As New York prepares its first death penalty prosecutions, it should heed the lessons of the Rolando Cruz case in Illinois (news article, Nov. 5).
Mr.
Cruz was charged with the rape and murder of a 10-year-old girl, a horrible crime.
He was condemned to die on a circumstantial case corroborated by an unreliable prison snitch.


Paul A. Wolkin, 78, A Legal Educator
Paul A. Wolkin, a national figure in continuing education for the legal profession, died on Thursday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 78.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his wife, Diana Burgwyn.


For Seniors, It's the Football Game That Will Last Forever
Some things in life you never forget.
They are indelibly etched into your consciousness, mental and emotional touchstones, like your first love, your first car, your first kiss and, in these parts, the last time you played football for Williams or Amherst.
Evidence of this abounded on those two campuses this week as the Division III teams prepared for their 110th meeting Saturday, the season finale and Williams's homecoming game at Weston Field.
There was a little extra ardor at the practices, there were motivational T-shirts -- the best one, seen hanging in St.
Pierre's barber shop on Spring Street, reads: "How Good is Williams Football? Good Enough to Lower the Admission Standards at Amherst!" -- and there were football alumni everywhere, strolling down the streets and giving pep talks from the bulletin boards.


Bias Against Straphangers? Suburbanites Beg to Differ
Their trains may have padded seats, luggage racks and toilets, but many commuters on the Metro-North and Long Island railroads don't think they're getting a far better deal than their subterranean cousins.
For one thing, commuters in the nearer suburbs say current fares of $6 or so  per ride -- or roughly $3 with a monthly pass -- mean they already pay two to four times as much as subway riders for trips that are shorter than many subway  rides.


World News Briefs;It's Mr. Chretien, Ma'am (The Real One This Time)
Queen Elizabeth II spoke today with Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada, the real one.
In October, the Queen thought Mr.
Chretien had called her by telephone to discuss the sovereignty referendum in Quebec, when in fact it was a Montreal radio host, Pierre Brassard, impersonating Mr.
Chretien.


METRO DIGEST
DEATH CASTS SPOTLIGHT ON A PAINKILLER


9-Month Profit Reported At Scandinavian Airlines
Scandinavian Airlines System said yesterday that its pretax profit for the first nine months of 1995 leaped 73 percent, to 2.15 billion Swedish crowns ($321.5 million), despite a costly series of labor disputes.
The airline, owned  by the Governments of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, forecast a full-year profit of at least 2.5 billion crowns ($374 million).
(Reuters)


Mississippi Representative Switches to the G.O.P.
Representative Mike Parker, one of the most conservative Democrats in the House, announced today that he was joining the Republican Party.
"I truly believe the party that is moving this country in the right direction is the Republican Party," said Mr.
Parker, 46.
"I think it is our last best chance to do that."


No Clues in Fatal Robbery
The police said yesterday that they had no leads in the slaying of a Teaneck  businessman and the attack against his elderly mother during a break-in and robbery at the home they shared.
Howard Lewis, 49, was killed Wednesday afternoon at his home after leaving his business to pick up his mother to take her to a doctor's appointment.
Mr.
Lewis was attacked when he returned about 3:40 P.M. from the mattress company he and several relatives owned, police said.
His 86-year-old mother, Lillian, told authorities that two men tied her up, taped her eyes and gagged her.
She managed to free herself and call 911.


Carolina Fraternity Punished for Rush Letter
A fraternity at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill had its charter suspended yesterday after a women's group on campus disseminated the fraternity's pledge-recruitment letter, which reads like raunchy ramblings at an out-of-hand keg party.
The undated document, on the fraternity's letterhead, was delivered to the dormitory rooms of 40 students rushing Phi Gamma Delta, known on the Chapel Hill campus as Phi Gam.
The letter invited prospective members, among other things, to ogle sorority pledges "as they stumble around the dance floor in a drunken stupor bordering on the brink of alcohol poisoning." There also were references to masturbation, oral sex and slang for female genitalia.


Armatrading Recaptures a 70's Tone
Shyness and intimacy are two qualities one doesn't normally expect to encounter in the same performer.
But the combination is part of what endears Joan Armatrading to her audience, a polite, post-collegiate crowd that likes to  sing along quietly with her best-known songs.
The West Indian-born English singer and songwriter, who performed at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday evening, specializes in loose-jointed folk-rock ballads about relationships that have the tone of intimate personal correspondence and diary jottings.
But for all the emotions that spill out in her lyrics, much, including the sex of her songs' characters, remains ambiguous.
In recent years, Ms.
Armatrading has moved away from the soft rock for which  she is best loved and tried to build a new image as a more declamatory part-time rocker.
That strategy failed to gain her a larger audience, and in her newest album, "What's Inside" (BMG), she has returned to the more reflective tone of her best 1970's work.
The centerpiece of Wednesday's concert was a block of songs from the new album, performed with a violin, cello and piano trio, with Ms.
Armatrading occasionally joining in on acoustic guitar.


Aspen Journal;Arrival of the Wealthy And Resentment as Well
Provoking threats of a lawsuit and outrage from public housing tenants, the Department of Housing and Urban Development has ordered the Baltimore Housing Authority to terminate its contract with a security company run by members of the Nation of Islam.
The order came on Wednesday after a year of protests by some Jewish groups and legislators like Representative Peter T. King, Republican of Long Island, who criticized the use of taxpayer money to employ a company affiliated with the Nation of Islam.
Critics have called the leader of the Nation of Islam, Louis H. Farrakhan, an anti-Semite, race-baiter and homophobe.


A 'Cinderella' That Fills a Larger Space
The problem the New York City Opera has faced in presenting musicals is that  the New York State Theater is a space far more suitable to opera.
Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Cinderella" presents a particular challenge, because the show was conceived for a television production in 1957.
The chance to write for the small-screen elicited from this fabled team one of their most tuneful, literate  and intimate scores.
For the most part, the company found an effective solution with its handsome  1993 production of "Cinderella," which returned on Thursday night to the obvious delight of an audience teeming with children.
The Prince's ball was announced with brass fanfares from the balcony boxes as excited townspeople streamed to the stage up ramps from the orchestra floor.
The Fairy Godmother's magical transformations were accomplished in an elegant ballet sequence choreographed by Sharon Halley and the director, Robert Johanson.
Four live speckled ponies drew  Cinderella's cream-white coach.
And little girls throughout the hall oohed and aahed when the curtain went up to reveal a stageful of women in glittering gowns for the royal ball.


State to Let Owners Clear Park Lands
Over the objections of some environmentalists, the Pataki administration has  decided to allow owners of private woodlands within the vast Adirondack Park to  clear-cut tens of thousands of acres where trees were damaged in a freak windstorm last summer.
The decision represents a substantial shift in the state's land-use policy for private holdings within the park, where the largest previous permit for clear-cutting involved 55 acres.


Weather Could Delay Shuttle Launching
The space shuttle Atlantis was fueled and ready to return to the Russian space station Mir, but cloudy skies threatened the launching today.
Because of the weather, NASA had just seven minutes to launch Atlantis today, beginning at 7:56 A.M.
The Atlantis last traveled to Mir four months ago.


After U.S. Veto, Dutch Candidate for NATO Leader Withdraws
The leading European candidate to become NATO's senior civilian official pulled out today after the United States vetoed him for the job.
The move threw  the alliance off balance as it prepared to take on a possible peacekeeping role in Bosnia and to take in new members from central Europe.
The Dutch Government angrily withdrew the candidate, a former Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, because Secretary of State Warren Christopher had told Dutch officials that the United States was not satisfied that Mr.
Lubbers was qualified to become NATO Secretary General, the officials said.


Debt Ceiling Impasse Dampens Bond Prices
With the Republican-controlled Congress and the Clinton Administration still  at loggerheads over raising the Federal debt ceiling to allow the Government to  meet interest payments, Treasury securities fell yesterday, continuing their slide of Thursday.
Traders and dealers seem convinced that politicians could not possibly be so  naive as to allow a default that would undermine the Government's credibility.
Yet the unsureness of the situtation is weighing heavily on bond prices.


Pataki Vetoes Bill as a Threat To New York Police Merger
Ignoring inense last-minute lobbying by New York City's powerful police union, Gov.
George E. Pataki vetoed a much debated police arbitration bill today, saying it would unravel the merger of the city's three police forces.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had opposed the bill, saying it would not only disrupt the merger but also increase city labor costs by hundreds of millions of dollars.
Tonight, he called Mr.
Pataki courageous for defying the police union when almost the entire State Legislature, which passed the bill earlier this year, would not.
"The Governor is to be commended for standing up to that pressure and for demonstrating that he's the Governor of the entire state," Mr.
Giuliani said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


Washington Irving H.S. Is Still for Me
To the Editor:
With so many negative stories on the New York City public school system, it's time for a positive one.


Big Risk for G.O.P.
As a week of political setbacks ends, Republicans have taken a high-risk course in Congress.
They are, with calculation, risking blame for shutting down  the Government next week, or for the United States' defaulting on its debt soon  after.
In the process they may project an extreme, uncompromising image, the sort that contributed heavily to this week's election setbacks.
Ironically, that is the image that might have been mitigated in a Presidential campaign by Gen.
Colin L. Powell, for he would have forced their campaign dialogue away from pleasing the right and toward the political middle, where elections are won.
But the retired Army general announced on Wednesday that he would not run next year.


Check-Off Box Bill Gains
State income-tax forms could offer still another voluntary check-off box -- this one to add money to a pool to pay for food, shelter and mental health counseling for crime victims, under a bill released by a Senate committee.
If the bill is passed, the new check-off box would be added to those already in place on tax forms for financing aid to abused children and wildlife preservation efforts.


The Chicago Plays With Opposites
On consecutive evenings at Carnegie Hall this week, the Chicago Symphony took us to the ends of the musical earth.
A few practical matters aside, how little the Bruckner Eighth Symphony on Wednesday had to do with Strauss's "Elektra" on  Thursday.
Yet taken as polar oppositions, how many comparisons the two inspired, a list long enough to eat up this entire review.
Each is a work that comfortably fits one intermission-less concert program: bad news for Carnegie Hall's concessionaires, but promoting unbroken concentration among listeners.
Take away Strauss's percussion-instrument exotica, and the instrumental resources don't look that different either.
Both pieces employ the Wagner tuba, a late-Romantic bass-baritonal hybrid.
Both use tinkling harp figurations in unexpected ways.


China Warns U.S. Again On Taiwan
A senior officer of the People's Liberation Army says he warned the Clinton Administration last March of "explosive" consequences should the President of Taiwan be allowed to visit the United States.
In June the White House allowed the President, Lee Teng-hui, to make a private visit to a college reunion, touching off a crisis in relations with China, which claims Taiwan as a province.
The military official, Lieut.
Gen.
Xiong Guangkai, added in an interview this week that any future visit by President Lee would incite an even stronger reaction.


Kosso Eloul, 75, Sculptor of Flame
Kosso Eloul, the sculptor who designed the eternal flame at Yad Vashem, the Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem, died on Wednesday.
He was 75.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Rhon.


No Headline
If the unions can be crushed in Detroit, they probably could be crushed anywhere."
MOLLY ABRAHAM, a striker at The Detroit Free Press. [39:4.]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Francis Grover Cleveland misstated the election history of his father, the country's 22d and 24th President.
Grover Cleveland, a Democrat, was elected in 1884 and 1892, not  in 1888.
That year he gained a majority of the popular vote but lost the Presidency in the Electoral College to Benjamin Harrison, a Republican.


Yearbook Case Takes New Turn
A 19-year-old youth was charged Thursday with assaulting one of the five white teen-agers who were accused in June of planting a racist message in the Greenwich High School yearbook.
The police said they were not able to establish that the assault, one of two  attacks outside a party in the Winterset Road area on Oct. 22, was retaliation for the yearbook incident.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the overdose death of a medical student attending Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn misstated that hospital's relationship to Kings County Hospital Center, where the woman's  body was found.
Downstate is affiliated with Kings County; it is not based there.


Brown Is Out $11,000, 1 Game
Don Nelson advised the Knicks before Thursday's encounter with Indiana that they had better keep their heads in the game and not be distracted by the replacement officials.
The Knicks listened, but Larry Brown, the Pacers' coach, lost his head and raged out of control.
As a result, Brown is reaching for his checkbook.


Yomitan Journal;A Pacifist Landlord Makes War on Okinawa Bases
As a grocer, Shoichi Chibana deals daily with lettuce and tomatoes, but now he is taking on what he hopes is the biggest perishable of all: American military bases.
A friendly, likable man who plays tag with schoolchildren who visit his boxy  little neighborhood store, Mr.
Chibana is like a Japanese Mr.
Rogers.
But he is  also a landlord, and to the United States Army he is a landlord out of a nightmare.


How to Answer a Hanging in Nigeria
Scorning pleas for clemency from governments, human rights groups, environmentalists and private citizens across the world, Nigeria's military dictatorship executed Ken Saro-Wiwa yesterday.
A military court had convicted him in the murder of four pro-government leaders of the Ogoni people.
But Mr.
Saro-Wiwa, an anti-government Ogoni leader, was nowhere near the murder scene and was denied a fair chance to defend himself.
For two years, Gen.
Sani Abacha's military Government has been systematically eliminating its critics by execution, long prison terms, intimidation and exile.
The suppression of dissent has given a corrupt clique of generals a free  hand to loot Africa's most populous country and drive it toward a new civil war.


PETROLEUM CONCERN TO ADD 65% OF INDSPEC CHEMICAL
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire a 65 percent equity interest in the Indspec Chemical Corporation for $85 million.
Occidental  Petroleum said that Indspec's management and employees would retain voting control of the company.
Occidental is buying the stake from Harlan Inc., a New York merchant bank, and an affiliated investment partnership.
The investment partnership, Castle Harlan Partners II L.P., acquired Indspec in December 1993,  along with Indspec management, employees and the employee stock option program.
Indspec, with 1994 sales of $115 million, is the world's largest producer of resorcinol.


Observer;No Butler To Do It
Here is a wonderful, haunting photograph.
It shows 31 persons grouped outside an East Village place identified on its awning as Limbo.
It is probably a coffee house; what looks like a coffee cup is sketched on the awning.
Knowing too much would spoil matters, however, for it is a picture filled with mysteries.
Who are these people?
Why do they look so freshly soaped and scrubbed?
What are they doing occupying two full pages (60 and 61) in last Sunday's New York Times Magazine?


Partisanship From Mr. Vacco
New York State's Attorney General, Dennis Vacco, has purged scores of experienced nonpolitical lawyers to make way for attorneys with ties to Republican leaders and campaign contributors.
What he calls "a cleansing process" is instead a partisan makeover of his office.
It also marks a troubling departure from a tradition of bipartisan professionalism that dates back decades to an earlier Republican Attorney General, Louis Lefkowitz.
The Attorney General's office defends the state government against lawsuits and enforces numerous state laws.
Under Mr.
Lefkowitz and his Democratic successors, Robert Abrams and G. Oliver Koppell, it earned a reputation for insulating the state's legal business from politics.


Daiwa's Fate: Merger Partner Or Lesser Bank?
Toshihide Iguchi, the 44-year-old trader at the Daiwa Bank who is charged with the bank's disastrous $1.1 billion loss, may wind up having a hand in creating the world's largest bank.
The Sumitomo Bank, one of the world's largest, has raised the prospect of a merger with Daiwa that could create a banking behemoth with assets of 87.7 trillion yen, or roughly $860 billion.
But with potential resistance coming from Daiwa's largest shareholder, the Nomura Securities Company, or from some other quarter, another line of thinking  is that Mr.
Iguchi's messy bond trading scandal may turn Daiwa into a much smaller institution.
The pressing questions now for Daiwa are these: Can Daiwa thrive on its own?
Does it want to suffer the humiliation of becoming a lesser institution?


CHRONICLE
What more appropriate aria could one sing to a cardiologist than "Mon coeur s'ouvre a ta voix" ("My heart opens at the sound of your voice"), from Saint-Saens's "Samson et Dalila"?
MICHELLE DeYOUNG, a mezzo-soprano at the Metropolitan Opera, sang it as a surprise to Dr.
NICHOLAS DePASQUALE, the chief of cardiology at Lenox Hill Hospital, at the hospital's Autumn Ball on Wednesday at the Waldorf-Astoria.
He received the hospital's medal of distinction.


Toyota Says Profit Fell By 54% in Its First Half
The Toyota Motor Corporation, Japan's biggest car maker, said today that pretax profit tumbled 54 percent in its fiscal first half as domestic market share declined and exports fell sharply.
Another auto maker, the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, said pretax profit rose 23 percent in the half.
Mitsubishi has been a leader in capturing a share of Japan's growing market for sport-utility vehicles, while Toyota has lagged behind.


House and Senate Leaders Compromise to Soften Welfare Bill
Senior Republicans in the House and the Senate reached a tentative compromise today on welfare legislation that retains many elements of the House plan, but softens them somewhat, along lines approved by the Senate.
White House officials said they did not know enough about the proposal to predict whether President Clinton would accept it.
One White House official, speaking on the condition that he not be named, said, "This sounds more like a back-room budget deal than true welfare reform."


Dow Sets Another Record But Overall Market Is Off
Even though the Dow Jones industrial average set a high for the third consecutive session, stock prices were under pressure yesterday as investors worried that the Federal Government might default on its debt because of political conflicts over the budget.
The 30-stock Dow average gained 6.14 points, to 4,870.37, buoyed by a round of computer-guided buy orders and the strength of its large-capitalization cyclical issues.
For the week, the Dow had a gain of 44.80 points.
But in yesterday's trading the broader averages turned lower, and there were more declines than advances on the New York Stock Exchange.


Making Sure Izzy Doesn't Go Pop


Death Highlights Drug's Lethal Allure to Doctors
Jennifer Timbrook went to work last Saturday at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn much as she had for the last week, signing in at 9 A.M. on the sixth-floor pediatrics ward, pulling on scrubs and taking on her new duties as a third-year medical student on rotations.
As she often did on her days off, she had volunteered to come in that day to  help examine newborns, talk to new mothers and discharge patients.
But at 11:30 A.M., she signed out, and some time later took an elevator down to a deserted second-floor radiology darkroom.


HOUSE APPROVES STOPGAP BUDGET AND HIGHER DEBT
The House voted today to give President Clinton ways to avoid both a Government shutdown and a default on its bonds, but only on terms that he has called unacceptable and has promised to veto.
On a nearly straight party-line vote, the House passed a bill to extend the Government's authority to borrow money.
The vote for a four-week extension was 219 to 185 -- with 7 Republicans voting no, largely because they oppose raising  the limit on Government debt at all, and 4 conservative Southern Democrats voting yes.
The vote sends the measure to the President.


Telling, Then Showing
A pleasant chat was followed by a pleasant dance on Thursday night when Les Grands Ballets Canadiens offered the New York premiere of Kevin O'Day's "Principia."
The Montreal company's presentation was part of Works and Process at the Guggenheim, in which artists talk about new works, then show them, this time at the Kaye Playhouse.


Student Charged in Shooting Of His Brother With Crossbow
A New York University student shot his younger brother in the neck with an arrow fired from a crossbow because he would not take part in a plot to kill their mother, the police said yesterday.
The authorities said the college student, Ruben Huaman, 20, of 27 Vermilyea Avenue in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, told the police that he felt he could not live up to the expectations of his mother, Marguerita Ruiz, a  deeply religious woman.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
British Psychedelic Eccentricity With Off-the-Wall Imagery Julian Cope Westbeth Theater Center


COMPAY BRIEFS


Stephen King on the Installment Plan
Stephen King is looking to Charles Dickens for his latest twist on suspense.
Not for purposes of plot or setting.
Mr.
King is not writing about hungry orphans or the pretenses of Victorian England.


8% Withheld From Budgets
The Whitman Administration has begun withholding about 8 percent from all departmental budgets, but State Treasurer Brian Clymer denied yesterday that this constitutes a spending cut to prepare for revenue shortfalls in the current budget year, The Associated Press reported.
The departments won't get the extra 8 percent until they submit tentative budget plans for the fiscal years that begin in July 1996 and July 1997, Mr.
Clymer said, adding that some revenue may be "lapsed." That means less spending this budget year and the transfer of money to the next budget, he said.


Breast Cancer Gene Doesn't Cause Disease
To the Editor:
Your headline "Research Links Single Gene to Almost All Breast Cancers" (front page, Nov. 3) masks a biological reality the new research into this disease underscores.
If the findings are confirmed, they indicate how gene products, not the DNA patterns identified by genetic screening tests, play a role in disease.
These new findings also remind us that genes (as DNA sequences) do not work alone.


Ex-Aide's Suit Gives Glimpse Into Empire Of Milken
A dispute between Michael R. Milken and his former accountant is providing a  rare peek into the financial empire of the former junk-bond financier.
Mr.
Milken's fortune is estimated at hundreds of millions of dollars.
But the nature of his holdings has been little known even as Mr.
Milken, who served 24 months in Federal prison for securities fraud, is re-entering the public spotlight, serving as an adviser to corporate chieftains like Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting, Rupert Murdoch of the News Corporation and Bert C. Roberts  of the MCI Communications Corporation.


World News Briefs;U.S. Spy for East Berlin Gets Suspended Sentence
A German court gave an American researcher a suspended 18-month jail sentence today for spying for East Berlin.
The 54-year-old spy, Jeffrey Schevitz, admitted passing secrets to East Germany between 1977 and 1990, helped by his wife, Beatrice Altmann, who was fined $7,000.


Raids Yield $100,000 In Newark
Federal officials executing search warrants at the homes and offices of two top city officials were surprised to stumble across more than $100,000 in cash at the main residence of a close aide to Mayor Sharpe James, people close to the investigation said today.
Investigators began poring over the documents seized on Thursday from the City Hall office and the main residence used by Jackie R. Mattison, who is both  the Mayor's chief of staff and a New Jersey assemblyman, to try to determine the source of the cash.


HORIZON/CMS HEALTHCARE TO BUY PACIFIC REHABILITATION
The Horizon/CMS Healthcare Corporation agreed yesterday to buy Pacific Rehabilitation and Sports Medicine Inc. in a stock deal valued about $62 million.
Under the deal, Pacific Rehab stockholders will receive 0.3483 of a Horizon/CMS common share for each Pacific Rehab common share.
The deal values Pacific Rehabilitation's stock at about $7.71 a share, a premium at current prices.
Pacific Rehabilitation's shares rose 62.5 cents, to $6.8125, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
Horizon/CMS shares were up $1, at $21.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Pacific Rehab, of Vancouver, Wash., provides outpatient physical therapy services.
Horizon/CMS, of Albuquerque, N.M., is a diversified health care provider.


Canada Without Quebec Won't Fall Apart
To the Editor:
Re Edgar M. Bronfman's Nov. 5 letter on Quebec: Mr.
Bronfman describes himself as a former Canadian, and I suspect he harbors a nostalgic view of Montreal as far more important to the Canadian polity and economy than it once was.
The sad fact is that Quebec and Canada have had less and less to do with one another over the last few decades.


Tyrone Turner, Magazine Executive, 40
Tyrone Turner, editorial business manager for Newsweek magazine, died on Wednesday at Walt Disney World's Pleasure Island.
He was 40.
His body was found early on Thursday in four feet of water under the Planet Hollywood restaurant, which is elevated over a lagoon, the Orange County Sheriff's office said.
He probably drowned, though the exact cause of death will be determined by the medical examiner's office, a sheriff's spokesman said.
No foul play was suspected.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Youth Has Its Evening In Works With Cosmic Themes Namaste Danse Ohio Theater


Sherrard: the Go-To Who's Not Gone To
Dan Reeves hasn't had a 1,000-yard receiver since 1989.
The Giants have not had one since 1988, when Lionel Manuel gained 1,029 on 65 catches.
If expansion  teams are excluded, that is the fifth-longest drought in the league.
Only Arizona (1987), Kansas City (1987), Pittsburgh (1985) and Chicago (1970) have longer shortages.
When the Giants signed the effervescent and talented Mike Sherrard, he was expected to be their deep threat.
Their playmaker.
At times, he has fulfilled that promise.
Last season, Sherrard had 53 catches for 825 yards and 6 touchdowns -- all career highs.
In 1993, he was on pace to do even better until  he shattered his hip socket.


Funeral for Eighth-Grade Sweethearts


Giants Vow to Retaliate If Raiders Use Dreaded Chop Block
The story goes this way.
It was the early 1980's, and Dan Reeves was in the infant stages of his coaching career with the Denver Broncos.
Minutes before the Broncos were going to play Coach Bill Walsh and the San Francisco 49ers, Reeves  approached Walsh.
The 49ers apparently had several controversial plays in their repertoire that had to do with the nasty move known as the chop block.
A former 49ers assistant at the game that day recalled that Reeves told Walsh that the 49ers were employing the dangerous block and that he would not stand for it.
Reeves told him he had inserted a similar offensive play that week just  for the 49ers game and if Walsh ran one of those blocks, he would have no choice but to protect his guys and respond with a matching play.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 12, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Assassins Usually Miss the Larger Target
FROM the moment Yigal Amir fired his pistol, killing Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the question in the minds of many was what impact the Israeli leader's death would have on Middle East peace.
Mr.
Amir's own words could not have been clearer: He had said months earlier  that he was determined to stop Israel from turning over control of much of the West Bank, what he called Israel's "most holy land," to the Palestinians.
What is not clear -- at least not yet -- is whether he will succeed in stopping, or even slowing down, implementation of the peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians.


L.I. Wines Gain Nassau Beachhead
LONG ISLAND wines are consumed in Manhattan, Florida, California, on transcontinental American Airlines flights and even in London and Paris.
Yet about half the restaurants on the Island carry no local wines.
Others stock one  or two bottles.
Long Island wines are especially difficult to find in Nassau and western Suffolk Counties.
The same spots that proudly promote local products like Long Island duck, potatoes, corn, tomatoes, fish and shellfish do not connect the region's food with its wines.
Many restaurants in Europe offer little else but wines from their regions.
On the Island, the opposite often occurs.


High Danger: That's What Friends Are For
The Journey Of August King Jason Patric, Thandie Newton, Larry Drake, Sam Waterston; narration by Maya Angelou Directed by John Duigan PG-13 95 minutes


A New Era Underground
The minutes were ticking away all weekend to zero hour for the new $1.50 subway fare, testing many New Yorkers' forbearance.
Natural instinct -- to wisecrack, to be choleric -- strained mightily against civic duty. ("You serving drinks in the train for the extra money?" one rider asked a token clerk.) Still, virtue seemed to be winning out.


Farm Issues Are Taking Center Stage
On Thursday, as the Federal Government teetered at the edge of shutting down  and defaulting on its debts, several powerful Republicans spent nearly two hours bickering about the price of milk.
The chairmen of the House Rules Committee, Appropriations Committee, Agriculture Committee and the House Republican Conference met with a dozen other Republicans in the office of Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of New York, the chairman of the Rules Committee.
They set a simple rule: anyone who yelled loudly enough or pounded the table hard enough to cause the room's giant chandelier to tremble would be ejected.


In New Hands, Undiluted Sophistication
A REGULAR at Barney's in Locust Valley was overheard saying: "I always request the room with the fireplace. It's so cozy, with the fire and the mantel  covered with candles."
Her companion agreed, but added: "Yet there is something special about eating in the bar room.  Those long belts of Barney's, mounted on the wall, make me feel as thin as Olive Oyl, even on one of my fat days."


Sunday: November 12, 1995; QUESTIONS FOR;Pierce Brosnan
He was offered the James Bond role in 1986, but his life then as Remington Steele prevented the actor, now 43, from expropriating 007's suavity until "Goldeneye," which opens Friday.


Casino Issues Spotlight Rift In the G.O.P.
Trapped in the poor southeastern corner of Fairfield County, the people of Bridgeport are pinning their hopes for economic salvation on an unlikely ally.
The predominantly Democratic city is counting on the new Republican Governor, John G. Rowland, to win approval for a law to bring what could be the world's most profitable casino to Bridgeport.
To the west, the county's wealthy bedrock Republican towns are not at all pleased with the man they helped elect.
Many prominent Republicans are fighting  the casino proposal that Mr.
Rowland, the state's first Republican Governor in 20 years, has said is vital to Connecticut's prosperity.


Abortion Bill Is Slowed Down
Having been steamrolled a little over a week ago in a House vote on a bill to ban a method of late-term abortion, abortion rights forces regained a bit of their footing last week in the Senate.
A coalition of Senate Democrats and moderate Republicans stalled a vote on the bill by shunting the legislation to the Judiciary Committee for consideration and a public hearing.
That maneuver bought time for opponents of the bill to try to mount a defense -- but only until Dec. 7 -- and a chance to amend the legislation to at least allow the abortion procedure to be performed to save the life of the mother.
JERRY GRAY


Standing Up for Buck
To the Sports Editor:
I have respect for Buck Showalter for having the courage to stand by his convictions.
I can only hope that Showalter will be be back in pinstripes some day when the fans of New York are owned by someone who has integrity and respects the franchise.


Windstorms Ahead of Front Cause Damage
High winds preceding a cold front knocked down dozens of trees and utility poles and ripped down power lines around the New York area yesterday, blocking roads, causing some minor injuries and leaving at least 30,000 homes without power, officials said.
The southeasterly winds, with gusts as high as 55 miles per hour on Fire Island and other coastal areas, began whipping across parts of eastern New Jersey about 7 P.M., according to the National Weather Service.


A Congregation of Chefs


The Bird Ladies of Boston
SHE'S WEARING A DEAD BIRD ON HER HEAD!
By Kathryn Lasky.
Illustrated by David Catrow.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


To See Ourselves As Writers See Us
THERE is a scene in "Jernigan," a 1991 novel by David Gates, about (and narrated by) a cynical, self-loathing suburban father living in what sounds a lot like Essex County, in which the eponymous protagonist pays a visit to his father, a painter who is something of a renegade, in Connecticut.
It's a pungent but understated encounter, in which the author manages to get across a mutually  believed but unspoken truth between father and son, namely that the son has let  go of his principles and resigned himself to a second-rate life.
" 'So how do things march down there in America?' " the father asks, at one point, over a glass of bourbon.


Budget Battle Has Come Down to a Game of Chicken
For all the polls and high-blown strategy, this latest round of budget brinkmanship is being driven by some strikingly personal assessments: Who will blink first, and why.
House Republican leaders talk about President Clinton as a man without a core of beliefs, driven by political calculations and hostage to the public opinion polls.
Even as they complain about his unwillingness to negotiate, some Republicans say they assume it is only a matter of time before he yields and signs some version of their balanced budget plan.


He Shoots, He Scores! And by the Way, He's 76
To the Editor:
You offered a worthwhile profile of a septuagenarian athlete in your interview with Dante Costanzo ("On a Fort Lee Basketball Court, One Player Always Breaks 70," On the Map, Oct. 22), but I'm a witness to a far more remarkable senior jock in my twice-weekly ice hockey games at South Mountain Arena, the Devils' practice rink in West Orange.


Susan E. Kearns, Eric R. Hubbard
Susan Elizabeth Kearns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Kearns Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., was married there yesterday to Eric Richard Hubbard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Hubbard of Grand Rapids, Mich.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King.
Mrs.
Hubbard was until recently a paralegal at Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, the law firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is the president of W. M. Kearns &amp; Company, a private investment concern in Morristown, N.J.


For Japanese-American Veterans, a War at Home
Richard M. Sakakida, a young intelligence officer in the United States Army during World War II, was captured by the Japanese in the Philippines and endured months of torture.
But Mr.
Sakakida, a Japanese-American, now says the most difficult test was proving to his country that he was a loyal citizen.
"I wasn't seeking medals and honors," Mr.
Sakakida, 74, recalled this week.
"I wanted to fulfill my duty to my country. When my mother said goodbye to me, she told me, 'Don't you dare bring disgrace to your country or your family.' That really stuck with me."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Meet Farooq Ahmed Bhatti, a new power emerging in the cab industry to match a new ethnic icon: the Pakistani cab driver.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE PERSIAN PICKLE CLUB By Sandra Dallas. St. Martin's, $20.95.


The Little Old Agitator Of Union Square
THAT one old lady and I are sitting on a bench in Union Square Park trying to have a conversation, which is not easy; too many people -- cops, parks employees, neighbors, beggars, squirrel feeders, members of her Union Square Community Coalition -- think this is her park, and they stop to talk about trees, fences, politicians, new buildings across the street.
Because she, too, sometimes thinks it's her park, she answers with orders, suggestions, numbers to call.
But she is trying hard to focus on my question: "Why are you such a pain?"
She fishes a previously half-smoked cigarette out of her purse, bums a light  from a passing German tourist, inhales and finally says, "The people who make public policy are not from the world as I understand it. They don't care about people, they have no sympathy. I have beliefs, I have a profound sense of mercy. And, this is going to sound very soppy, but I really do think you should brighten your corner of the world. This neighborhood and this park is my corner  of the world."


The Great Pretenders
MORALITY PLAY By Barry Unsworth. 206 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $22.50.
IN a bitter winter in 14th-century England, a young scholar-priest comes upon a troupe of traveling players.
These are violent times, when victims of the plague are heaped in common pits and "the spirit of murder is never far." Nicholas Barber is in several sorts of flight: from the verbosity of the Latin manuscripts he has been set to copy, from the wrath of the bishop whose kindness he has betrayed and from the husband of the (most recent) woman he has toppled.
Characteristically, the engaging hero of Barry Unsworth's new novel, "Morality Play," is walking not on the road but in the shadows.
From his hiding place, he  witnesses the actors in a real-world death scene, gathered around one of their number.
We know at once that Nicholas will join the troupe, taking the dead man's place.


IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE WORD
Notwithstanding the three scholars who quibble, carp, cavil and occasionally  applaud Everett Fox's new translation of the Bible, most readers of any Bible will continue to understand its basic messages ("In the Beginning Was the Word -- and They've Been Arguing About It Ever Since," Oct. 22).
A better goal would  be to encourage daily Bible use rather than to restate words or phrases found in the plethora of existing Bibles.
GEORGE W. NORDHAM Waldwick, N.J.


INSIDE


Corrections
A picture caption in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday misstated the address of a building in Ridgewood, Queens, that has had no heat or hot water for eight months.
It is 17-19 Cornelia Street, not Cassandra Street.


Bruce A. Katzman, Julie E. Vogel
Julie Eliza Vogel, the daughter of Trudi Vogel of Manhattan and Irving (Speed) Vogel of Sag Harbor, L.I., is to be married today to Bruce Abram Katzman, a son of Anita Katzman of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Nathan Katzman.
Rabbi Elana Zaiman is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse, a party space rented for the occasion.
The bride, 34, was until recently a senior counselor for adolescents at Phoenix House in New York.
Her father, an author, wrote "No Laughing Matter" with Joseph Heller.
Her mother is a portrait painter in Sarasota.


Atlanta Vending Contract Angers Olympic's Sponsors
For most people here, a sidewalk is a sidewalk and a park is a park.
But to Munson Steed, a young entrepreneur who started out selling T-shirts from a pushcart, these are "underutilized assets."
Armed with this perspective and a personal and political relationship with Mayor Bill Campbell, Mr.
Steed persuaded the Mayor to grant him and his recently formed company an exclusive contract to put as many as 1,000 kiosks and vending  carts in those spaces during the Olympics next summer and to transform them into moneymaking areas.


Maria Traficanti, Nelson Villarreal
Maria Ruth Traficanti, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, and Nelson Villarreal Fernandez, a video cameraman, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Msgr.
Charles A. McDonagh officiated.
Mrs.
Villarreal, 28, graduated from George Washington University, from which  she also received her law degree.
She is a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Joseph Traficanti of Kingston, N.Y.
The bride's father works in Albany as the Deputy Chief Administrative Judge for Courts Outside New York City.
Her mother is the director of human resources at the Benedictine Hospital in Kingston.


One Teacher Who Continues to Learn
DONALD McKAYLE HAS the genial, unflappable air of an elder statesman.
And that is what Mr.
McKayle, at age 65, has become in the world of American modern  dance.
It is, however, a part he has been playing since the early 1950's, when he became a role model to other young black choreographers and dancers.
He had his own company.
And he had created "Games," the first of three of his pieces that would one day become modern-dance classics.
But there is a difference today.
"I have a title now," Mr.
McKayle said with  a rumbling laugh, in a recent telephone interview from his home in Laguna Beach, Calif.
" 'Artistic mentor and resident choreographer.' "


Plants to Keep Away From Curious Creatures
Now that the focal point of gardening has moved indoors, a practical precaution is in order.
Parents of young children and people with animals in their homes need to remember that some common house plants are poisonous.
Especially susceptible are children under 5 and puppies and kittens.
The consequences for curious nibblers can be drastic -- possibly in severe illness or, in some cases, death.
Some potentially harmful plants may be received as as gifts; others just may be part of a house plant collection.
Sometimes just leaves or the fruit of a particular plant may be the hazard.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A. Hardaway Is the Hero


HIGH TIME in the HIGH TATRAS
I love winter resorts.
Or, to be precise, I love the Platonic conception of such places.
The reality usually leaves me not just cold but let down and irascible.
Much as I'm enamored of snow, bracing clear air, crystalline views from mountain peaks, tonic bouts of vigorous exercise, hot toddies in front of fireplaces and deep dreamless sleep under goose-down duvets, I loathe the crowds, the interminable lines at ski lifts, the annihilating snobbish competition that starts with clothing and equipment and ends with bruised egos or broken bones on the slopes.
I especially hate the drop-dead chic of deafening discos and the paralyzing price of everything from a room to rubbing alcohol.
After listening to this litany of complaints, friends in Eastern Europe suggested that I try unchartered territory and spend time in the High Tatras, the far northwestern region of the Carpathian range in the newly independent republic of Slovakia.
Traveling by train from Prague, about a seven-hour trip, I reached the city of Poprad late at night and caught a cog-rail car that climbed through darkness  so impenetrable it might have been a tunnel.
At Stary Smokovec, I got off at a station with cheerfully lighted lamps and loudspeakers playing a sprightly tune  called "Summer in Dixie," just what you want to hear when the temperature is 14  degrees.
The information booth was shuttered, the ticket windows closed, and the waiting room deserted.
Outside, there were no taxis and not a pedestrian in sight.


Scandal Shows Deep Roots in Korean Politics
Roh Tae Woo, the dapper former President of South Korea, has been to the White House and to summit meetings, to ribbon-cuttings and groundbreakings, but  now he is expected to go somewhere he has never been before.
Jail.


Really Odd Jobs
We do not know what occupation Gen.
Colin L. Powell will choose now that he's declined a Presidential run, but as a youth he had a very unusual job.
He was a  Shabbos goy: on Saturdays he ran errands for Orthodox Jews whose religion forbade them from such tasks.
Do you know someone with an "odd" job, earning millions or just pin money, working on his own or for a company?
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New  York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished  in any medium.


Critics Say Republican Budget Will Create Shortage of Nursing HomeBeds for Elderly
For much of the past decade, advocates for the elderly and the disabled pushed to expand the nation's long-term care system to meet the demands of an aging population.
At times, they seemed on the brink of achieving their goal.
Now, those advocates say, they are struggling to preserve what to them is a system with serious inadequacies.
An array of Administration officials, advocates, analysts and health care providers is warning that the Republican budgets would put extraordinary strains on the nation's patchwork system for paying for nursing homes and other forms of long-term care.


Powell Can Only Hope for Big-Tent G.O.P.;Belief, Not Values
To the Editor:
Concerning Ben Wattenberg's book "Values Matter Most," which prompted President Clinton to place a telephone call to the author: Values in themselves  do not matter at all.
What matters is belief.
The President would do better to train his mind on the question of what belief is.
Or to join the ranks of those  who consider that the crucial question of our time.


Prairie Rattlers
To the Editor: As a Montana rancher who coexists with the prairie rattler, I  blanched in reading in James McCommons's piece on the Missouri River ("Trailing  Lewis and Clark," Aug. 20) that this enigmatic creature is "not really a hazard." Moreover, I was unsettled over the author's advice to carry a snakebite kit.
These kits can be hazards in themselves, particularly if they are of the cut-and-suck variety, which at best are placebos, at worst infection inducers.
Two years ago two of our llamas were bitten by a rattlesnake.
Despite our vet's flying to our ranch for their immediate treatment, both died, one within hours, the other four days later.
Several years ago two children in our county perished from multiple snakebites.


For Research and for Fashion
Festive nights support work in Alzheimer's disease and AIDS, and celebrate designers both new and famous.


1,200 Candy Canes? It's Christmas at Drumthwacket
For most people, Christmas is amply celebrated with a tree, a wreath, some plastic choirboys on the lawn and, perhaps, a few stockings on the hearth.
But not if you are the Governor of New Jersey.
For the Governor, according to Mrs.
Whitman's protocol office, you need more stuff, not to mention closet space.
Here, then, is a rough list of what it takes to have Christmas at Drumthwacket:
WHITE LIGHTS 10,000, strung inside and outside.
CANDY CANES 1,200, tied with ribbon and a bell.


Stacey Feldman, L. A. Glickstein
Stacey Jo Feldman, a daughter of Iris G. Pianko and a stepdaughter of Norman  M. Pianko of North Brunswick, N.J., is to be married there today to Lawrence Andrew Glickstein, the son of Eydie and Neil Glickstein of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi  Jack Pianko, a brother of Mr.
Pianko, is to officiate at the Congregation B'nai  Tikvah.
The bride, 26, a certified public accountant, is a financial analyst for Citibank in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her mother teaches English at Intermediate School 51 in Graniteville, S.I.
The bride's stepfather teaches American history at I.S. 72 in New Springville, S.I.


Chimpanzees Find A Sanctuary in Kenya
A 200-acre sanctuary where orphaned, abused or abandoned chimpanzees can be rehabilitated and taught to fend for themselves has been opened in Kenya, a country to which chimpanzees are not indigenous.
The sanctuary was founded with three chimpanzees a year ago by the Jane Goodall Institute, Kenya Wildlife Services and Lonrho East Africa, which owns seven hotels in Kenya.
Others have been added since then, bringing the current population to 15.


Seeking Racial Harmony in the Musical Kind
IF THE directors of the Passage Theater had dreamed up a show, it could have  been "Avenue X." As if custom-made for the company in setting, size and theme, the musical should establish a recurring residency here.
"Keep coming back," I'd say, "till you get it right."
Actually, at this stage, "Avenue X" is more than halfway right.
What's right  about it is inspiring and thrilling.


What to Do With All That Open Land?
AS the state prepares to pull the last patients out of the huge Fairfield Hills Hospital complex, opened in 1933 in Newtown, a variety of groups are watching anxiously to see what kind of new uses are proposed.
With ready access to Routes 25, 34 and Interstate 84, as well as by virtue of its being the largest undeveloped block of land in Fairfield County, Fairfield Hills is expected to attract a lot of interest when it becomes available.


Off Broadway
To the Editor: Your article "What's Doing in New York City" (Sept. 10) provided the public with much valuable information about current and forthcoming shows on Broadway.
But please remember Off Broadway, which has become America's  foremost home for nonmusical plays and playwrights.
Comedies abound Off Broadway: A. R. Gurney's romantic comedy "Sylvia" at the  Houseman Theater and Steve Martin's well-received "Picasso at the Lapin Agile" at the Promenade Theater are two examples.


Monica J. Yates, Brian S. Shapiro
Monica Jane Yates, a daughter of Sheila Yates of Somers, N.Y., and the late Richard Yates, was married yesterday to Dr.
Brian Scott Shapiro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Shapiro of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Judge Fred L. Shapiro of Westchester County Criminal Court in White Plains officiated at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Women's Club.
Mrs.
Shapiro is a nurse and until recently worked in the surgical intensive-care unit at Metropolitan Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from Columbia University.
Her father was a novelist whose books include "Revolutionary Road" (Atlantic-Little, Brown, 1961).
Her mother retired as a fifth-grade teacher at the Mahopac (N.Y.) Falls Elementary School.


Girl Who Killed 2 Gets 14-Year Term
A 13-year-old girl convicted of murder for smothering two young children in her care was sentenced on Friday to 14 years in state custody.
Victoria Dalton, who prosecutors said was fascinated with the macabre, wept when her punishment was announced in District Court here.


Jamie D. Mitchell, David C. Bowen
Jamie Denise Mitchell, a daughter of Jane P. Jackson-Mitchell of New York and the late Millard S. Mitchell, was married yesterday to David Courtney Bowen, a son of Dorothy C. Bowen of Harrisburg, Pa., and Cecil D. Bowen of Brooklyn.
The  Rev.
Gary P. Rogers, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Holy Trinity Chapel at New York University.
Mrs.
Mitchell-Bowen is a vice president at the New York branch of the Compagnie Financiere de CIC et de l'Union Europeenne, a commercial bank in Paris.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a director of volunteers for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
Her mother trains special education teachers at the New York City Board of Education in the Bronx.


Plants to Keep Away From Curious Creatures
Now that the focal point of gardening has moved indoors, a practical precaution is in order.
Parents of young children and people with animals in their homes need to remember that some common house plants are poisonous.
Especially susceptible are children under 5 and puppies and kittens.
The consequences for curious nibblers can be drastic -- possibly in severe illness or, in some cases, death.
Some potentially harmful plants may be received as as gifts; others just may be part of a house plant collection.
Sometimes just leaves or the fruit of a particular plant may be the hazard.


An Evergreen in Charcoal Gray
The chalk-stripe suit worn by men and women at the Ralph Lauren runway show in Bryant Park provided the week's strongest visual statement by an audience.
And it spoke volumes about the signature Lauren style of haberdashery.
Once the domain of London's Savile Row and the impenetrable uniform of Boston and Philadelphia bankers, the natty tailored suits with their shaped jackets, matching vests and cuffed trousers provided men with a dashing well-groomed image that wasn't weakened when the women borrowed it.
It takes on  a totally different look on women, but even with white shirts, silk ties, matching vests, pocket handkerchiefs and veiled soft bowler hats, the adaptations managed to look feminine without denting the armor of the men.


Mr. Clinton's Fateful Welfare Decision
President Clinton has virtually promised to accept a welfare bill that his own experts calculate will force more than a million children into poverty.
What a perverse twist on Mr.
Clinton's pledge, when he ran as a new kind of Democrat  in 1992, to "end welfare as we know it."
That formulation originally meant that Mr.
Clinton, like the Democrats of old, still believed government had an important obligation to help the disadvantaged.
But the formulation also meant he rejected the unconditional handouts that over 60 years created dependency among the poor and poisoned the political atmosphere for disgruntled taxpayers.


Economy Champs Get the Cold Shoulder
FOR years, the people who lobby against tougher fuel economy rules have argued that not many American buyers want the highest-mileage cars.
The 10 most  fuel-efficient models, they pointed out, account for less than 2 percent of sales.
But now, they say, that argument is outdated; in the '95 model year, it was less than 1 percent.
The decline was modest, to nine-tenths of a percent in the 1995 model year from 1.26 percent in 1994.
In actual numbers, the slippage was smaller, because  the number of cars sold rose last year to 8.2 million, from 6.1 million the year before.
But the lobbyists have a point; at the extreme high end of the fuel economy scale, as in the car market as a whole, gas mileage is clearly not as important as it used to be.


Coat Check
The silhouette of the season - short, narrow, mod - makes its outdoor debut.


In Trenton, a Ditch That Was a Canal Fights for a Comeback
For most of its meandering route across central New Jersey, the Delaware and  Raritan Canal is quiet and scenic, an extended waterfront park with a broad pathway where mules once pulled canal boats.
Here in Trenton, it recalls this city's industrial prime of nearly a century ago, when barges carried coal and lumber through a thriving business district.
But for generations, the canal's Trenton section has been anything but thriving: a muddy, garbage-strewn ditch through a neighborhood of dilapidated houses and abandoned warehouses, of vacant lots roamed by drug dealers and vagrants who barely notice the nearby Battle Monument commemorating George Washington's first victory in the Revolutionary War.


Canucks' Bure Out for Season
The Vancouver Canucks star Pavel Bure has a torn ligament in his right knee and will be lost for the rest of the season.
"Obviously devastating news to the organization," Canucks Coach Rick Ley said today.
"It's the type of injury you'd like to see no athlete sustain."


ITALY
The torrential ran that angered hoteliers and vacationers last August brought an unusually copious crop of wild mushrooms.
All over Italy, mushroom hunters are taking revenge, some motivated by profit, others by palate.
Armed with baskets and small sharp knives, they reach the woods before dawn and risk laceration by thorns, or even a fall over a precipice (recently a television program reenacted the dramatic rescue of a mushroom hunter who took a wrong step).
Those of us who prefer to let others burrow in damp and rotting leaves admire our mushrooms at city markets, which eloquently signal the changing season.
We are now seeing the last figs, the very first persimmons, chestnuts and, of course, enormous quantities of funghi di bosco from northern Lazio and the Castelli Romani. (In the hierarchy of funguses, cultivated mushrooms are not even called funghi, but rather champignons, and wild field mushrooms, prataioli, are less prized than those from the woods, bosco).


THIS WEEK: For Movers And Shapers
It's a fine time to plant or transplant deciduous trees and shrubs, if their  leaves have fallen.
Give them a generous hole, but don't plant too deeply, which can smother roots near the surface.
When planted, the tree or shrub should be at the same level as it was in the nursery container or in its previous location.
Cut back perennials after the frost to about six inches from the ground; this will make it easier to mulch.
As soon as chrysanthemums have finished blooming, prune these back, too.
ANNE RAVER


Mystery Ends But Its Traces Still Remain
For more than a decade, the loft building at 135 West Third Street was a neighborhood mystery.
With its ground floor boarded up, the seven-story structure just off the Avenue of the Americas appeared uninhabited from the street.
The mystery was solved, in part, three years ago when police officers responding to complaints of foul odors emanating from the building discovered the body of the owner, Isabel Wright, who had died of natural causes.
Ms.
Wright, who was in her 70's, had been dead for several days, but there was another reason for the odors -- cats, hundreds of them, living and dead, interspersed amid mountains of debris piled so high that only one of the building's floors was passable.


Default Consequences Would Last Forever
To the Editor:
The Republican leadership in Congress does not understand the consequences of a default by the Government in meeting its contractual obligations to security holders.
Even if the default lasts for only a few days, the consequences would last forever.


Momentum for Democrats? Well, Something Like That
So who won?
New Jersey's Democrats say they did, because they picked up three seats in the Assembly, won some scorching local races and ran strongly in others that they should have lost by a wide margin.
The Republicans say that if the Democrats are happy winning 30 seats out of 80 in the Assembly, why, they would  be glad to see many such victories for them.


THE TRIUMPH OF THE PRIME-TIME NOVEL
Favorably comparing "critically acclaimed" TV dramas to the literature of Fitzgerald, Dickens and Dreiser is like finding a potato chip that looks like the Baby Jesus and confusing it with the real thing.
McGrath doesn't need to rationalize his TV viewing.
It's a common enough failing.


The Best Illustrated Books Of the Year
The illustrations on these pages have been taken from the Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1995.
The Book Review has annually asked a panel of three judges to make a selection from among the several thousand children's books published each year.
The judges this year were Judy Zuckerman, the Bronx children's specialist in the New York Public Library;  Paul O. Zelinsky, an artist whose most recent book is "Swamp Angel"; and Michael Cart, a critic and the author of "What's So Funny? Wit and Humor in American Children's Literature." As a matter of note, David Catrow was a winner once before and Gennady Spirin twice before.
WHY THE SUN &amp; MOON LIVE IN THE SKY.
Written and illustrated by Niki Daly. (Lothrop. Lee &amp; Shepard Books, $15).
WHEN THE WHIPPOORWILL CALLS.
By Candice F. Ransom.
Illustrated by Kimberly Bulcken Root. (Tambourine Books, $16.)


A MODEL FAMILY
I can't tell you their real names.
But I assure you, they exist, and when I first heard of the model family -- mommy, daddy and toddler son -- I was annoyed.
No family should be that attractive.
Their brochure, showing the model  family romping at the beach, gets them lucrative jobs.
"It's the most successful piece I've sent out in years," their agent told me.
"We're basically doing the casting for art directors in advance. It's a whole family, and it works."
I wasn't looking forward to meeting them.
But on a hot day in August, with the intention of unraveling the model family and laying their mythos bare, I drove up to Wilton, Conn.
They were in a Thanksgiving shoot for Ladies' Home Journal.
Open season.


Community Improvement
If your community could have one civic improvement -- a new library, a better school, a road, anything -- what would you want it to be?
A Cleaner City


Correction
A picture caption in Long Island copies on Oct. 29, with an article about a proposed historic district in Riverhead, misstated the surname of the executive  director of the East End Arts Council.
She is Patricia Berman, not Snow.


Keenan Makes His Return An Unsentimental Journey
Mike Keenan made his symbolic return to New York tonight. Sort of.
It was Long Island, not Manhattan.
And Keenan said before the game that he did not think it was all that significant, his coming here to face the Islanders so early in the season.


UTAH, BY SKI AND SNOWBOARD
Aficionados say the snowflakes that find their way into Little Cottonwood Canyon, in the Wasatch mountains of Utah, are chemically unique.
It may even be  true.
Winter storms off the Pacific Ocean dump most of their moisture on the High Sierras in California and are then further desiccated by their passage over the Great Basin deserts and by salt-laden evaporation from the Great Salt Lake.
By the time these storms strike the jagged wall of the Wasatch, they are carrying vast quantities of weirdly light snow.
But molecular bravado seems excessive in this case.
For skiers, ultralight snow is the stuff of dreams, and  the average annual snowfall in Little Cottonwood Canyon, just southeast of Salt  Lake City, is some 500 inches -- more than 40 feet.
The canyon's two ski areas,  Alta and Snowbird, are glorious enough without a microscope.
One of the oldest ski resorts in the West, Alta occupies the slopes at the head of the canyon.
Its first chairlift, built in 1938, was constructed from pieces of an old aerial mining tram. (Alta was a silver-mining mecca before it was a ski mecca. Between booms, it was a ghost town.) The Denver &amp; Rio Grande Railroad, which built a line up the canyon during mining days, helped build the  Alta Lodge in 1939.
Although a few more amenities -- a scatter of small lodges,  half a dozen more chairlifts -- have been added since, Alta has maintained a strikingly modest operation.
There are no high-speed trams or state-of-the-art quadruple lifts -- the chairlifts don't even have safety bars -- and, for a world-renowned ski mountain, lift tickets are extraordinarily cheap ($25 a day).
A crush of skiers is avoided by the simple expedient of closing the parking lot  -- and, in the case of overnighters, by the limited accommodation.
Bill Levitt,  the longtime mayor of Alta (population 396) and owner of the Alta Lodge, catches the contrarian, minimalist spirit of his snow-blessed hamlet nicely when he sniffs about the competition being "real-estate operations masquerading as ski areas."


Carole Pesner, Martin Cherkasky
Carole Manishin Pesner, the owner of Kraushaar Galleries Inc. in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Martin Cherkasky, a former hospital executive.
Rabbi  Dennis Math is to perform the ceremony at the couple's apartment in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of the late Edith and Eli Manishin.
The bridegroom, a graduate of Temple University and its medical school, retired as president of the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He is the son of the late Sarah and Samuel Cherkasky.
The bride was a widow.
The bridegroom was a widower.


Doc Watson, Down-Home Virtuoso
DOC WATSON IS ONLY A couple of songs into his first set at the Bottom Line, and already the dark, drafty room is starting to shrink, starting to feel like a few friendly chairs pulled up to a potbellied stove in somebody's living room.
"I'm just as informal as I would be if I was at my house," the blind, flat-pick guitarist tells the sellout crowd.
"If I had to be formal, I'd go home."


Soul Music on the Radio: Competition Is Welcome
To the Editor:
I wish a rock-'n'-roll success to WRKS (KISS-FM) and WBLS ("It's a Soul War Salvo . . . With Frankie Crocker!" Nov. 5).
Compared to Miami or San Francisco,  New York listeners have starved for years for good soul music, and we can certainly use the competition.


On Parade To the Beat Of History
With 500,000 cheering, flag-waving spectators lining the way and thundering drums and nostalgic Glenn Miller swing on the autumn air, tens of thousands of proud American warriors marched out of the past and up Fifth Avenue yesterday in New York's largest Veterans Day Parade since the end of World War II.
Planes roared overhead, tanks rumbled by, cannons boomed salutes and church bells pealed across the city and the nation as huge Norman Rockwell crowds turned out and more than 33,000 marchers -- led by Medal of Honor winners and veterans of many conflicts -- joined the Nation's Parade, the official culmination of four years of celebrations marking the Second World War's 50th anniversary.


Tienne E. Lee, Darryl D. Chiang
Tienne Elissa Lee, the daughter of Tatwina C. Lee and Dr.
Richard H. Lee Jr.  of Berkeley, Calif., was married yesterday to Darryl D. Chiang, the son of Emily Chiang and Prof.
Alpha C. Chiang of White Plains.
The Rev.
Sally Norris performed the nondenominational ceremony at Riverside Church in New York.
The couple, both 26, graduated from Princeton University.


After Assassination, Israel Is a Fragile Market
AS a shaken Israel recovers from the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak  Rabin, the Israeli financial markets are girding for two big tests in coming weeks.
Ever important will be the participation of American and other foreign investors, who had been moving into Israel in recent months, but who may now remain on the sidelines for the short term.


Dancing, Mah-Jongg? Church Frowns, and Evicts Senior Center
Blame it on the bossa nova -- and mah-jongg: a city-financed senior center in Elmhurst will be shut next month because its landlord, a church, objects to the  center's recreational activities.
Officially, the elders of the Christian Testimony Church, at 87-11 Whitney Avenue, say they will not renew the lease of the Elmhurst Jackson Heights Senior Center when it expires at the end of December because they need the space to accommodate their growing congregation, which is primarily Chinese.
But privately, they acknowledge that dancing and gambling, which are frowned upon by the church, were among the deciding factors behind their decision.


A Full-Scale Mall At Indianapolis Airport
The Indianapolis Airport Authority has signed an agreement to be managed for  the next 10 years by a private British company, BAA.
The most visible evidence of change to travelers is expected to be more name-brand stores and concessions  at the airport.
BAA, which owns seven airports in Britain, including Heathrow outside London, and was known as the British Airports Authority until it was privatized in 1987, manages the Airmall at Pittsburgh International Airport, where there are dozens  of stores and restaurants like those found in malls around the country -- the Body Shop, the Nature Company, T.G.I.
Friday's and Waterstone's Booksellers.
BAA guarantees that prices at the Airmall will be no higher than in other malls.
The Indianapolis Airport Authority said the agreement should save $105 million over the 10 years.
BAA said it would lower by a third the average cost to the airlines for each passenger boarded, which may encourage airlines to schedule more flights to Indianapolis.


Sports of The Times;Say Goodbye To 'Bullets' As Nickname
YES, you can change a team's name -- if the cause is right.
Abe Pollin decided months ago that it was wrong to call his Washington basketball team the Bullets.
He pushed up the announcement the other day after flying back from the funeral of a friend, a hero, who had been killed by bullets.


Mothering Heights
THE CAROUSEL By Liz Rosenberg.
Illustrated by Jim LaMarche.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $16. (Ages 5 to 9)


The End of a Banquet Hall: Harvest Manor as Rite Aid
Twelve years ago, the Bethany Baptist Church turned an abandoned supermarket  on St.
John's Place into a 500-seat banquet hall and cafeteria for Crown Heights.
"It was called Harvest Manor," recalled the church's minister, the Rev.
William Augustus Jones, "but I gave it a secondary name: the Gathering Place."
And it lived up to that name.
In a neighborhood with few venues to serve its  civic groups, schools and churches -- some of which have congregations in the thousands -- Harvest Manor became the spot for awards dinners, graduation parties, business luncheons and political functions.
"We had showers, weddings,  christenings and wakes," said Eva Butler, one of its managers.
"Everything from  birth to death."


Hollywood Finds a Presidential Role Model
FORGET THE RUMORS: "The American President," Rob Reiner's new film about the  pratfalls of an Oval Office courtship, is a comedy, a romantic comedy -- a comedy with a political tinge, to be sure, but just a comedy.
If it bears passing resemblance to the Clinton White House, it is only passing.
"The American President," which opens on Friday, is as much about the current American President as "Gone With the Wind" was about meteorology.
We have Hollywood's word on it.


King of the Pakistani Cabbies
LIKE many New York City cabbies, Farooq Ahmed Bhatti got his hack license in  a moment of desperation.
Dismissed from his job as a crane operator, Mr.
Bhatti  figured he'd drive a few shifts while looking for another position in his field.
That was five years ago.


High Cost, Inconvenience Mar Plan for Parking Lot
To the Editor:
Does Sheepshead Bay need more parking?
Of course.
But the plan to turn a triangle of land north of the Belt Parkway into a parking lot makes no sense ("Need for Parking Consumes a Bit of Robert Moses's Plan," Oct. 22).


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18


Bantam of the Opera
BROADWAY CHICKEN By Jean-Luc Fromental.
Illustrated by Miles Hyman.
Translated by Suzi Baker.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Laurie Chlebek, Michael Gordon
Laurie Beth Chlebek, the daughter of Donna J. Futoransky of Fall River, Mass., and Robert W. Chlebek of Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to Michael  Russell Gordon, the son of Seena and William Gordon of Lido Beach, L.I.
Judge Peter Rosedale, who is retired from the Providence (R.I.) Municipal Court, officiated at the Glen Manor House in Portsmouth, R.I.
The couple, both 25, graduated from Tulane University.


Officers' Training Moves to the Streets;New Methods Add Realism and Relevance to the Police Academy
Twenty police recruits snapped to attention as James O'Keefe Jr., the director of training, popped into their Police Academy class by surprise.
Their  shoes spit-shined, their gray and blue academy uniforms starch-pressed, the recruits nodded excitedly as Mr.
O'Keefe described a bold new training experiment.
For the first time in the history of the New York City Police Department, he  told them, police students will be put on street patrol next month -- guns in their holsters -- to learn from experienced officers months before graduation.


Professor Pays Fine for False Travel Claims
A physics professor who resigned from Cornell University last August after an investigation into his use of Government research money has paid a $20,000 penalty for submitting false travel reimbursement claims for four trips.
The former professor, Stuart Shapiro, last month paid the minimum $5,000 civil penalty for each trip, according to records obtained under the Freedom of  Information Act.
Mr.
Shapiro's name was deleted from the records because of Federal privacy laws, but several lawyers familiar with the inquiry but who requested anonymity said the records applied to him.


. . .And So Does Shevardnadze
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, who made his name in the Soviet Union as an architect of the transition out of the cold war, has other things on his mind today.
His campaign to be President of the violence-torn Caucasus nation of Georgia under its new Constitution promised moderation, patriotism, a fight against crime, and, above all, stability.
As expected, preliminary returns from voting last Sunday showed the Georgian  leader winning handily in a field in which the biggest challenger waxed nostalgic for Soviet days.


Sunday: November 12, 1995; GAMES;Puzzlement
Determining the best puzzle solver in the world is no easy thing.
The most popular variety of puzzle, the crossword, cannot be used because it is limited by language and culture.
And so at the Fourth World Puzzle Championship, which was just held in Romania, the focus was on language- and culture-neutral challenges, like numerical problems and logical brainteasers, which were supposed to level the playing field.
Even the fairest-looking challenges, though, sometimes held hidden biases.
A puzzle that assumed knowledge of soccer was a struggle for the Americans.
And a  problem involving a golf tee evoked only stares from the Russians.


Liberties;The Letterman Curse
I never wanted to be a nattering nabob, dispensing advice to the powerful.
But then I saw someone who really needed help.
His numbers were down.
His handlers had deserted him.
He was off-message.
He was struggling to reinvent himself.
He had rambled on the phone to a newspaper pundit about his frustrations.


Jennifer Engelke, Scott E. D. Skyrm
Jennifer P. Engelke, a daughter of Ruth Smiley Engelke of Doylestown, Pa., and George L. Engelke Jr., of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Scott  E. D. Skyrm, the son of James M. Skyrm of Allendale, N.J., and the late Arlene T. Skyrm.
The Rev.
John W. Havrilla performed the ceremony at the Good Shepherd  Lutheran Church in Pearl River, N.Y.
Mrs.
Skyrm, 29, is an account executive at Liz Claiborne, the apparel and accessories manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Astoria  Federal Savings and Loan Association and of its holding company, the Astoria Financial Corporation, both in Lake Success, L.I.
The bride's mother is the executive assistant at the Pearl S. Buck Foundation, the international child assistance and adoption agency, in Perkasie, Pa.


For Newark Mayor, the Only Relief Is Comic
When Federal agents raided the City Hall offices of a top aide to Mayor Sharpe James of Newark last week, the Mayor emerged briefly from a staff meeting to hand over the keys, mentioning the search to his aides only in passing before resuming his discussion.
"If he hadn't said anything, we would not have known they were there," said an aide, speaking on the condition of anonymity.


U.S. Drops Case of Spying By Computer
Federal prosecutors have dropped an espionage charge against a computer hacker, saying the military document found in his possession was obsolete.
The charge was dropped on Thursday in exchange for a guilty plea to unrelated offenses involving unauthorized intrusions into the files of the Pacific Bell Telephone Company.


Now Let Israel Build a Consensus for Peace
To the Editor:
Far from being a recipe for decreasing violence, "Three Jobs for Israel" (letter, Nov. 7) is a prescription for the further radicalization of Israeli society.


Cuts in Aid Are a Worry for Legal Services
THERE were more than a few roadblocks in the way when Lila Brown, a determined black woman, first purchased her dream house more than two decades ago.
But being a fighter, as she describes herself, she prevailed -- as she did  again recently when she almost lost that dream.
Beset by mounting property tax bills, a lawsuit and possible foreclosure proceedings on the property, Mrs.
Brown turned to Westchester/Putnam Legal Services.
"One of my proudest accomplishments was owning a home, and I stood to lose it" recalled Mrs.
Brown, 76, who explained that it was difficult for a woman to  purchase a home in the 1970's -- and even more difficult for a black woman.
When she first came to Legal Services in the early 1990', elderly and with few resources, she feared that the life savings she had invested in the house would  be lost.
Gary W. Bieber, the lawyer who handled Mrs.
Brown's case, described his client recently as "spunky, a woman who believes in getting her due."


Your Days Are Numbered
FUN WITH NUMBERS By Massin.
Translated by Carol Volk.
Illustrated by Les Chats Peles.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Creative Editions/ Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $17. (All ages)


Future View: Reorganized Industry, Change in Sales
BRACE for a complete reorganization of the investment management business in  the United States, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company says.
A host of pension funds, mutual funds and institutions now manage $6 trillion, but rising costs and global competition will reduce the field to a handful of dominant companies and  many small specialty firms, Goldman predicts in a recent report, "The Coming Evolution of the Investment Management Industry: Opportunities and Strategies."
In the mutual fund industry, Goldman expects several big changes in how funds are distributed to investors.
For now, there are simply too many funds vying for too few assets, meaning that brokers, financial advisers and others who distribute funds have considerable leverage over fund companies and can demand high fees for their services for the foreseeable future.


Stephanie Linden And Judd Landon
Stephanie Maureen Linden, a story analyst in Los Angeles, and Judd Ashley Landon, an agent trainee at the William Morris Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif.,  were married last evening at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Marina del Rey, Calif.
Rabbi Eli Hersher officiated.
Mrs.
Landon, 27, graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Michele Linden-Charnofsky of Manhattan Beach,  Calif., and Jeffrey Linden of Encino, Calif.
The bride's father is of counsel to Ginsberg, Stephan, Oringher &amp; Richman, a law firm in Century City, Calif.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist in Los Angeles.


Now Let Isreal Build a Consensus for Peace;What Arafat Can Do
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman (column, Nov. 8) invites the silent Jewish majority here and in Israel to stand up for Yitzhak Rabin's vision of peace and speak out vigorously in favor of it.
Mr.
Friedman omits one important partner in this complicated issue: the Palestinians.


Commercial Property: By Douglas Durst;A Savvy Developer Who Marches to His Own Beat
BACK in the summer of 1987, the Durst Organization began building 114 West 47th Street.
It was a time when developers were putting up huge office towers all over the West Side, certain that the appetite for high-priced space would never be slaked.
Not Seymour B. Durst.
He did not build until United States Trust signed on for more than half the building.
And if U.S.
Trust were to back out, he said at  the time, "we won't proceed further than the excavation." U.S.
Trust didn't, the building went up on schedule and, unlike other towers of the time, it remained fiscally sound.


Wildcats Shouldn't Be Bitter
To the Sports Editor:
William N. Wallace expresses regret that Northwestern's lone defeat will relegate it to a game in the Citrus Bowl against the Southeastern Conference's second-place team, "either Arkansas or Florida" ("Northwestern's One Slip Taints a Rose Bowl Run," The Times, Nov. 6).
The writer has neglected to notice the Citrus Bowl's history of selecting the second highest ranked S.E.C. team, regardless of whether that team participated in the conference championship game.


A Met Legend Guides Teachers
WHEN Roberta Peters and Carnegie Hall collaborate in a vocal workshop next Saturday, nearly 100 teachers, including some from the county, will benefit.
The daylong workshop, a first for Carnegie Hall and Miss Peters, will address the ways music teachers and others can incorporate vocal techniques into the general curriculum.
The event, "The Roberta Peters Workshop: The Vocal Spectrum," will take place from 10 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. in Weill recital Hall in Manhattan and costs $35 for a three-session program that includes a box lunch.
Phyllis Susan, director of education for Carnegie Hall, said the aim was to guide teachers in a better use  of singing and the spoken voice.


To Think That It Happened on Klickitat Street
MY OWN TWO FEET A Memoir.
By Beverly Cleary.
Illustrated. 261 pp.
New York: Morrow Junior Books. $15. (Ages 10 and up)


As the U.S. Bickers, the World Catches a Chill
JUST an hour or so after Yitzhak Rabin was buried on Monday, Israel's Finance Minister, Abraham Shohat, buttonholed Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin with an urgent question: How would the standoff between Congress and the White House over the budget affect the timing of $3 billion in aid for Israel?
And was Mr.
Rubin aware of the implications for Israel -- on its own budget and debt payments -- if the aid were delayed?
An unseemly topic on a day of national mourning?
Certainly.
But it underscores the fact that when America argues over a budget, or talks openly about the possibility of default, the effects are felt not only in Peoria but in Pakistan and Palau.
And frequently there is a multiplier effect: Whatever happens in Washington is amplified in foreign capitals, often in ways no one in  Washington can anticipate.


Cornell Tied for Lead After Beating Columbia
Cornell 35, Columbia 14


On Air Force One, Cabin Fever
From the start, it was a flight different from all other flights: Three Presidents, three secretaries of state and all the top leaders of Congress airborne for nearly a solid day, bound to and from the state funeral of Yitzhak  Rabin in Israel.
But by week's end, President Clinton's 20-plus hours aboard Air Force One with George Bush, Jimmy Carter, Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich had turned into a typical Washington occasion: a petty, partisan fight.


Unlucky Jack
A GOAT'S SONG By Dermot Healy. 408 pp. New York: Viking. $24.95.
DERMOT HEALY'S second novel, "A Goat's Song," has been widely appreciated in Ireland and Britain for (among other reasons) braiding together four divergent aspects of Irish society: Dublin, the cities of the Protestant North, agrarian counties on either side of the border, and the Gaeltacht, the Irish-speaking areas on the westernmost edges of the republic.
The novel also draws upon Roman  Catholic, Presbyterian and Church of Ireland theology, as well as pre-Christian  legend, to illuminate the last half-century of Irish history.


Ailing Star Helps Yale Deal Tigers First Loss
Princeton commenced a $750 million fund-raising campaign here on Friday with  an announcement of a gift of $100 million.
But the wheel of fortune swung another way today when the football team lost an undefeated season to Yale, which is never just an opponent but Old Nassau's foremost rival.
On a slippery field soaked by intermittent rain, the Tigers' advantage in team speed was discounted, according to Princeton Coach Steve Tosches.
But there was no discounting Chris Heatherington, Yale's 235-pound quarterback who ignored the slop and made one big play after another to ignite the upset.


Berkeley Makes Peace With Its Veterans
A quarter-century ago, this city was a hotbed of opposition to the Vietnam War, so much so that City Council members stopped reciting the Pledge of Allegiance at their meetings.
On Veterans Day 1995, though, the city was ready for reconciliation, honoring 22 local men lost in the conflict.
"It is historic, there's just no question about it," Mayor Shirley Dean said.


Grandmother Held in Deaths of 3 Boys
Family members kept their suspicions to themselves when Elizabeth Shanklin's  two sons died three months apart in 1974.
When her grandson died under similar circumstances in May, the family spoke up, and the woman has been charged with suffocating all three boys.
Ms.
Shanklin, 48, was arrested on Thursday night after a grand jury handed up an indictment.


THE TRIUMPH OF THE PRIME-TIME NOVEL
Many thanks for Charles McGrath's paean to television drama, "The Triumph of  the Prime-Time Novel" (Oct. 22).
If we believe that Homer taught the mores of his time, then television is our comparable contemporary tutor.
Even if it's not basking in a "golden age," television surely merits its prime due, as given in the paper of record.
SUSAN WHEELER New York


Word for Word/Championship Scrabble;Linguistically Glaived, the Victor Pejorated Matters for His Foe
SIXTY-FOUR people from 31 countries competed in the World Scrabble Championship in London last weekend, seeking prestige, a gold-plated Scrabble set, and the winner's check for $11,000.
The final round of five boards, between cool-headed David Boys of Montreal, and the more emotive Joel Sherman of the Bronx, was a classic of championship play: high-scoring, full of arcane vocabulary words, and dramatic to the end.
Mr.
Boys won, three games to two.
Here are highlights from the final board, shown at right.


Psst! The Rumor Backfired. Pass It On.
DURING the Election Day post-mortems, Leonard Marshall figured out what he had done wrong.
He should have faxed both sides of his infamous "Vehicle Confiscation Law" flier.
That way, after the handbill lit a grass-roots wildfire that roared through New Jersey right up to the election, voters would have known where it came from.
Diligently distributed along labyrinthine networks of fax machines, photocopied by the tens of thousands, these handbills flooded New Jersey with an alarming warning about the arrival of a "Nazi-style police state" in the guise of the new automobile-emissions inspection law signed in June by Governor Whitman.
The law "is aimed at taking your car off the road," and "producing one-car families" the fliers bellowed.
Highways will be equipped with "automated sensing devices" to sniff out miscreants.


Wendy A. Lister, Jason E. Root
Wendy Alexandra Lister, the daughter of Marion and Walter Lister of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jason Elliot Root, a son of Eleanor J. Root of Ridgebury, Conn., and Harvey C. Root of Southbury, Conn.
The Rev.
William J. Hirschfeld, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the  White Church in Grafton, Vt.
The couple, both 28, graduated from Bates College.


Look Who Wants to Be the Shareholders' Friend
AND now, meet corporate America's newest champion of shareholders' rights: Bennett S. LeBow, the sometime corporate raider who has been vilified by angry stockholders, accused of plundering their companies' assets and sued when his businesses went into bankruptcy.
Mr.
LeBow's crusade is even more incongruous because his target is Charles M. Harper, chairman and chief executive of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
Mr.
Harper has been a missionary of shareholder value, transforming every dollar's worth of stock in Conagra Inc., which he took over in 1974, into the equivalent of $200, excluding dividends, by the time he left in 1992.


Melinda Tweeddale and Goran Puljic
Melinda Gabriella Tweeddale, the daughter of Patricia and Russell Tweeddale of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Goran Vid Puljic, the son of Drs.
Ankica and Smiljan Puljic of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
James Hickey officiated at St.
Patrick Roman Catholic Church in Farmington, Conn.
Mrs.
Puljic, 29, is the director of special projects for women's design at Polo Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is a managing director of investments at Connecticut Innovations Inc., a venture-capital concern established by the State of Connecticut, in Rocky Hill.


Trouble at the Guggenheim Foundation
For 70 years the Guggenheim Foundation has been a renowned Midas of the creative world, handing out grants to 13,500 artists, scientists and scholars, from Aaron Copland to Linus Pauling to James Baldwin, as well as 40 Nobel laureates.
These days, however, the Guggenheim Foundation has fallen on, if not  yet hard times (its endowment is $150 million), then surely very pinched times.
For years the foundation spent too generously, way exceeding the legal requirement that a foundation spend at least 5 percent of its assets annually.
At the same time it invested too conservatively, putting all its assets in the hands of one bank money manager instead of trying for more diversification and a more aggressive investment strategy.
Some years the investment earnings did not  even cover the grants awarded, which the foundation kept adjusting for inflation and which it maintained at 300 a year.


QUICK BITE
Park your car outside this squat industrial building and you're promptly smacked upside the head by the smell of charring onions.
March down a short hallway, through a swinging door, and you're in another world: a vast, dim, clanking, squealing, milling, whirring space that might be a set from "Sweeney Todd."
This is the Rockland Bakery, about 10 minutes north of Bergen County -- a wholesale-retail factory-store where you can get baked goods as soon as they're  made, on the floor where they're made.
Just beyond the swinging door, a great oven spills onion bialys onto a conveyor belt.
Beyond that are tall wheeled racks of pumpernickel and rye and oat-bran loaves, monster braided hallahs, Italian breads the size of Louisville Sluggers . . . .
Above you, flights of Kaiser rolls glide by on conveyor belts, puffy little cirrus clouds raining cornmeal into your hair.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Sunday: November 12, 1995; Dog Day 2;Leaders of the Pack
Who knows whether every dog has its day, but these six New Yorkers at least have theirs, thanks to Andrea Mohin, a New York Times photographer with a dogcatcher's instinct for capturing whatever it is that turns mutts and aristocrats alike into someone's best friend.


Advance Tickets Sold For Washington Shows
Timed-entry tickets will be needed for admission to the Johannes Vermeer exhibition at the National Gallery of Art in Washington this fall and winter, and the museum's Winslow Homer show will require them on weekends and some holiday periods.
The Vermeer show is on view today to Feb. 11 in the West Building.
The Homer  exhibition, which opened Oct. 15, requires passes on Saturdays, Sundays, the Friday after Thanksgiving (Nov. 24) and the week between Christmas and New Year's (Dec. 26 to Dec. 31).
Homer's work will be shown in the East Building of  the gallery until Jan. 28.


Fighting Pollution Along the Mianus
The article concerning algae blooms and bacteria contamination in the Mianus  River ("Only the Ducks Really Like the Mianus River's Green Gunk," Oct. 29) has  helped focus attention on the pollution problems facing important fresh water supplies in our area.
The article, however, contains several points that require clarification.
The Town of Greenwich has appropriated $50,000, not the $100,000 originally requested, to conduct a study of water quality of the Mianus River and Mianus Pond and to propose measures to correct any identified pollution source.
The study is expected to shed light on the sources of nutrients that might be the cause of recent serious algae blooms, and should establish the significance of old septic systems as a potential source of bacterial contamination.


A Painter's Evolution, Visual and Political
HUGHIE LEE-SMITH was born in Florida and schooled in Ohio and Michigan, notably at the Cleveland Institute of Art and Wayne State University in Detroit.
He is nonetheless a New Jersey artist, and not just because of the many years he has lived in Cranbury.
Mr.
Lee-Smith is no hyperrealist, yet his paintings are set in country that is plainly inspired by the state, its shore and the more desolate sections of its cities.
Then there was his 1988 retrospective: notwithstanding a long record of exhibitions in Manhattan and the Midwest, it was accorded him by the State Museum in Trenton.
Now, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Gallery is offering an update consisting of 38  paintings and watercolors, more than half of which have been produced since the  retrospective.
But since the gallery's curator, Pamela Sherin, includes canvases that go back to the late 1940's, the show, though small, acts as another summary of the artist's career.


Halifax
To the Editor: On my way home to Florida from Halifax, Nova Scotia, on July 30, I picked up a copy of the Sunday Times in Newark Airport.
I was delighted to find that the Travel section had chosen Halifax as the "What's Doing" city that  week.
Like Katherine Ashenburg, we were favorably impressed with the people's friendliness, openness and civic pride.


Terry A. Knox, Charles P. Ramseur
Terry Ann Knox, a daughter of Mary V. Knox of Reading, Pa., and the late John W. Knox, and Charles Phillip Ramseur, the son of Patricia and Charles F. Ramseur of Brooklyn, were married yesterday in St.
Ann, Jamaica.
The Rev.
Raphael Mason, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at the Jamaica Jamaica, a resort.
The bride, 36, and the bridegroom, 33, work at the Meridian Bank in Reading,  she as a loan administrator and he as a manager of consumer loan programs.
She graduated from Davidson College and received a law degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Mr.
Ramseur is a graduate of Lehigh University.


Expert Panel on Catholic Church Law Backs Women as Deacons
An influential group of experts in Roman Catholic church law has concluded that ordaining women as deacons in the church would be in keeping with Catholic  theology and past practice.
The group, the Canon Law Society of America, gave a  cautious endorsement of such a step as "desirable" for the United States.
Catholic Church officials have periodically raised the question of ordaining  women as deacons in an effort to re-examine church teaching on women and ordained ministry without running athwart Pope John Paul's unequivocal opposition to female priests.


SHUTDOWN BY U.S. FAST APPROACHES IN BUDGET BATTLE
President Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress danced today toward  a looming Government shutdown and potential default in a weekend of mutual recriminations, proffered meetings and rejected conditions, failing even to agree to discuss their differences.
"I believe we can find a good-faith way to keep the Government open and make  good on its obligations," Mr.
Clinton said in his weekly radio address, announcing that he had asked his chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, to meet with Congressional leaders from both parties this afternoon.
"But I will not allow them to impose new, immediate cuts in Medicare, education and the environment as a condition of keeping the Government open."


A Modest Proposal For an Acronym
To the Editor
Regarding the nascent acronym of Esso for the area East of SoHo, it seems a  shame not to take advantage of a name as steeped in American lore as the Bowery.
A suggestion, therefore, for the blocks bounded by the Bowery on the east and Lafayette Street on the west: Bowery-On-West, or more simply: BowOW.


A Blue Gala For a Green Space
The Central Park Conservancy, Nov. 8.


Crater Lake Lodge
To the Editor: Visiting Crater Lake National Park in Oregon in 1994, we saw the reconstruction of the lodge and planned to revisit in 1995.
Just before leaving we read Susan G. Hauser's enthusiastic article, "Sailing in a Volcano's  Heart" (Aug. 6).
We must express dissatisfaction with the dining facilities at the lodge, which Ms.
Hauser lauded.
The reservation policy is antediluvian, requiring one to line up at 3 P.M. for dinner reservations.
This meant that one person of our party had to interrupt our daily activity to return to the lodge.
The ostensible reason given is that people do not honor reservations made earlier in the day or the evening before.


While Help From Government Shrinks, Neighbors Are Reclaiming City Parks
As dusk closed in on a chilly afternoon, a lone man pushed a broom across a handball court in the middle of deserted West Side Park.
Methodically, meticulously, he swept leaves off to the side, along with the litter and crack vial caps that, along with the graffiti on the court wall, provide the only color in this otherwise dreary park.
Then Howard Mosely laid down his broom, picked up a tennis racquet and began  to play.


Adele F. Winter, David A. Adkins
Adele Francis Winter, the daughter of Patricia Winter of New York and Michael Winter of Cincinnati, was married yesterday to David Andrew Adkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Adkins of Topsham, Me.
Paula Miksic, a Buddhist lay practitioner, officiated at the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Adkins, 31, is the principal cellist in the Bangor (Me.) Symphony Orchestra.
She graduated from the Juilliard School, the Manhattan School of Music and the University of Maine.
Her father is an independent marketing consultant in Cincinnati.
Her mother is a vice president of ICM Artists in New York.


Beauty Knows No Age in A Budapest Bath
TRAVELERS who want to Keep in Shape should skip Budapest.
Vegetarian entrees  seem to be illegal here.
Gyms are scarce.
Nobody runs, everybody smokes and, like Parisians, people on their way to work sometimes stop at a cafe for coffee  and a shot of brandy.
You might call the atmosphere Pre-Fitness -- Western values have not yet entirely caught on.
Or you might call it Beyond Fitness.
The citizens of Budapest know how to attain a jogger's high without jogging.
They take to their  baths.


Russell A. Divak, Jodi L. Edelson
Jodi Lynn Edelson and Russell Alan Divak, associates at New York law firms, were married last evening.
Rabbi Eric Milgrim officiated at the 200 Fifth Club in New York.
Mr. and Mrs.
Divak, both 28, received their law degrees from Boston University.
She works at Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed and he at Coudert Brothers.
The bride graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of Michigan.


Plants to Keep Away From Curious Creatures
Now that the focal point of gardening has moved indoors, a practical precaution is in order.
Parents of young children and people with animals in their homes need to remember that some common house plants are poisonous.
Especially susceptible are children under 5 and puppies and kittens.
The consequences for curious nibblers can be drastic -- possibly in severe illness or, in some cases, death.
Some potentially harmful plants may be received as as gifts; others just may be part of a house plant collection.
Sometimes just leaves or the fruit of a particular plant may be the hazard.


Nets Persevere and Beat The Eight Eligible Kings
The heart and character that Butch Beard had preached to the Nets during the  preseason seemed to be just talk after a 1-3 start that included an opening-night loss at expansion Toronto and an old-fashioned whipping at the hands of the Miami Heat Friday night.
But the competitiveness and intensity Beard had hoped would be constants this season finally revealed themselves tonight, when the Nets toughed out an 86-84 victory and handed the Sacramento Kings their first loss of the season.


TEGUCIGALPA. WHY NOT?By PATRICIA VOLK
Want to go to Tegucigalpa?" my husband says.
"Huh?"


As Leader Prepares to Leave, a Church Struggles to Keep ItsIndependence
After three decades of leadership by one of the nation's most imposing religious figures, the Greek Orthodox Church in the United States is suddenly wrestling with its future.
At the heart of the turmoil is the issue of who will replace the church's longtime leader, Archbishop Iakovos, and the conflicts surrounding his unexpected decision to retire.


MARKET TIMING
Monday


Kosher Curry and Kashruth Kebabs


You're a Big Boy Now
BUDDY LOVE NOW ON VIDEO By Ilene Cooper. 183 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $13.95. (Ages 10 and up) THE NEW NICK KRAMER, OR MY LIFE AS A BABY-SITTER By James Howe. 120 pp.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $13.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


High Danger: That's What Friends Are For
Three Wishes Patrick Swayze, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Joseph Mazzello, Seth Mumy Directed by Martha Coolidge PG 105 minutes


Rocket Attacks Kill 35 in Afghan Capital
The rebel Islamic Taliban militia attacked Kabul, the Afghan capital, with rockets today, killing 35 civilians and wounding 50, the Government said.
The Government-controlled Kabul radio said the rockets caused casualties in several parts of the city overnight and during the day.
It said eight actors, including an 11-year-old girl and her father, were killed when a rocket hit the  state-owned Qais film studio.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Oscar Hammerstein and the 100th anniversary of his opening of the Olympia Theater on Broadway at 44th Street misidentified Oscar Hammerstein 3d.
He is Oscar Hammerstein's great-great-grandson, not great-grandson.


Marjorie I. Jacobs, Gary A. Kahn
Marjorie Ilene Jacobs, the daughter of Elaine and Norman Jacobs of Lexington, Mass., was married last evening to Gary Andrew Kahn, the son of Sheila Kahn of Bayside, Queens, and the late Barrie Kahn.
Rabbi Bernard Eisenman officiated at  the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Kahn, who graduated from George Washington University, is the marketing  director for the data services division of the Teleport Communications Group in  Richmond, S.I.
Her father is the president of the transdermal systems division of Becton Dickinson, a manufacturer of medical devices and diagnostic systems in Franklin Lakes, N.J.


Guatemala Hopes Vote Ends War
Against a backdrop of continuing political violence and widespread frustration with electoral politics, Guatemalans go to the polls on Sunday to elect a new President who they hope will be able to negotiate an end to three decades of civil war and military dominance.
The election will be the third since formal constitutional rule was restored  a decade ago, after a particularly violent and repressive period of military rule.
Yet the military, with 44,000 soldiers, remains the power behind the throne, and there has been growing dissatisfaction with the inability of civilian Presidents to control the armed forces.


Bring On the Clam Pie
AT the announcement that the kitchen had run out of clam pie, Ed Hitzel's mustache drooped; his chubby face fell.
He had made a 45-minute trip from his home in Weymouth Township to occupy most of a banquette at Allen's Clam Bar, a roadside shed in New Gretna that he called the "best blue-jeans seafood restaurant in Atlantic City, except it isn't in Atlantic City." And now his all-time favorite seafood dish -- a variation on chicken potpie made with fresh clams -- was unavailable.


Hospital Bid With Doctors Seems Likely
The doctors at Coney Island Hospital, one of three city hospitals the Giuliani administration is offering to lease to private operators, have signed a contract to join the New York Hospital Care Network, virtually sealing their hospital's takeover by their new partner.
New York Hospital, the network's parent, had long been considered a leading prospective buyer of Coney Island Hospital, even before its new arrangement with the Coney Island Medical Group -- the corporation that employs all the hospital's 360 doctors and medical professionals.


New Jersey Transit's Detour On the Road to Cleaner Air
To the Editor:
I am not shocked at New Jersey Transit's attitude toward natural gas vehicles ("Fuel for the Fleet: Should It Be Diesel or Something Else?," Road and Rail, Oct. 22).
The agency's continuing efforts to ring our town in busways are legendary here.
But its stubborn allegiance to diesel fuel at the expense of air quality is extremely troubling.


Has-Beens vs. Will-Bes
To the Sports Editor:
Doc and Darryl?
George Steinbrenner is trying to rely on used-to-bes instead  of relying on the future.
The Yankees' future lies in the hands of Russ Davis, Andy Pettitte and Mariano Rivera.


Aristide Demands U.N. Back Hunt for Arms
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in an angry speech at the funeral of a member of Parliament, called on the United Nations peacekeepers in Haiti today to support Haitian police efforts to disarm illegal gun owners.
Mr.
Aristide said the police had been ordered to disarm people with illegal guns, and he implied that he might eject the United Nations troops if they did not cooperate.


Here's How They Break In a New Boxx at Sotheby's
NOW it can be told: Diana D. Brooks, the chief executive of Sotheby's since early last year, has become an auctioneer.
It's as if Michael Eisner, chief of the Walt Disney Company, learned how to produce "Pocahontas."
So far, Ms.
Brooks has tried her gavel only at parts of Sotheby's routine day sales and low-price "arcade" auctions -- not at the glitzy evening sales that define Sotheby's image.
"I'm certainly not there yet," she said in an interview.
But stay tuned.
JUDITH H. DOBRZYNSKI


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
The American dadaist Man Ray has been the subject of so many shows and books  that it would seem hard to come up with fresh examples of his provocative work.
But MAN RAY 1890-1976 (Ludion/ Abrams, $65) does just that, offering a trove of  little-known photographs, as well as reproductions of a few paintings and works  in other media.
The book, which includes more than 300 pictures, covers Ray's earliest days in New York, his astonishing career in Paris in the 1920's and 30's, and his years in Hollywood, where he lived in the 40's.
Bursting with photographs that are by turns sensuous, sardonic and surprising, "Man Ray 1890-1976" offers ample testimony to the artist's inventiveness and to the diversity of his output.
His links to Surrealism are apparent in shadowy "photograms," made without a lens, and in dreamy solarized nudes.
But Ray also operated a commercial studio, and examples of his fashion photos are included, as are portraits of leading artists and intellectuals, among them Marcel Duchamp, Gertrude Stein and Jean Cocteau.
The strength of this remarkable book is its thoroughness.
But only the barest information is offered for any of the pictures; also missing are essays that might have clarified how these images fit into Ray's overall output.
People familiar with his work are apt to discover fresh delights here; those who want to know more about his life and art may find the book enticing but frustrating.
CHARLES HAGEN


A Less Confusing, if Not Easier, Route to College
Choosing among New Jersey's public colleges used to be easy: most prospective students focused on geography instead of philosophy, picking the campus closest  to home.
But in recent years, the colleges have been granted more freedom to create programs and priorities, making the options far more complex.
This year, all nine state colleges -- along with Rutgers, the New Jersey Institute for Technology, the University of Medicine and Dentistry and 19 county colleges -- have collaborated to simplify the selection process.
For the first time, they have compiled thorough reports that describe their students, faculties, programs and missions.
With statistics that cover everything from class size to student satisfaction, they reveal each campus's strengths and weaknesses.


Are We Aliens?
WHEN IT COMES to describing extraterrestrials, science fiction writers have almost all the fun.
But astronomers last month took a first piece of the action  by discovering a planet orbiting a star in the constellation of Pegasus.
Another planet was discovered three years ago, but in orbit around a dead star.
The star 51 Pegasus is like our sun, and its possession of a planet confirms that there are probably billions of stars in the universe with solar systems like our own.
Is any likely to support life?


Arches Triumphant
The Romans may have invented them, but they are not confined to Rome.
Triumphal arches celebrating anything from the spoils of empire to the economic  benefits of Communism stand tall all over the world.
In what cities, then, will  you find the examples pictured here?
1.
Bucharest, Rumania 2.
Bombay, India 3.
Lisbon 4.
Brooklyn, N.Y. 5.
Rome 6.
Moscow 7.
London.


Ignoring the Outcry, Nigeria Executes a Protest Figure
To outsiders, it had seemed unthinkable that Nigeria's military Government would go through with executing Ken Saro-Wiwa after a flood of appeals from African and other countries to spare the well-known environmentalist.
But Mr.
Saro-Wiwa and eight associates in the struggle for minority rights were hanged Friday, on murder chargesthat their supporters insisted were a frame-up, even as Nigeria's Foreign Minister attended the annual summit meeting  of the Commonwealth Heads of Government, an association that links Britain with  51 of its former colonies.


Explain Yourself, George
To the Sports Editor:
If the principal owner of the Yankees offered some logical reason for losing  one of the best managers in Yankee history, the fans would understand.
Instead,  the owner uses trickery, deceit, doubletalk and fuzzy reasoning to give up on a  loyal employee and a manager who had ballplayer and fan support.


Violence Against Women Not Taken Seriously
To the Sports Editor:
Despite all official statements to the contrary, the University of Nebraska's decision to allow the reinstatement of Lawrence Phillips clearly shows that crimes of violence against women are not taken seriously by the university administration or by the staff of the football team.


Visible Man
THE ALL-AMERICAN SKIN GAME Or, The Decoy of Race.
The Long and the Short of It, 1990-1994.
By Stanley Crouch. 267 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books $24.


Japan's State Symbols: Now You See Them . . .
AS President Clinton prepares to travel to Japan this week for the summit meeting of Pacific rim leaders, a pop quiz:
1. Who is the head of state of Japan?


A Place Where Time Flies but the Runners Do Not
The New York City Marathon is the world's greatest marathon by every measure  except one.
It's slow.
The five-borough course, featuring five bridges and challenging hills, foils  attempts at personal bests, particularly because of week-long festivities that leave competitors spent before the race even begins.


Take This Bribe, Please, For Values to Be Received
UTAH already has the highest birth rate in the nation, but Republican leaders here have come up with a plan that may bring even more children into the Beehive State: They want to pay unwed, pregnant women who carry their babies to term and put them up for adoption.
The price for a baby in Utah will be about $3,000, paid to the mother by the  state and reimbursed by the adoptive parents.
The philosophy behind the idea is  simple, said state Senator Craig Taylor, a young conservative who devised the plan.


Mighty Joe Mishbooker
THE MIAMI GIANT By Arthur Yorinks.
Illustrated by Maurice Sendak.
Unpaged.
New York: Michael di Capua Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $15.95. (All ages)


Correction
An article on Oct. 29 about water quality of the Mianus River in Greenwich misspelled the surname of the chairman of the department of environmental studies at the University of New Haven.
He is Roman Zajak, not Rajak.


High Danger: That's What Friends Are For
Home for the Holidays Holly Hunter, Robert Downey Jr., Anne Bancroft Directed by Jodie Foster PG-13 105 minutes


Germany Lifting Ban on Hemp Growing, but Not on Marijuana
The German Government announced this week that it is lifting its ban on the cultivation of hemp, a fibrous plant used to make food, textiles, fuel, soap, lubricating oils, cosmetics, building materials and other products.


Turkish Lawyers Are at Center of a Battle Over Muslim Head Coveringsfor Women
The murder victim was a lawyer who headed a local bar association in northeastern Turkey.
He was also an observant Muslim who had threatened to expel two female Muslim lawyers for defying a ban against wearing head scarves in the  courtroom.
The killer was a Muslim fundamentalist who walked into the lawyer's office and shot him.
The killer told the police later that his motive was to set "an example for all those who would ban the turban."


A More Perfect Union
TO HOLD THIS GROUND A Desperate Battle at Gettysburg.
By Susan Provost Beller.
Illustrated. 95 pp.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $15. (Ages 10 and up)


Car Wars: Yup, Them's the Brakes
CARS may look pretty much the same year after year, but they are evolving rapidly, acquiring and discarding features faster than Darwin's fickle finches or Presidential candidates.
Yet when it comes to car evolution, fitness is determined as much by the driver as by the car: all the ingenuity in the world can't save a mechanical invention if the driver doesn't adapt with it.
Some recent evolutionary dead ends include four-wheel steering, talking cars, "heads-up" displays that flash on the windshield and those miserable, grinding automatic seat belts.
Long-forgotten ones include punch-button automatic transmissions and vase holders.
And then there are the ones that haven't finished evolving -- among them the new anti-lock brakes, which, mysteriously, are not reducing accidents, as they were designed to do.


Hofstra Is One Rout Closer to Playoff Spot
No place like home?
Not for Hofstra, which hasn't lost on the road since 1993.
That streak continued today when the undefeated Flying Dutchmen, ranked eighth in Division I-AA, routed the 22d-ranked Rhode Island, 37-3, before 5,837  at Meade Stadium.
Hofstra (10-0) moved a step closer to qualifying for the I-AA playoffs, with  a game remaining against seventh-ranked Marshall next week.
One loss may not do, as the Flying Dutchmen found out last year when they wound up at 8-1-1 but did not get invited to the playoffs.


Commonwealth Suspends Nigeria Over Executions
The Commonwealth suspended Nigeria today in response to the execution of nine human rights campaigners and threatened Nigeria's military Government with expulsion unless democracy is restored.
The action is one the 52-member Commonwealth, which includes Britain and its  former colonies, has never taken before.
The group is meeting here.


Disclosure Puts Florida Governor Under Fire for Election Ethics
Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida, who has taken pride in running clean campaigns for nearly four decades, now finds his ethics being questioned a year after what he said would be his final run for elective office.
After months of denials, the Democratic Governor's top political advisers admitted over the last several days that they authorized a blitz of scare telephone calls to elderly citizens just before last year's election.
The callers, who lied about their identities, told as many as 680,000 elderly Floridians that the Republican nominee, Jeb Bush, had cheated on his taxes and that Mr.
Bush's running mate wanted to do away with Social Security and Medicare.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
FIRE IN THE CANES By Glenville Lovell. Soho, $22.


Correction
A listing of business best sellers last Sunday with the Off the Shelf column  omitted a co-author of one book.
"It's Better to Laugh," at No. 10 on the hard-cover list, was written by Kathy Levine with Jane Scovell.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Dr. Ioannides, Dr. Rappaport
Dr.
Barbara Ioannides, a daughter of Nadia Ioannides and Dr.
Kyriakos Ioannides of Neptune Beach, Fla., was married yesterday in Amelia Island, Fla.,  to Dr.
Kenneth Dean Rappaport, a son of Jacqueline and Mel Rappaport of Dix Hills, L.I.
Judge Eleni Derke of Duval County Court in Jacksonville, Fla., performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 28, are residents at the Medical College of Virginia Hospitals in Richmond, she in internal medicine and he in ophthalmology.


Now Let Isreal Build a Consensus for Peace;In Religion's Name
To the Editor:
As a human being and a Jew, I am shocked by the killing of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin by a fellow Jew.
As a forensic psychiatrist and a Holocaust survivor, I am not surprised that Mr.
Rabin was killed by a religious Jew.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Giants Need Elias
To the Sports Editor:
Does anyone have the answer to the second disappearance of Keith Elias?
In preseason, he averaged almost six yards per carry for the Giants and was voted player of the game in two of four games.
He has since skipped the rest of the season, just like last year, while Herschel Walker averages fewer than 3 yards per carry.
Since Giants fans are wild over this local boy and his superhuman success in making the team, doesn't he deserve to run a few plays a game?


Golf Course and Houses Rising in Purchase
ONE- and two-acre lots at Purchase Estates carry price tags of $650,000 to $1.1 million, just for the land.
Add on the cost of building a house on the land and the figure climbs to $2.5 million to $3 million a house, making Purchase Estates one of the most expensive residential developments to be built in Westchester County in many years.
But, as the developers point out, it is the only residential community in the Northeast that will be adjacent to an 18-hole, 6,900-yard championship golf course designed by Jack Nicklaus.
Masahiko Kasuga, president of Hickory Pines Associates, the owner-developer of Purchase Estates, said plans call for 73 single-family estate houses to be built around the golf course on the 400-acre site in the Purchase section of the town of Harrison.


Euro-Slash;Deficit-Cutting's International
THE proclamations of Europe's political leaders these days could make House Republicans in Washington sound almost profligate.
"The priority of priorities is to cut deficits," said President Jacques Chirac of France, adding that the country would have to live with high unemployment and a leaner social welfare system while it got its finances under  control.


Rest in Pieces
SUSPENDED ANIMATION Six Essays on the Preservation of Bodily Parts.
By F. Gonzalez-Crussi.
Photographs by Rosamond Purcell. 151 pps.
San Diego: A Harvest Original/ Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.
Paper, $16.


A City Fights To Save The Browns
To the thousands of angry, depressed, bewildered and determined Browns fans in this city irate about the planned move of their team to Baltimore next season, the owner Art Modell is now Walter O'Malley's peer in franchise-removal  infamy.
The Brooklyn-born Modell, who acquired the Browns nearly 35 years ago, symbolizes for them the rapacious modern owner willing to turn his back on a devoted citizenry for a sweetheart deal in a team-hungry town.
They want the Browns back, but not Modell (or his coach, Bill Belichick).
Short of that, they want Modell to surrender the Browns' name and colors, to preserve them for another team of Browns to fill their broken hearts and the mausoleum that is the ancient Cleveland Municipal Stadium.


Julie Goodman and Michael Lev
Julie Myra Goodman, a daughter of Sandra and Dr.
H.
Maurice Goodman of Worcester, Mass., is to be married today to Dr.
Michael Howard Lev, a son of Marilyn and Bertram Lev of Brooklyn.
Rabbi James Simon is to officiate at the Lord Thompson Manor in Thompson, Conn.
Ms.
Goodman, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in behavioral neuroscience at Boston University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in psychobiology from Emory University.
Her father is the chairman of the physiology department of the University of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester.


Whitman Returns Home After Her Surgery
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman returned to her home in Oldwick, N.J., yesterday  morning, one day after undergoing surgery to remove a benign cyst on her right ovary.
"Everything is fine, the surgery was successful in all respects and she is resting comfortably and making telephones calls," the Governor's spokesman, Carl Golden, said yesterday.


26-Mile Drive Is a Marathon, Only Slower
THE New York City Marathon comes around again today.
It has become so much a  part of people's lives here that the other day it finally seemed time to take up the challenge.
But that is not an easy proposition for someone whose attitude toward physical exertion was largely shaped by Calvin Coolidge.
"I do not choose to run," Coolidge said back in 1927, and seven decades later his wisdom endures.


Now Let Isreal Build a Consensus for Peace;Surmising a Vision
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's "How About You?" (column, Nov. 8) confuses legitimate dissent in the Israeli body politic with incitement to murder, and calls on everyone to join him in honoring the late Yitzhak Rabin by fulfilling "his vision."


Yonkers Honoring Kern 50 Years After His Death
IT is vaguely possible that the river Jerome Kern envisioned when writing "Show Boat" was the Hudson, since the composer lived in Yonkers from 1918 to 1935.
In any case, the Yonkers Historical Society is sponsoring a free concert at the Will Library today at 2 P.M., to mark the 50th anniversary of Kern's death.
The performers include such notable Westchesterites as the violinist Herbert  Baumel, the saxophonist Vivian Randall and members of the Yonkers Male Glee Club.


All Things Reconsidered
ZOOM Written and illustrated by Istvan Banyai.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $13.99. (All ages) RE-ZOOM Written and illustrated by Istvan Banyai.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $13.99. (All ages)


Baruch Plans Hung Up as S.R.O. Holdouts Hang On
When Jim Davis looks at the Hotel Gramercy, a shabby warren of tiny rooms in  a faded brick building at 24th Street and Lexington Avenue, he sees a bit of New York history -- a single-room occupancy hotel devoid of crack and crime, a haven for genteel people who happen to be down-at-the-heels. (Murray Kempton, the writer, planned to spend a night in the hotel and ended up staying for three years in the late 1970's, said Mr. Davis, an unemployed construction worker and handbag designer.)
But when officials from the state's Dormitory Authority look at the sagging seven-story hotel, which is said to be more than a century old, they see a potential roadblock in the final phase of a proposed multi-million dollar project that will consolidate Baruch College, which is now housed in six leased  buildings from 18th to 26th Streets. (The first phase, a $159 million library and technology center, opened at 151 East 25th Street, in September 1994.)


It Was Something He Ate
BUZ Written and illustrated by Richard Egielski.
Unpaged.
New York: A Laura Geringer Book/HarperCollins Publishers. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 7)


Foes Say Big Hotel Just Won't Fit In
This summer, when the Landmarks Preservation Commission approved the proposed Hudson Center Hotel in northern TriBeCa, the developers thought they were one step closer to building the 334-room, 19-story tower on West and Laight Streets, near the Holland Tunnel.
But a group of community advocates, who want to hang a "no vacancy" sign in TriBeCa for large-scale hotels, are seeking to have the landmarks decision overturned in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
They say the hotel would increase traffic and pollution and cut off light and river views.


Annette Caruso, George Gosselin
Annette Elizabeth Caruso, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Caruso of East Lansing, Mich., was married there on Friday to George Nelson Gosselin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Gosselin of Greens Farms, Conn.
The Rev.
Michael D. Murphy performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas Aquinas.
Mrs.
Gosselin, 33, is the home furnishings manager at Anthropologie, a store  in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from Michigan State University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in East Lansing.


U.N. Is Cutting Back on Its Peacekeeping Ambitions
Strapped for cash and dogged by failures in Bosnia and Somalia, the United Nations is dramatically scaling back its readiness to keep peace around the world.
With peacekeeping costs for its 16 current missions far exceeding the organization's regular budget, officials from Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on down have expressed concern that peacekeeping has drained resources away from more traditional tasks like development work.


A Different Look At the Ivy League
Playboy magazine's "Women of the Ivy League," featuring nude and semi-nude poses, has spawned a similarly titled version by female students at several schools.
Women at Brown, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, the University of Pennsylvania and Yale contributed poetry, essays, artwork and photography reflecting feminist values to the magazine, which was released a few weeks ago. (Columbia and Princeton did not participate.)


Walesa Hangs On . . .
After sagging so badly in the polls that many believed he would fade from the scene, Lech Walesa bounced back last week in the first round of Poland's presidential elections.
He emerged only two points behind Aleksander Kwasniewski, the candidate of the former Communists, and now the two will face each other Nov. 19 in a run-off.
It is a paradox that Mr.
Kwasniewski, a smartly dressed and smooth-talking 40-year-old, is seen as the candidate of the future by many young voters, and Mr.
Walesa, the 52-year-old electrician-turned-politician, is often seen as a symbol of the past.
But Mr.
Walesa's record of courageous battling against the Communists as leader of the Solidarity movement a decade and a half ago is shadowed these days by his turbulent five years as President.
Most analysts are  reluctant to predict the outcome of the runoff.
JANE PERLEZ


Sunday: November 12, 1995; DOG DAY 2;On the Scent
In the world of bottled scents there is Obsession, Passion and Pleasures.
And then there is Pseudo Corpse, Pseudo Drowned Victim and Pseudo Distressed Body.
The Pseudo scents are not exactly perfumes; they are training aids for search-and-rescue dogs.
Until recently, dogs on the victim trail had to be indoctrinated with cadavers.
But now, after analyzing and distilling the composition of decaying bodies, the Sigma Chemical Company of St.
Louis has taken the corpse out of the mortuary. (And with Pseudo Distressed Body, taken the fear out of someone who is still alive but, say, buried in rubble.)
In the process of developing fake narcotics for training dogs, Patricia Carr  of Sigma enrolled in a dog-tracking course to get a better sense of the trackers' needs.
There she learned how search-and-rescue dogs normally acquired  their fatal attractions.
"I shivered all the way home," Carr says.
"I told our research team we needed to make body-in-a-bottle, and they looked at me like I was nuts." Nuts or not, she created the forensic-product market.


No Points, No Victory, But Something to Celebrate
Down in the mud and the blood and the sawdust, on a squishy surface at Weston Field that looked like an aerial view of the Okefenokee Swamp, Amherst College accomplished the impossible today.
It beat undefeated Williams, 0-0.


Most People in Drug Areas Do Resist the Easy Money
To the Editor:
The article about the plight of families caught up in crack-infested areas of the city ("A Family on the Run," Sept. 24) says that these families have to make "an almost daily calculation of surrender versus resistance, the benefits of easy money versus the despair of being sucked into the crack society."


Watching Manufactured Evil And Judging Justice Itself
THERE IS NOT A WHIFF OF THE Devil about him when a sleazy Hollywood producer  flashes his business card at a would-be starlet.
"How do you like my logo?" he asks, proud and eager as a Boy Scout.
"A serpent uncoiling from a film can!" We  don't actually see that logo, but we recognize it as the perfect emblem, and not just for Frank Musso, the no-conscience producer deliciously played by Joe Mantegna in "National Lampoon's Favorite Deadly Sins," a made-for-cable movie being shown tonight at 8 on Showtime.
This has been a big show-biz season for sin.
It may be coincidence that "Favorite Deadly Sins" arrives while the hit movie "Seven," about a killer inspired by the deadly sins, is still doing strong business in theaters.
But together they hold a pop-culture mirror to society, reflecting the cynical view that evil can go unpunished; in fact, we like things that way.
And while it may not be a surprise that viewers secretly wish they could get away with murder, that attitude shatters a cardinal rule of movies and television: villains must be brought to justice.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
DIVIDED WATERS The Naval History of the Civil War.
By Ivan Musicant.
HarperCollins, $30.


Max Gets a Guru
SWAMI ON RYE Max in India.
Written and illustrated by Maira Kalman.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $16. (All ages)


Pamela S. Berman, J. Michael Cline
Pamela Samantha Berman, a daughter of Laurie S. Berman and Alan M. Berman of  New York, was married last evening to J. Michael Cline, a son of Rose Marie and  James G. Cline of Upper Grandview, N.Y.
Rabbi David M. Posner performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Cline, 27, was until recently a sales executive with Air France in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner in LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae, the law firm in New York.


A Survey Too Far
All government agencies pay close attention to the press coverage they receive, but Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary may have taken that concern to a new and unseemly level.
Mrs.
O'Leary found herself the subject of harsh criticism for having paid an  outside consulting firm $46,500 in public funds to evaluate the reporters who cover her department, in order to identify those who needed to be worked on a little.
Some of the harshest criticism came from the White House, which was eager to stay ahead of Congressional critics.


Habitats: 160 West 66th Street;A Student Apartment, With Views of the Hudson
O.K., so he's 24 years old, an aspiring singer and actor, and his parents just bought him a $1.06 million condominium apartment overlooking the Hudson River and Central Park.
Tell the truth. How do you feel about him?


Explorers of Watery Wilds Dive for Urban History . . .
A steady rain speckled the Narrows as the Heaven, a 22 1/2-foot fishing boat, cut its engine and bobbed under the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
Gene Ritter and Pete Oliver squeezed into their diving suits, strapped on scuba tanks and jumped into the murky water.
"You never know what you're going to find down there," Mr.
Ritter said before disappearing under a cluster of bubbles.


WHAT THE POOR DESERVE
Professor Gans raises the question of whether the affluent woman who shops all day (and pays taxes while she does, I might add) is any different from the woman who spends her days watching TV.
You bet she is.
I made the decision not to have children because I couldn't afford them.
Now I can't save for a decent retirement because I have to pay taxes to support other women's children.
If I have to choose, give me the dilettante who pays taxes any day!


What Speer Knew
To the Editor:
Claudia Koonz, in her review of Gitta Sereny's "Albert Speer: His Battle With Truth" (Oct. 8), seems almost as much an apologist as Ms.
Sereny when she says Speer was among Germany's "best, brightest and most rational." Brightest, perhaps, but not the rest.
From Speer's memoir, "Inside the Third Reich," it is  clear that he was magnetically drawn to power and fell romantically in love with Hitler once they met, wearing his hair similarly, keeping in step when they walked together, gladly becoming his military Speer (like that of Wotan) and falling out of love only when rejected by Hitler.


THE ATTACK MACHINE
Over the past 25 years, a formidable network of organizations has emerged to  promote the conservative political agenda.
Players range from research institutions, like the Heritage Foundation, to gadfly entrepreneurs, like Floyd  Brown.
The groups and individuals in the accompanying chart form a subsection of the conservative establishment: specialists in bare-knuckle attacks on political opponents.
Media
PAUL WEYRICH -- Famed New Right activist, Weyrich, right, established the Heritage Foundation and National Empowerment Television.
ROBERT NOVAK -- Syndicated columnist and talk-show host, Novak, below, cultivates a snarling image as the "Prince of Darkness." June 26 column ignited attacks on Sheila Burke.
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL EDITORIAL PAGE -- Bulletin board of right-wing grievances.
Savaged Vincent Foster before his suicide.
THE WASHINGTON TIMES -- Broadsheet mix of fact and rumor.
One story hinted at links between Bill Clinton and Soviet agents.
THE AMERICAN SPECTATOR -- Edited by R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., a  Clinton hater.
Called Hillary Clinton "Lady Macbeth" and likened homosexuals' heads to "butternut squash." DAVID BROCK -- American Spectator staffer who wrote "Troopergate" article.
Called Anita Hill "a little bit nutty and a little bit slutty." RUSH LIMBAUGH -- Pioneer of "anything goes" commentary.
Suggested that  "Vince Foster was murdered in an apartment owned by Hillary Clinton."


GERMANY
The nights are long in Germany's Rhine Valley in November, and growing colder.
The autumn yellows and reds that splashed the vineyards have faded to the ochers and rich rust browns of winter.
The chill wind rustles the remaining  leaves; a fox hurries through the rows of leafless vines, unseen in an empty landscape.
Empty save for a forgotten corner of one vineyard where small, tight bunches  of grapes still cling forlornly to the almost naked vines.
But nothing here is what it seems.
These grapes are neither forgotten nor forlorn: the grower is saving them for ice wine.


Stacy Glass, Jayson Goldstone
Stacy Jill Glass, a daughter of Dale and Gary Glass of Boca Raton, Fla., was  married last evening to Jayson Douglas Goldstone, a son of Carol and Ira Goldstone of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman performed the ceremony at  the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Goldstone, 24, graduated cum laude from Duke University and completed the American arts course at Sotheby's, the auction house in New York.
Mr.
Goldstone, also 24, graduated from Northeastern University.
He is the executive vice president of the Horn Graffiti Control Corporation of America, graffiti removers in Long Island City, Queens.


Mississippi Congressman Switches Parties
Representative Mike Parker, one of the most conservative Democrats in the House, announced on Friday that he was joining the Republican Party.
"I truly believe the party that is moving this country in the right direction is the Republican Party," said Mr.
Parker, 46.
"I think it is our last best chance to do that."


Susan Davis, Vanderlei Pereira
Susan J. Davis, the singer and pianist for Sabor Brasil, a Brazilian jazz band based in New York, is to be married today to Vanderlei Pereira, the group's drummer.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon is to officiate at the 200 Fifth Club in New York.
The bride, a graduate of Wesleyan University, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Davis of East Williston, L.I.
The bridegroom graduated from the Mannes College of Music.
He is a son of Maria Pereira of Rio de Janeiro and the late Licinio Pereira.


POSTINGS: Village's Last Parcel for Multifamily Dwellings;Luxury Condos For Pelham Manor
A 10-unit luxury condominium complex is being built in the village of Pelham  Manor, in Westchester County, on the village's last remaining parcel of land suitable for multifamily construction.
It is the first such construction in the village in 15 years, and is sure to  be the last, said John Pierpont, the village manager.
"There's no land left," Mr.
Pierpont said.
"The only available land now is single lots interspersed here and there."


Powell Can Only Hope for Big-Tent G.O.P.
To the Editor:
For those who have looked to Colin Powell with some degree of hope and curiosity, it is disappointing to hear not only his decision not to pursue the Presidency, but his support of the Republican Party as well.


Miss Magliocco And Mr. Schlank
Josephine Ann Magliocco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Magliocco of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Colgan Schlank, the son of Joan B. Schlank and Colgan Schlank, both of New York.
The Rev.
Martin Igoe officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The couple graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Keeping a Covenant With an Old Pizzeria


High Danger: That's What Friends Are For
Vampire in Brooklyn Eddie Murphy, Angela Bassett, Allen Payne Directed by Wes Craven R 105 minutes


Lawsuit Seeks to Block a Garbage Incinerator in the Navy Yard
A coalition of community groups filed suit last week seeking to prevent New York City from building a 3,000-ton-a-day garbage incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard without filing a new environmental impact statement.
The incinerator, intended to reduce dependence on the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island, has drawn strong opposition.


Holik Is Back And All Is Well
Bobby Holik apparently means a great deal more to the Devils than most people realize.
The physical center, who had been sidelined by an injury since opening  day, returned this afternoon and scored the game's first goal to spark the Devils to a 4-2 triumph over the Philadelphia Flyers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Holik's return brought more than a spark to the Devils.
It let Coach Jacques  Lemaire reunite the team's Crash Line, with Holik centering for Mike Peluso on the left and Randy McKay on the right.
The combination, known for its crunching  checks and ferocious forechecking, has been very effective since Lemaire put it  together three years ago as the team's fourth line.


A New Voice for the Small Investor
THE small investor, whose views are often lost in the din of brokers, lawyers, executives and others, is getting a new voice.
According to a statement to be released tomorrow, securities officials from several states have set up a new group, the National Council of Individual Investors.
Organizations for investing's rank and file are few, and this one, its creators say, is unique for its focus on advocacy and investor self-protection.


Baby-Boom Baedekers
MISSING


Tee Wee Tator and Flytrap Klinkenburg
OUR HOUSE The Stories of Levittown.
By Pam Conrad.
Illustrated by Brian Selznick. 65 pp.
New York: Scholastic. $14.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Wendy's Debate: Tasty, but Tasteful?
After three decades looking for gallery space, Bill Rabinovitch, 55, a figurative expressionist painter, has finally found a high-profile, heavily trafficked venue in which to hang his work -- a new Wendy's, due to open at Broadway and Bleecker Street this week.
"Sure I have mixed feelings about showing at Wendy's," he said.
"But if no one ever sees your work, what's the point of being an artist?"
The arrival of Wendy's is literally meat to those who work in the area and want an inexpensive lunch.
But it is poison for others.
Some residents, particularly artists, say it is another nail in the coffin of the art scene and  atmosphere that once connected it to SoHo.
They point to the sprawl of franchises along Broadway, which include Reebok, Tower Records and McDonald's.


Ex-Bad Boy as Sensitive Director
A JAGGED SLASH RUNS perilously close to Sean Penn's left eye.
Another cut slices deep into his nose.
The nose itself is swollen, the bone prominent through the skin.
"I was in London about five days ago, and a friend said he wanted to show me  the town," Mr.
Penn said, a bit vague and almost apologetic.
"We were in a bar,  and I was just on my way out and the next thing I know this . . . happened. I was on the floor, and my back got kicked a lot, and my legs got kicked a lot, and the side of my head got kicked." He points to his face.
"I didn't know this  happened until I got to a mirror."


Museum That Honors War Dead Reopens
As biplanes buzzed by and a marching band played, dignitaries and art lovers  ranging from Pablo Picasso's relatives to uniformed war veterans gathered today  to reopen one of San Francisco's most beautiful and historic museums.
The California Palace of the Legion of Honor, a European art museum designed  to honor the 3,600 Californians who died in World War I, reopened after three years of earthquake proofing and remodeling.


Simon's 'Chapter Two' By Fleetwood Company
THE memory plays about Neil Simon's young life ("Brighton Beach Memoirs," "Biloxi Blues," "Broadway Bound," "Lost in Yonkers") and professional associations ("The Sunshine Boys," "Laughter on the 23d Floor") are more durable than the wallowing of his adult phases ("Chapter Two," "Jake's Women"), where perspective of distance and the affection it invites are missing.
The point is instant relief; the effect is the contradiction of time.
When "Chapter Two" opened on Broadway in 1977, a writer's battle to exorcise  the emotional hold of his deceased wife and to get on with his life and his new  love -- an enchanting actress (Marsha Mason in transparent disguise) -- had a bittersweet appeal.
The play was not propelled by a joke machine but by human frailty, by a sense of uneasy renewal.


Tokens of Imagination
It's smaller.
It's lighter.
And for the time being, at least, it costs 25 cents more.
Beyond that, critics have complained, New York's new subway token is a bland symbol of the city that has to start using it today.
So The New York Times asked a carful of designers -- artists, architects and advertisers among them -- to create an alternative token with true New York style.
They were urged not to be constrained by roundness or other practicalities.
As fare cards make inroads, the token itself is becoming an endangered species.
But not so the city's creativity.
MICHAEL MOLYNEUX


Huskers Lose Finesse, But Keep the Streak
Nebraska 41, Kansas 3


What Would de Gaulle Say?
President Jacques Chirac, the political heir of Charles de Gaulle, promised France "fundamental change" when he was elected last May.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, another Gaullist, had the assignment of getting it done, and tried with a 42-member Cabinet that never seemed to be clear about its priorities.


Trying to Lure Business to the Red Hook Waterfront
USUALLY it's the arrival of artists that is said to herald the rejuvenation of an urban neighborhood.
When artists move into low-cost underutilized industrial space, can repopulation and higher property values -- or gentrification, as it may eventually be called -- be far behind?
But in Gregory O'Connell's view, revival along the Red Hook waterfront in Brooklyn would mean the arrival of more industrial tenants, more trucks operating day and night, and perhaps eventually, more cargo ships.


Care for a Meal With Your Sugar?
THE season of gluttony is upon us.
Beginning with Halloween, when the juvenile lust for candy moves children to commit at least four of the deadly sins, through Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's Eve, Americans will consume more and richer desserts than at any other time of year.
Pastry chefs have turned away from the berries and sorbets of summer to stoke the internal furnace with rich tarte tatins, hefty chocolate mud pies and creamy cheesecakes, served with clouds of whipped cream.
At home, pumpkin and sweet potato pies will supplement the usual cakes, cookies and ice creams.


When (and Where) Sculpture Can be Seen in Sharper Relief
FALL may be the best time to visit the Kouros Sculpture Center in Ridgefield, for the greenery is going or gone and the great equalizer, snow, has not yet arrived.
That being the case, it becomes easy to see that the display has been revitalized by the addition of new works.
Conspicuous among these are the wood carvings of Emilie Brzezinski, who seemingly finds the spiral irresistible, the bigger the better, and one of her three works turns out to be all spirals.
"Cherry Upright," as this is called, consists of vertical sections cut from one or more tree trunks that at the center stands 14 feet and has a pleat down the middle; the others are shorter and simpler, but all three writhe as if to show off their flesh, which is red at the center, yellow along the sides and rimmed with bark.


Q and A
Seeing Australia by Bike


Mrs. Whitman's First Lady
CHRISTABEL VARTANIAN says she has one of the best jobs in the Whitman administration: She is in charge of graciousness.
For Ms.
Vartanian, the job seems as tailor-made as the pink fitted jacket she wore one recent morning on a  tour of the official mansion, Drumthwacket.
The job, head of protocol, pays $55,385 and is a new one -- for a very good reason.
While Mrs.
Whitman entered office equipped with a First Gentleman -- John Whitman, an investment banker -- he was not willing to take over traditional First Lady jobs: planning dinners, rescuing guests stranded awkwardly at official cocktail parties, presiding over household staff meetings, charming visiting legislators and business leaders.


Three Sturdy Flavors For Autumn Tables
AUTUMN'S bounty beckons.
Rich squash, sturdy greens and ripe pears provide robust flavors for an autumn menu.
Butternut or other winter squash, cooked until tender, then pureed in a food  processor, easily becomes the basis for a bisquelike creamless soup.
Similarly,  pears can be pureed to stand in for an egg-and-cream custard filling for a tart.
Both these recipes are worth remembering for Thanksgiving.


Two New Partnerships For Frequent Fliers
New partnership agreements among frequent-flier plans have recently taken effect.
All Nippon Airways has entered into a reciprocal arrangement with Delta Air Lines.
Participants in Delta's Skymiles program, (800) 325-1551, and the ANA plan, (800) 262-4653, are now permitted to collect and redeem miles for flights  on either airline.
ANA has daily nonstop service from Tokyo to New York and Los  Angeles, and nonstop service on Monday, Wednesday and Saturday to Washington.


Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 Hackensack.
Tomorrow through Friday, one eastbound local lane will be closed between exits 66 and 67 over the Hackensack River from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M., and two eastbound local lanes will be closed from 10 P.M. to 6 A.M.


Finding a Bargain in a Booming Market
IT'S a tough season for bargain hunters.
As the stock market chugs past many  new highs, possibly on its way to 5,000, fewer cheap stocks can be found.
And the ones that can be found prompt a troubling question: Why, even in these sunny days on Wall Street, are they viewed so dimly?
Nevertheless, sifting through the stock market's refuse is a time-honored practice, one squarely in the tradition of Benjamin Graham and other "value" investors.
These investors think the best way to make a profit is to buy unwanted stocks off the sale racks, not to look for well-liked ones that are selling at Tiffany prices.


Crash Pad Insights Gained By Living on Floor Below
To the Editor:
What was missing from your article about apartments used by flight attendants ("The Crash Pads of Queens," Oct. 15) were interviews with the tenants living above, below and on each side of these apartments.


The Battle of Belle Harbor
ON a clear day on the bay side of Belle Harbor, you can see Manhattan.
On cloudy days, the skyline is a gray blur rising from the water, giving justa hint that Belle Harbor belongs to New York City.
Celeste Pacifico, her husband, Fernando, and their two children, Michael and  Jessica, moved to Belle Harbor from Gravesend, Brooklyn, seven years ago.
Fernando, a doctor, was born in Mondragone, an Italian village by the Mediterranean, and the neighborhood reminded him of home.
Mrs.
Pacifico, who trained as an obstetrical nurse but has stayed home to raise the children, grew  up in Bay Ridge.
She says that when she drives over the Marine Parkway bridge from Brooklyn, shoots onto Beach Channel Drive along the bay and arrives in Belle Harbor, she can smell the difference.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING A Symphonic Observance Of the Camps' Liberation


THE TRIUMPH OF THE PRIME-TIME NOVEL
Recently, a partner at my law firm has been saying that prime-time television has no redeeming value and that he can't understand why our young associates would rather watch "E.R." than read a book on Buddhist philosophy.
I'm giving him a copy of McGrath's article -- it may enlighten him.


In the Region: Westchester;For 90's, Developers Find Moderation the Condo Key
IF the 80's was the decade of the luxury condominium, it could be said that the 90's, so far, is the era of the moderately priced development.
Several such projects are under construction or awaiting approvals in the county.
And developers maintain that the pent-up demand could result in more moderate-price projects in the next several years.


JAPAN
After a long and blisteringly hot summer, fall is finally in the air.
And so  is the distinctive aroma of sanma on the grill.
The name of this fish, when written in Japanese, uses the calligraphs for "autumn" and "sword" and, indeed,  it is a slender, sleek and steely colored species.
Typically, sanma is sprinkled with coarse salt, then grilled, ungutted.
Served with a small mound of grated daikon (radish) that is drizzled with soy sauce, it is one of the great plebeian pleasures of autumn.


It's a New Generation of Business Travelers
BETH MARIS'S stories are guaranteed to make parents shudder.
There were the hours she spent scrubbing her daughter's purple crayon off the upholstery of a rental car, for example.
And then there was that anxious afternoon 18 months earlier, when Ms.
Maris was waiting to testify in a court case related to her therapy practice.
She nursed her baby in the witness room, fretfully eyed her dwindling supply of diapers and, finally, appeared before the judge -- complete  with telltale yellow stains all over her white pants.
But Ms.
Maris, who lives in Columbia, S.C., does not let these mishaps deter  her from bringing her child along on business trips.
"The experience of seeing a professional mom, I think it's really important" for children, she says.
"If you're flexible and don't get totally wigged out, you can do a lot of things and get away with it."


Way Down From a Showdown
Both the Dallas Cowboys and San Francisco 49ers had circled this date on their calendars since the schedule was announced in the spring.
This was supposed to be a monumental Sunday in which the tone would be set for an eventual showdown in the National Football Conference championship game.
However, when the two teams square off at Texas Stadium this afternoon, the game will be anything but colossal.
The Cowboys are 8-1 and on track for the Super Bowl.
The 49ers are 5-4 and have lost two straight, including a heartbreaker to the expansion Carolina Panthers last week.
They appear to have lost their way.


Young Poles View Walesa As Passe
In classrooms and on campuses, in living rooms and workplaces, a week before  the presidential runoff election young Poles are saying, forget their favorite candidate's Communist past.
He is, many of them argue, the force for the future.
Many first-time voters in next Sunday's election say they will choose Aleksander Kwasniewski, 40, a telegenic former Communist, because as a man who speaks English and knows some economics, he is a modern man.


This Time, Silva Promises He'll Toe the Line
Before his final workout for today's New York City Marathon, German Silva of  Mexico made an obliging stop yesterday along Central Park South at Seventh Avenue.
It has become an unintended landmark, the spot where he made a wrong turn near the finish before recovering to win last year's race.
"I was running the other day, showing some people the way, and I said, very seriously, 'I know the course well,' " Silva said.
"Then I smiled. 'Well, most of the course.' "


2,000 Are Evacuated From a Yonkers Complex
Denise Payne was on the phone in her apartment on Thursday night when the lights went out.
"I said, 'Must be a circuit breaker,' " she recalled.
But as she looked out the window of her third-floor apartment toward another wing of the 2,000-resident apartment complex here, Ms.
Payne said, "The whole other building was flickering on and off."


Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 Hackensack.
Tomorrow through Friday, one eastbound local lane will be closed between exits 66 and 67 over the Hackensack River from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M., and two eastbound local lanes will be closed from 10 P.M. to 6 A.M.


Elias Schwarzbart, 88, Radical Lawyer, Is Dead
Elias Schwarzbart, the last surviving member of the radical band of New York  defense lawyers who went to Alabama in the 1930's and made the Scottsboro Boys case a national symbol of racial injustice, died on Wednesday at the Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 88.
It was Samuel S. Liebowitz, a prominent New York lawyer who later became a justice of the State Supreme Court, who served as chief counsel for the so-called Scottsboro Boys, nine black teen-agers who were repeatedly convicted of raping two white women aboard a freight train near Scottsboro, Ala., on March 25, 1931.


At the Long Wharf, Shakespeare No. 4
IN 30 years the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven has produced but three plays  by Shakespeare; now "As You Like It" makes four.
The statistic is all.
The production, staged by John Tillinger and designed by Ming Cho Lee (sets)  and Marcia Dixcy (costumes), is pointlessly perverse.
It does not count as art.
Powerless to go beyond the surface, it is oddly resistant to polishing that surface so that it contentedly entertains.


Ayun Halliday and Greg Kotis
GREG KOTIS, 29, and Ayun Halliday, 30, are members of the Neo-Futurists, a small alternative theater troupe that started out in Chicago and recently moved  to New York.
Among troupe friends, they are known as Greggy K. and Princess Annie.


Before Agatha Christie, A Memorable 'Mouse-Trap'
To the Editor:
In his review of Agatha Christie's "Mousetrap" at the George Street Playhouse (Theater, Oct. 8), Alvin Klein asks, "Now, how many of you know of another play  called 'The Mouse-Trap,' written by William Dean Howells in 1889?"


Traffic Alert
TODAY


Top Cat
THE LITTLE CAT AND THE GREEDY OLD WOMAN Written and illustrated by Joan Rankin.
Unpaged.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $16. (Ages 4 to 8)


Walling Off The Real World
To the Editor:
By the time I finished reading Herbert Muschamp's description of the Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla, Calif. ["To a Neuroscientist's Liking: Calm, yet Complex," Oct. 22], I was running for the warmth of a cup of tea in front of the fire.
While the monks of a medieval monastery, to which Mr.
Muschamp compares these buildings, may have isolated themselves from the material world, they did not wall out nature as this new institute seems to do.
The photograph accompanying the article could easily have been of a prison courtyard or a medieval fortress, so dominant are the vertical planes of concrete and stone, the absence of windows, the absence of trees -- the absence  of connections to the outside world.


Why Demonstration Failed: Its 'Preposterous' Theme
To the Editor:
The failure of a demonstration at Gracie Mansion ("A Giuliani Fracas, and This One Is Close to Home," Oct. 29) cannot be blamed on the lack of a loudspeaker permit but on the demonstration's preposterous theme: protesting the crackdown on quality-of-life offenders.


Gay Politicians And Issues Win Major Victories
Except for the biggest prize of all, the San Francisco mayoralty, lesbian and gay politicians were able to claim victory last week in most races they had entered, as well as in a key referendum on civil rights.
A ballot initiative in Maine that would have denied civil rights protections  to homosexuals was rejected, 53 to 47 percent.
It was the first time that a statewide gay rights referendum had been considered in the East.
Similar measures were rejected last year in Oregon and Idaho, by narrower margins.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


'Be All You Can Be': Fightin' Words?
THE military is still looking for a few good men and women, but it's getting  tougher.
As the armed forces bask in commemorations of the 50th anniversary of World War II this Veterans Day weekend, they can rest somewhat assured that they are signing up enough new recruits to keep the boot camps hup-two-ing.
Ninety-six percent of the recruits are high-school graduates, almost a record high.
But Pentagon surveys show that men, who make up 85 percent of the military, are less and less likely to enlist.


2 Writers Guide Parents in Communicating With Children
FOR more than 20 years Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish, both of Roslyn Heights have been writing books, organizing workshops and lecturing on how adults and children can better communicate.
Their newest book, "How to Talk So Kids Can Learn at Home and in School" (Rawson Associates, Scribner/Simon &amp; Schuster), focuses on the attitudes and language that help children succeed in school.


THE FINAL ORDER: A special report;Variation on a War Game: How Powell Arrived at No
The following article is based on reporting by Richard L. Berke, Francis X. Clines, Eric Schmitt and Ernest Tollerson and was written by Mr.
Clines.
On the first two days of this month, the small group advising Gen.
Colin L.  Powell in his agonizing over a Presidential candidacy found itself making plans for a positive declaration on Nov. 21 or 22 in New York at his alma mater, City College, and imagining a wondrous opening day.


BEST SELLERS: November 12, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


Political Stakes Are High In Mexican State Election
This is the land of monarchs and peasants, a place of brooding mountains and  gentle lakes that is also one of the most traditional places in Mexico and its most radical.
The Pacific coast state of Michoacan is the setting for elections on Sunday that are taking on dimensions as broad as the wave of monarch butterflies that began arriving by the million here last week on their yearly cross-continental migration.


Her Name is Barbra
So, is she a monster or isn't she?
When we read Barbra Streisand's life story, that question seems more to the point than the usual quest for celebrity  dirt: affairs, drugs, her son's sexual orientation.
Is she an egotist out of control or a strong, talented perfectionist in a sexist age?
In STREISAND: Her Life (Crown, $25), James Spada doesn't really answer the question, but he provides detailed testimony, pro and con, and lets the reader decide.
Stephen Sondheim loved her when they worked together on her "Broadway Album," as did Pat Conroy when she filmed his novel "The Prince of Tides." Anne Francis hated her when they appeared in the movie "Funny Girl," more than two decades earlier. ("She said: 'Don't touch me. I've been told that a star is never touched in a scene like this.' ") Walter Matthau, her co-star in "Hello, Dolly!," said he was "appalled by every move she made." Mr.
Spada, who has written biographies of other actresses, including Grace Kelly and Bette Davis, manages to make Ms.
Streisand's largely loveless childhood and early career struggles the most fascinating parts of her story.
Young Barbra carried a cot from one friend's apartment to another's because she had no place to sleep, happily accepted free  dinners instead of pay and seemed amazed that people liked her voice ("I don't think I'm that good," she told a roommate in 1960).
However, by page 79, at the  age of 19, she's already difficult to get along with.
The book ends on a frankly adoring note, but until then the story of the public's discovery of a genius and the genius's discovery of herself is actually thought-provoking.
ANITA GATES


Israeli Soldier Reported Held in Rabin Killing
Israeli military radio reported today that an active-duty soldier and his father had been taken into custody, bringing to eight the number of suspects detained in the investigation of the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin.
The police would not confirm the arrests.
But the radio, citing security sources, said the soldier was a 21-year-old resident of Tel Aviv, and that he was suspected of supplying Yigal Amir, the confessed killer, with weapons.
There were no immediate indications why the father was detained.


Dana Linett And Jason Silber
Dana Linett, a daughter of Caryl and Eugene Linett of Summit, N.J., is to be  married today to Jason Uziel Silber, the son of Hanna Uzielly of New York and the late Leo Silber.
Rabbi David B. Bateman is to officiate at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 32, is a freelance writer in New York.
She is a graduate of Boston University.
Her father is a tax lawyer in Summit.
Her mother is the chief executive and creative director of Linett &amp; Harrison, an advertising agency in Millburn, N.J.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


Two Attacks Intensify War In Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka's ethnic warfare intensified on two crucial battlefronts today, with the Tamil Tiger rebels mounting a suicide bombing attack in the capital that killed at least 17 people and with the Government army pressing an offensive on the Jaffna peninsula in the north that has caused nearly 900 casualties in 48 hours.
The losses have stunned this country of 18 million people off the southeastern tip of India.
Twelve years of conflict between the Tamil minority in the north and the island's Sinhalese majority have already left at least 60,000 dead, according to many estimates.
But no single chapter of the conflict  has seen such sustained levels of bloodshed.


At Wounded Knee
To the Editor:
In his review of Russell Means's autobiography, "Where White Men Fear to Tread" (Oct. 15), Brent Staples says Wounded Knee showed an "exterminatory impulse" by the Federal Government that was "alive and well" at Waco.
By equating these events, he misses important differences, including how the lessons of Wounded Knee could have avoided the tragedy in Texas.


Two Legends, Two Under-the-Skin Portraits
HOW DO YOU SHOW A GREAT artist or thinker at work, struggling past terrors, limits and dead ends to make something that has the force of what we call truth  and the shock of what we call beauty? (We are right to hold onto these old words; we are wrong when we cling to prim, persnickety definitions of them.) Artists and thinkers are usually taught to disguise their struggles, to keep them behind the scenes in the privacy of their studios and laboratories.
But when an audience is allowed to witness the process, however briefly, nothing is  more suspenseful or cathartic.
Freud called the working psychoanalyst a detective and the patient his criminal; Freudian analysis showed us that the analyst can be the criminal too,  whether he is alone with his patient or alone with himself.
Willa Cather put it  more lyrically when she proclaimed that only opera singers, novelists and doctors could share the uncanny (her words were "unique and marvelous") experience of entering into the very skin of another human being.
"What can compare with it?" she asked, and that exultant question tells us everything we need to know about the risks, the costs and the rewards.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
HOTEL AMERICA Scenes in the Lobby of the Fin-de-Siecle.
By Lewis H. Lapham.
Verso, $24.95.


Microbrewing: Macrosmelly?
Yorkville was once famed for breweries, which flourished as a major local industry in the 1800's and dwindled away in the mid-1900's.
One of the last bottlers, the sprawling multiblock Ruppert complex, with copper vats with capacities up to 23,000 gallons, shut down in 1965.
Now braumeisters are back.
They have a new format, scaled-down in size and upscaled in style: microbreweries, with restaurants and bars.
For some neighbors, however, the accompanying aromas and sounds have not made for a charming return to yesteryear.


How to Foil an Intruder
Everyone hates noises in the night.
Not everyone has courage enough to get out of bed to investigate.
The wife of Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada does, and Mr.
Chretien says it was a good thing Sunday that she also had "incredible sang-froid."
At about 2:45 a.m.
Sunday, Aline Chretien heard noises in the hallway of the  Prime Minister's official residence in Ottawa, then went far enough to see a man with an open jackknife, returned to the bedroom, locked the doors and called the police -- in time for them to arrest him.


Riders Told To Load Up On Tokens Before Rush
The minutes were ticking away all weekend to the fare increase's zero hour, testing many of those traditional virtues New Yorkers are not supposed to have:  patience, forbearance, understanding.
Natural instinct -- to wisecrack, to become choleric, to curse -- strained mightily against civic duty.
Still, virtue seemed to be winning out yesterday, though the true test will not come until today, followed, of course, by Monday morning's rush hour.


Immovable Object
ALEXANDER, WHO'S NOT (DO YOU HEAR ME? I MEAN IT!) GOING TO MOVE By Judith Viorst.
Illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser in the style of Ray Cruz.
Unpaged.
New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. $14. (Ages 5 to 8)


F.Y.I.
Minuit Waltz


Manhattan Minute
THE CHANGE-OF-THE-LIGHT BRIGADE: How many Westsiders does it take to change a light pole?
After months of debate, a local advisory panel has finally agreed on the lamp post design shown here for the West Side Highway project.
The winner isn't the one plugged by state transportation officials -- nor any of the alternatives proposed by community board members.
It's an adaptation of a city parks model. . . .
SUITS FOR SITES TM Park Avenue Associates says its building at 315 Park Avenue South could go bankrupt because of a special state law canceling a nine-year lease there.
So TM Park is suing to overturn the law, part of a plan to move the state optometry college from Park to CUNY's building  on 42d Street, while CUNY would go to the B. Altman building.
Other new uncertainties in the plan: CUNY is looking at other sites, and retailers may be  interested in Altman's. . . .
VOICE-MAIL DERAILED: As of noon last Monday, callers to the 24th Precinct's main telephone number got a human being, not the  precinct's unpopular voice-mail system.
Eventually, anyway: one caller waited about 15 rings before giving up on a weekday afternoon.
The voice-mail system, a departmental pilot program, was transferred to the 45th Precinct in the Bronx. . . .
ON THE PLATE AT THE SILVER PALACE: The sprawling Chinatown restaurant, which filed for bankruptcy in January following a long labor dispute, may come under new management if its creditors and workers have their way.
Last week, creditors and the 318 Restaurant Workers Union asked a United States Bankruptcy Judge to appoint a special trustee to operate the restaurant.
A hearing is scheduled for  Nov. 22.
In another blow,Community Board 3, which has advisory powers, has voted down a proposal that would permit an Off Track Betting parlor to operate in the  restaurant. . . .
INSULTING PRAISE: Has the Limelight become a better neighbor in recent weeks?
Police padlocked the dance club on Sept. 15 following a drug raid, and the owner, Peter Gatien, paid a $35,000 fine and hired a security consulting firm.
The club reopened on Sept. 22, and since then, has also hired an undercover security force, according to Ron Alan, a club spokesman.
Neighbors say the sidewalk is tidier and the club's garden has been replanted.
But Mr.
Alan says that the club has always maintained its grounds.
"The garden," he said, "was being renovated before this happened."


. . . And Find Pieces of Brooklyn's Own Atlantis in the Slime
It is Brooklyn's Atlantis: Fort Lafayette, a small island fortress that was submerged to make way for the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
But unlike the Greek continent of legend, Brooklyn's lost isle has inspired few explorers to comb its remains.
Until now.


Some 70's Ephemera
THE FRACTIOUS DAYS OF the early 1970's, when the full-bodied art object was suspect and ideas were paramount, are enjoying something of a renaissance.
Perhaps it is simply the art world's tendency to look back in fondness to the decade just before the last one. (Remember how the 80's loved the 60's?) But surely the pared-down purity of the 70's esthetic, when art's future seemed to lie everywhere but in the direction of painting and sculpture, holds an additional appeal.
We remain, after all, somewhat in recovery from the material  flamboyance of the 80's.


When Placing the Blame, Don't Leave It to the Dogs
To the Editor:
While I agree with most of what Robert Lipsyte in his Oct. 15 Coping column,  the title should have been changed.
Rather than "I Don't Love Dogs. Here are My  Reasons," it should have been "I Don't Like Dog Owners," because as he says, most dogs are stupid and it is supposedly the owners who are in charge.
So don't condemn the poor creatures who don't know a sidewalk from a toilet bowl.
Blame their unthinking, uncaring masters!
MARILYN BUTLER Upper East Side


Arizona Gets Set To Hire Showalter
First will come the agent, then the wife and kids and then the man himself.
By the time Buck Showalter arrives in Phoenix on Wednesday, his future employer  indicated today, he will be the manager of the expansion Arizona Diamondbacks.
"I fully expect to have this business taken care of by midweek," Jerry Colangelo, managing partner and architect of the Diamondbacks, said.
"I don't see any reason why all of this, whatever needs to be done, won't be worked out
this week. I expect him to be my manager."


Aboriginal Culture In an Australian Center
A center devoted to Aboriginal culture recently opened in the desert of Australia's Northern Territory.
The Uluru-Kata Tjuta Cultural Center is less than a mile from Uluru, the huge rock sacred to the Aborigines, also known as Ayers Rock.
The building's design is influenced by the mythology of the Aborigines, as well as the desert environment of Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park.
Built with earth bricks manufactured on the site, the center was designed in a collaboration between the Anangu tribe and the Australian firm of Gregory Burgess Architects.
Its curved form represents ancestral snakes in the Tjukurpa, the Aboriginal story of creation.
The park was returned 10 years ago by the Australian Government to the Anangu tribe, to whom the land traditionally belonged.


Shana Alexander Takes On the Toughest Subject, Her Family
SHANA ALEXANDER has always been a journalist who likes sinking her teeth into tough subjects, from becoming the first female editor of McCall's in 1969, to going head to head over current affairs with James J. Kilpatrick on "60 Minutes" in the 1970's, to best-sellers on Patty Hearst ("Anyone's Daughter"), Jean Harris ("Very Much a Lady"), and Bess Myerson ("When She Was Bad").
But with a new book, "Happy Days: My Mother, My Father, My Sister and Me" (Doubleday), she examined perhaps the most difficult subject of all, her own life as the daughter of glamorous yet emotionally distant show-business parents.
In the process, she said, she found that she was also obliged to examine her relationship with her sister, her daughter's suicide, two failed marriages and the legacy of a heart-stopping love affair.


Rome's Ambitious Plans For the Year 2000
THIS city has been called many things over the centuries imperial, eternal, holy -- but rarely, if ever, has Rome ever been accused of being organized.
However, faced with a deadline that can't be ignored or postponed, the city now  has a plan to get ready for the year 2000, when millions of pilgrims are expected to come here to mark the beginning of the third millennium of Christianity.
At the insistence of Mayor Francesco Rutelli, a 41-year-old political newcomer in office since 1993, the Great Jubilee -- as Pope John Paul II has dubbed the Holy Year celebrations -- will serve as a catalyst for a long list of projects that range from unclogging key traffic arteries to restoration of the Colosseum to the conversion of an old psychiatric hospital into housing for the  elderly.


Curious Creatures' Plants To Avoid
NOW that the focal point of gardening has moved indoors, parents and people with animals in their homes need to remember that some common house plants are poisonous.
Especially susceptible are children under 5 and puppies and kittens.
The consequences for curious nibblers can be drastic: severe illness or, in some cases, death.
Some potentially harmful plants may be received as gifts; others just may be part of a house plant collection.
Sometimes just the leaves or the fruit of a particular plant may be the hazard.


Budapest Theater
To the Editor: I enjoyed "What's Doing in Budapest" (Sept. 17), particularly  the item on the production at the Vigszinhaz Theater, "Let's Dance Together."
My husband and I were in Budapest a few months ago and found the performance  very enjoyable even though we do not speak a word of Hungarian.


Sturdy Flavors Are a Must for Autumn Tables
AUTUMN'S bounty beckons.
Rich squash, sturdy greens and ripe pears provide robust flavors for an autumn menu.
Butternut or other winter squash, cooked until tender, then pureed in a food  processor, easily becomes the basis for a bisque-like creamless soup.
Similarly, pears can be pureed to stand in for an egg-and-cream-custard filling for a tart.
Both these recipes are worth remembering for Thanksgiving.


When the Price of Peace Is Injustice
THERE is a simple Milosevic barometer.
When the Serbian president is unhappy, he calls the Clinton administration's chief Balkan mediator "Mr. Holbrooke." When things go swimmingly, it's plain "Dick." As Mr.
Milosevic's irritation mounted this week at Bosnian peace talks, "Dick" went out the window.
The reason for Slobodan Milosevic's displeasure was the absence of any easing of trade sanctions on Serbia.
Finally, on Friday, the Serbian leader was offered natural gas to heat homes for a two-month trial period.
"On the one hand," said  a senior administration official, "Milosevic does not deserve any sanctions relief. On the other, to do a negotiation you need some wampum."


200 Fishermen Missing In Bay of Bengal Storm
Nearly 200 fishermen from Bangladesh were missing in the Bay of Bengal after  a storm hit the coast and offshore islands, community leaders said today.
Six trawlers with 96 crew members from the Cox's Bazaar area were missing, said Ekramul Hussain Chowdhury, leader of a fishing boat owners' group.
Another  100 fishermen on 15 trawlers were reported unaccounted for in the coastal district of Barguna after the storms, which began late on Thursday.


High-Turnover General Managers
Even the people in the room may not be able to tell the general managers without a scorecard at the general managers' meetings in Scottsdale, Ariz., this week.
The position has become so volatile that two clubs, barring last-minute decisions, won't even have general managers in the room because they haven't filled their vacancies.
Four general managers have been named to their jobs in the last month.
Two of them will attend for the first time as general managers;  the other two have participated before but for different teams.


Higher Property Taxes, County by County
Average Increase in property taxes from 1994 to 1995 in each county.
Individual tax increase vary greatly from these averages because of variations from town to town in tax assessments and property appraisals.


ENGLAND
Although some experienced England-bound travelers look forward to the robust, down-to-earth pleasures of pub lunches -- shepherd's pie, Lancashire hot pot, or perhaps a slab of creamy Stilton -- I dream about a glass of golden cider to wash it all down.
That one glass (which is 6 to 8.4 percent alcohol) always puts me into a post-lunch drowse, but I so much relish cider's fruity, mellow taste, spiced with a hint of submerged bubbles, that I'm willing to pay with a few unintended blinks in an afternoon museum or a bit of a nod on a sunny garden lawn.
Since many fine hotels and restaurants rather look down on cider (and don't stock it), I've always assumed it was a plebeian taste, with even less cachet than the "house white." But Richard Knibbs, who has presided at Ye Olde Cider Bar in Newton Abbot, Devon, for 25 years, happily assures me otherwise.
At his pub, established around 1880, he serves 14 varieties of cider.


Alonna Ostrow and Michael Ostad
Alonna Michele Ostrow, a daughter of Batsheva and Ronald Ostrow of Old Westbury, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Ostad, a son of Soraya Ostad and Dr.
Abraham Ostad, also of Old Westbury.
Rabbi Alan B. Lucas performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Mrs.
Ostad, 25, is a market research analyst for Coach, the leather goods manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the president of LeaRonal Inc., a specialty chemicals manufacturer in  Freeport, L.I.
Her mother is the executive vice president of the Solomon Schechter Day School in Jericho and Hicksville, L.I.


ON THE TOWNS
ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey  Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.


WHAT THE POOR DESERVE
In "What the Poor Deserve" (Word &amp; Image, Oct. 22), Max Frankel calls attention to Prof.
Herbert J. Gans's exposure of America's neglect of the most needy.
The struggle out of poverty for African-Americans and Hispanics is often a solitary journey across a mine field.
The Million Man March was so successful  because respectable, law-abiding men wanted to stand up and be counted by a news media too often enamored of the activities of minority criminals.
BARBARA SUTTON MASRY Great Neck, L.I.


IS IT ART, OR JUST DEAD MEAT?
Damien Hirst, the British artist, was set to open his newest exhibition at the Gagosian Gallery in downtown Manhattan this fall when trouble hit him from all sides.
"It was a case of us trying to find out too much beforehand," says Hirst.
The exhibition was to feature two pairs of dead, rotting cows simulating copulation by means of a hydraulic device.
Animal-rights groups organized a letter-writing campaign accusing Hirst of cruelty to animals.
The gallery worried that methane gas would build up around the cows, causing an explosion or an unbearable stench.
Informal discussions between the gallery's lawyer and the city Department of Health about the display of animal carcasses did not look promising.
The gallery finally canceled the exhibition, prompting The Sunday Times of London to report, delightedly, that New York City authorities had been afraid the cows might "prompt vomiting among spectators." But the real explanation was  quite simple, according to the bemused artist: if the cow piece had gone ahead,  the government would have closed the gallery down. (Gagosian will mount a different Hirst exhibition, featuring a new work, this spring.) "It's a bit sad," Hirst says.
"I say, 'Don't ask: just do it.' "


Q. &amp; A.
Tax Rules On Fees In a Condo


Katherine Rothkopf, James Hardin
Katherine Rothkopf, a daughter of Arthur and Barbara Rothkopf of Easton, Pa., and James Howard Hardin, the son of Donald and Alice Hardin of Wollaston, Mass., were married last evening.
Judge Stanley S. Harris of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in Washington.
Ms.
Rothkopf, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the assistant curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in art history from Williams College.
Her father, the president of Lafayette College in Easton, was the Deputy Secretary of Transportation from 1991 to 1992.
Her mother retired as the administrator of Woodley House, a psychiatric social-service agency in Washington.


New York, New York
ALPHABET CITY Written and illustrated by Stephen T. Johnson.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $14.99. (All ages)


The Boss Goes Bonkers, The Workers Just Go
To the Editor:
Regarding Karen DeCrow's "Absence Makes the Boss Go Bonkers" (From the Desk Of, Oct. 29), I show up for work.
However, if I found myself working for someone like Ms.
DeCrow, it would be a brief matter of time before I, too, would not show up.


Dancing Up the Career Ladder: The Art of Diane Coburn Bruning
THE choreographer Diane Coburn Bruning improvises like a dynamo, flinging her limbs about and raising an instant sweat dampens her tights and tank top.
Her medium is contemporary ballet, a form that is based on, but departs radically from, classical ballet.
Ms.
Bruning, who lives in North Tarrytown and often develops new works at the Tappan Zee Dance Group's studios here, speaks a language that has excited dance  critics and brought her an increasing number of commissions and awards.


Broadcast Newsman
DAVID BRINKLEY 11 Presidents, 4 Wars, 22 Political Conventions, 1 Moon Landing, 3 Assassinations, 2,000 Weeks of News and Other Stuff on Television and 18 Years of Growing Up in North Carolina.
By David Brinkley.
Illustrated. 273 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


On York Campus, Ire Over CUNY Land Deal
A proposal by the City University of New York to turn over an overgrown vacant lot on its York College campus to a coalition of private and city agencies has angered students and faculty members, who say the move would stem the school's growth.
University administrators hope to sell or lease the property at Guy R. Brewer Boulevard and Liberty Avenue for development of a federally subsidized strip of  shops and restaurants.
Under the college's original master plan, devised when the school was under construction in the 1970's, the site was slated for a student center.
The administrators say they hope the shopping district deal will include a provision to allow the college to use a part of the development for a  student center and a day-care center.


Syosset Building Plans Lead to Calls for a Halt
A SURGE of building plans for Jericho Turnpike in Syosset and Woodbury is uniting some groups in an effort to urge the Oyster Bay Town Board to halt building until the town updates zoning laws and drafts a master plan for the area.
The three-mile corridor between Robbins Lane and Woodbury Road has seen changes.
The additions include a Kmart store east of Underhill Boulevard and a Pathmark supermarket that is to open soon in Woodbury where Gardenworld had been.


Coal Black and Tree Tall'
HER STORIES African American Folktales, Fairy Tales and True Tales.
By Virginia Hamilton.
Illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon. 112 pp.
New York: The Blue Sky Press/ Scholastic Inc. $19.95. (Ages 6 and up)


C. A. Riddell, Robert R. Ennis
Carol Anne Riddell, a reporter at New York 1 News, the cable channel, was married yesterday to Robert Richard Ennis, a New York-based associate with the U.S.-Russia Investment Fund, which invests in businesses in Russia.
The Rev.
Andy Bell, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Brookfield Country Club in Roswell, Ga.
Ms.
Riddell, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Roma Butler Riddell of Marietta, Ga., and Dr.
Wilfred A. Riddell of Atlanta.
The bride's father is the medical director at the South Fulton Hospital in Atlanta.
Her mother retired as a professor of music at the University of Western Ontario in London, Ontario, and is a former soprano with the Canadian Opera Company in Toronto.


Powell Can Only Hope for Big-Tent G.O.P.;Race Still Matters
To the Editor:
Colin Powell made the right decision not to run for President.
He couldn't win.
Despite what many whites believed, his Achilles' heel was still race.


Patricia Kassel, Daniel C. Schwab
Patricia Susan Kassel, a daughter of Terry Kassel of Rye, N.Y., and Jack Kassel of Baltimore, was married last evening to Daniel Craig Schwab, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Schwab of Harrisburg, Pa.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the New York Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Schwab, 24, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
She is a buyer for the Bon-Ton Stores, a chain of department stores based in York, Pa.
Her father is a senior sales executive at Shepherd Clothing, a men's apparel manufacturer in New Bedford, Mass.
Her mother is a sports marketing consultant in New York.


Foreign Affairs;Yitzhak, Bibi and Bill
When I last interviewed Yitzhak Rabin in his office a couple of weeks ago, I  was in the middle of asking him a question when he suddenly looked past me through his open door and called out to his secretary to bring him a beer.
I couldn't help but laugh, because I couldn't imagine any other world leader who would so matter-of-factly interrupt an interview to order a Bud.
But that was the secret of Yitzhak Rabin's political success, and it is a secret President Clinton and other politicians would do well to contemplate.
Mr.
Rabin had the most important attribute of leadership -- authenticity.
He put on  no airs, he wore no masks, what you saw was what you got, and what you got was a man who barely knew how to tie a tie, whose pants were always two inches too long, who blew cigarette smoke in your face while you were paying him a compliment and who often stammered in ungrammatical Hebrew.


Science Gives Fresh Faces to Old Vermeers
SOMETIME IN THE LAST century, a fragment of white paint migrated from its place in Vermeer's portrait of a girl with a blue headdress and settled on the earring that dangles in the shadows of her neck.
Glued down by murky varnish, the paint chip shrank the bauble's apparent diameter and gave the painting its modern title, "Girl With a Pearl Earring."
But when conservators looked through a microscope while cleaning the painting for "Vermeer and the Art of Painting," an exhibition that opens today at the National Gallery of Art, they saw varnish underneath the paint chip, proof that  the fragment was not original.


A Stone-Age Horse Still Roams a Tibetan Plateau
Deep in Tibet, in a high and icy valley, the explorers came upon the first of the enigmatic creatures.
They saw one, and then three of them grazing in the open forest.
Soon, to their astonishment, a whole herd of the unusual horses appeared.
"They looked completely archaic, like the horses in prehistoric cave paintings," said Michel Peissel, a French ethnologist and the expedition leader.
"We thought it was just a freak, then we saw they were all alike."


Elizabeth Kates and Joel Rothman
Elizabeth Ann Kates, the daughter of Linda and Stephen Kates of Boca Raton, Fla., was married there last evening to Joel Benjamin Rothman, the son of Irene  Barish of Aventura, Fla., and Dr.
Stan Rothman of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Agler officiated at the Woodfield Country Club.
Mrs.
Rothman, 28, is a corporate relations coordinator at George Little Management, an organizer of trade shows, in White Plains.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the vice president of strategic communications at Outsource, a human resources company in Boca Raton.
Her mother is an interior designer in Boca Raton.


Talking Some Good, Hard Truths About Music
JAZZ IS AMERICA'S CLASSICAL MUSIC," people often say. President Clinton, among others, has uttered the phrase. There are pernicious implications buried in it. The first is that classical music does not exist at all in the United States, in any indigenous sense; it can only be used as a metaphor for other kinds of music. The second is that jazz itself has become "classical" in the pejorative sense: complete, finished, historical.
There might be at least a half-truth here.
Through the 20th century, jazz has won the universal status that was previously the claim solely of classical tradition.
Its procession of major voices, from Louis Armstrong to Duke Ellington to John Coltrane to Miles Davis, is no less imposing than the polemically disordered retinue of American classical composers, perhaps more so.
More important for its future, jazz has made precise technical demands on its practitioners that can be codified, after long argument, into a syllabus for education.


New Signs Urge Drivers To Slow for the Elderly
The next time you're in Pennsauken, you may notice a new character on four new traffic signs at the intersection of North Park Drive and McClellan Avenue:  a pedestrian walking with a cane.
The signs are designed to make motorists slow down for the elderly.
An average of 18 to 26 people over age 62 are killed every three months in crossing accidents, according to Department of Highway Safety statistics.


Rangers Continue Their Rise To the Top
They aren't playing top teams yet, but the Rangers -- and their best players  -- are gaining momentum.
Their scoring lines are scoring.
Their checking lines are checking.
Their defensemen are playing it smart and steady and both goalies  are stopping the puck.
As a team, they continued their surge toward the top of the National Hockey League standings tonight with a 4-1 victory over the Whalers.
It was the fourth consecutive victory for the Rangers, who raised their record to 11-5-1.
Mark Messier, the captain and center of the first line, scored one goal and set up another.
Messier has scored at least one goal in each of the last five games.
He has seven in that span and 11 for the season, most on the team.


George Enjoys a Heisman-Type Day
Ohio State 41, Illinois 3 Eddie George took a large stride toward the Heisman Trophy yesterday, rushing for a school-record 314 yards on 36 carries and scoring three times as Ohio State, ranked No. 4 by the New York Times computer and No. 2 in the Associated Press poll, beat Illinois, 41-3, in Columbus, Ohio.


South Africa Votes: Still Thrilled With Democracy
GOING into his nation's second round of free elections, President Nelson Mandela and his party, the African National Congress, were an easy target.
After 18 months in office, South Africa's new Government could claim credit for fewer  than 11,000 new houses (it had promised 1 million in five years).
Crime had turned some areas of the country into armed camps.
And visions of health clinics and new schools were still just that.
Was impatience growing?
Would the more than 30 million newly enfranchised blacks lose interest in democracy?


Militia Groups Find New Target: Local Government
At a township meeting this week marked by screams, boos and taunts of "communist!" and the tears of an elderly woman upset to see neighbor turning against neighbor, a big man in the vortex of the storm seemed inspired.
A smile dancing in his eyes, William Ordiway Jr., a leader in the Michigan Militia, had come here to Norman Township to pitch thunderbolts.


The British Return to Philadelphia's Ft. Mifflin
Two hundred eighteen years ago, the British Army laid siege to Fort Mifflin,  pummeling the enclave on the Delaware River with artillery fire and killing more than 100 Colonial soldiers in a five-day battle.
On Friday, the British made amends of sorts with a $5,000 check to the historical organization that runs the moat-encircled fort here as a museum.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT


POSTINGS: $12,000 for 2,700 Paper-Thin, 23 1/2-Karat, 3-by-5-InchSheets; A Fifth Avenue Dome Gets a Toupee of Gold
A crew of steeplejacks has spent its working hours over the last four months  suspended from a 50-foot-high flagpole atop 170 Fifth Avenue, applying paper-thin sheets of gold to the building's Renaissance-style octagonal dome.
The regilding, using 2,700 3- by 5-inch sheets of 23 1/2-carat West German gold  worth $12,000, is expected to be completed soon.
"We originally gilded the dome in 1990," said Sheldon Stein, managing agent of the building, at the southwest corner of 22d Street.
"The former contractor improperly prepared the surface, causing large rust streaks to appear within months. I was getting calls from all over town about it. We light the building at night and people look at it from their windows. The contractor completely repaid to redo it after four years of litigation."


Self-Censorship at CBS
The emerging picture of what cigarette manufacturers have known and done or failed to do about the health hazards of tobacco is one of the biggest and most  absorbing news stories of the year.
Nevertheless, "60 Minutes" has decided to spike an interview with a tobacco-industry whistleblower out of fear of a lawsuit that the industry had not even threatened to file.
This act of self-censorship by the country's most powerful and aggressive television news program sends a chilling message to journalists investigating industry practices everywhere.
CBS's legal concerns over the interview were said to be based on fears that the subject of the interview, a former executive of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, had an agreement with the company not to disclose internal  company matters.
The CBS lawyers argued that the tobacco company, instead of claiming that it had been libeled by a false report, would simply declare that its former employee was committing a contract violation.
CBS, these lawyers said, could then be held liable and be directed to pay huge amounts in damages for inducing him to do so.
One disheartening aspect of CBS's decision is that the theory of liability for inducing someone to break a contract is almost wholly untested in news cases when First Amendment protections of freedom of the press are at stake.
Many legal scholars argue that liability in such cases can be overriden when a public good is served, including public health.
Were this doctrine to be accepted, it would devastate independent journalism, which counts on people to come forth and speak of wrongs they know about inside protective organizations.
In any event, CBS's response to a feared suit under this doctrine was exactly wrong.
New York-based news organizations often face legal challenges in unfriendly state courts.
They have an obligation to defend the journalistic franchise rather than cave in at the prospect of litigation.


Boxes for This and That, Even a Poem or Two
WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT THAT a lacquer box would have been politically correct in 17th-century Japan?
The two gnarled pines, intertwined against an inky sky, that are gilded on the lid recall a tale, well known in Noh theater, of the male spirit who crossed the sea and mountain each night to be with his wife until dawn.
The image of the trees, a metaphor for aging lovers, symbolized fidelity in marriage, an ideal that was widely promoted by the court to maintain stability throughout the empire.
Not only on the outside did the box carry a message; its very purpose was to  store poems written by its aristocrat owner.
The poems were often simple moral reflections that the authors exchanged at parties the way we might trade investment advice.
Poetry was used by 17th- and 18th-century emperors to preserve the high moral tone and esthetic principles that were deemed desirable  in society.


Fertility Clinic Is Blamed in Theft Of Eggs From Sedated Women
Eggs were stolen from nine women who were anesthetized for what they thought  were routine diagnostic procedures at a fertility clinic, a newspaper reported today.
The eggs were implanted in other women and resulted in three births, The Orange County Register said, citing records and interviews.


Zeal of Rabin's Assassin Linked To Rabbis of the Religious Right
The men arrested in the killing of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin are part of a new, deeply religious Jewish underground movement whose fury was fueled by the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord, Israeli police officials and political analysts say.
A week after the assassination, the picture emerging from the police investigation is of a small band with many of its adherents coming out of religious schools, a spinoff from the Kach organization founded by Rabbi Meir Kahane that revolved around the killer, Yigal Amir, and his brother Hagai.


Middle Village, Manhattan
ASTI + (212) 741-9105; 13 East 12th Street; $$(c) all major credit cards


Grading the Public Schools
DUMBING DOWN OUR KIDS Why America's Children Feel Good About Themselves but Can't Read, Write, or Add.
By Charles J. Sykes. 341 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.
POSSIBLE LIVES The Promise of Public Education in America.
By Mike Rose. 454 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


Jean-Louis Curtis; French Author, 78
Jean-Louis Curtis, whose novel "Forests of the Night" won him France's highest literary prize, died today of a heart attack in a Paris hospital.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Curtis won the Prix Goncourt in 1947 for "Forests of the Night," a fictional account of Nazi occupation through the eyes of a young village girl.


Maryland Betting Parlor Enrages a Neighborhood
When Vincent (Cap) Mona was trying to figure out a way to make his marina restaurant here in southern Maryland more profitable, he discovered that local zoning regulations allowed him only a few options.
Most he regarded as unimaginable, like a bowling alley, a sawmill, a dry cleaning shop or a fish-processing plant.
But off-track betting was also on the list, and in a flash, Mr.
Mona saw the future.
That was two years ago.
Today, his redecorated and renamed restaurant, the Port Tobacco Turf Club, opened for business with all the trappings of parimutuel wagering: betting counters, banks of televisions, tout sheets and chain-smoking  gamblers far more interested in odds than entrees.


Ready for Your Close-Up, Mr. President?
MICHAEL DOUGLAS IN the Oval Office?
Gives you pause.
Could a guy who has had  his excesses and marital problems chronicled in Vanity Fair be President?
In the real Washington, there are politicians (whom we might call Newt Gingrich and Bill Clinton) who think they can overcome that.
So why not in the movies?
There was once a lot of harrumphing about politics taking on the values  of entertainment.
Many people were appalled when an actor became President.
But  nowadays, everyone understands that there are two capitals of illusion: Washington and Hollywood.


Concerns Over Budget
Advocates for the elderly and the disabled have been pushing for years to fortify the nation's system of long-term care.
Now they are worried about what the planned curtailment of Medicaid and other programs will do to a system they  already view as a patchwork.
Article, page 30.


Alison Matthews, Stephen Muller
Alison Frances Matthews, a teacher at the Dwight School in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen McAdam Muller, an assistant district attorney for Bronx County.
The Rev.
Kenneth T. MacLean performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Ms.
Matthews, 24, is keeping her name.
She teaches kindergarten music, sixth- and eighth-grade English and remedial high school English.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is the daughter of Julie Hull of Haslett, Mich., and Donnell R. Matthews Jr. of Southfield, Mich., and the stepdaughter of Frederick Hull.


Schoolteacher Knows 3:40 Will Make Grade
Mary Gilligan loosened up for the start of a recent training session in the evening twilight at the Fort Monmouth running track in Tinton Falls, N.J.
The air was cool, the wind still.
A dozen runners showed up to do their weekly speed work.
The coach, Bobby Gordon, checked his stopwatch, said, "Go," and Gilligan took off for the workout that would show if she was ready to achieve her goal in today's New York City Marathon.


Not Strictly A Woman's Work
To the Editor:
In her article about the Cecilia Beaux exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery ["Recording the Good News of the Gilded Age," Oct. 29], Mary Gordon makes much of the artist's early activity as a painter of portraits on china plates.
According to Ms.
Gordon, this is yet another example of the low esteem in which women artists were held in the late 19th century.


Campaign Reform School;Now Moving Up on the Outside . . .
ONLY months ago, Bill Clinton was widely viewed as such a goner that even Dick Morris, who later emerged as his chief strategist, dismissed him.
"Bill Clinton will complete his course of study when he is defeated in 1996," Mr.
Morris wrote in a speech for a Republican gubernatorial candidate last year.
But such talk among Republicans -- as well as among many Democrats who were ready to dump their standard bearer -- was premature, if not presumptuous.
Bill  Clinton no longer looks like a certain loser.
He looks like someone who could be elected President.
Again.


Ms. O'Callaghan, Mr. Coughlin
Maura Ann O'Callaghan, the daughter of Mary Agnes and John J. O'Callaghan of  Woodbury, L.I., was married on Friday to Timothy John Coughlin, a son of Alice and Francis J. Coughlin of Manhasset, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles M. Kavanagh, the vicar  for development for the Archdiocese of New York, performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Coughlin, 28, graduated from Fairfield University and in June received a master's degree in elementary education from Fordham University.
Her father is Dean Witter's senior vice president in charge of floor operations at the New York Stock Exchange.


BENEFITS


ENDPAPER: Duets III;The Poetry of Frank Sinatra and Friends
"This Chick Scares Me" (With Sylvia Plath)


Britten's 'St. Nicholas' Opens Holiday Season
FOR the Fairfield County Chorale, the Christmas season premieres today with its performance of Benjamin Britten's "St. Nicholas," a cantata describing the life and miracles of the patron saint of children.
Johannes Somary, music director, conducts the 4 P.M. concert at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Stamford, with the tenor Patrick Romano in the title role and Kent Tritie the featured organ soloist.
A pair of free choral concerts at 3 P.M. also brighten today's calendar.
In New Haven, the Choir of United Church on the Green sings Mozart's Requiem with Mark Brombaugh conducting the soloists and orchestra.
And St.
Peter's Church in  Danbury is the vocal meeting ground for the Danbury Concert Chorus and the Western Connecticut State University Choir, their music directors, Charles Matz  and Kevin Isaacs, respectively on the podium for Te Deums of Berlioz and John Rutter.


Melissa E. Katz, Jonathan T. Kane
Melissa Ellen Katz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Katz of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Thomas Kane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Joel Kane of Waban, Mass.
Rabbi Judah Nadich performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
The bride, 27, is an independent press agent in the entertainment industry in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a partner in Maloney, Gerra, Mehlman &amp; Katz, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Judy Katz, is a sculptor and illustrator and an adjunct professor of graphic design at Parsons School of Design in New York.


Are Stocks Cheap? Sure, Just As in 1972
Mr.
Alger believes that rarely, if ever, has the future of the stock market  been so promising and predicts the good times will last for years.
He cites a valuation measurement that correctly showed stocks were extremely overvalued in  1987 and now shows them to be cheap, at the low end of historical valuations.
He figures that a good 1996 for the stock market is virtually a sure thing.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CAT SHOW


Ouch! It's Time For WTA's Tourney
What if you invited 16 top women players to a world championship tennis tournament that offered $2 million in prize money and nobody came?
You panic in private, but in public you assure your new sponsor, Corel, whose chief executive wanted to bat some practice balls around with the likes of Steffi Graf and Monica Seles, that there is nothing to worry about.


Yevtushenko's Revolution
DON'T DIE BEFORE YOU'RE DEAD By Yevgeny Yevtushenko.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis 415 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.
IT can take a while, but success and fame in Russia are always punished eventually.
Throughout the 1960's, 70's and 80's and even up until the moment the statues of Lenin came tumbling down, Yevgeny Yevtushenko was the Russian "superpoet," worshiped by millions.
They packed soccer stadiums to hear him recite his ringing, defiant verse, and in the West he was lionized for his talent and extravagant charm.
Mr.
Yevtushenko's stature was so inviolable it daunted even the K.G.B., which skittered between intimidation and clumsy attempts to flatter and co-opt him.


DIARY
LET'S MAKE A DEAL


He and She
To the Editor:
It is amusing, if not reassuring, to learn that Thomas Mann's original English translator was a man.
"Lowe-Porter's apology . . . was exaggerated, but  his vocabulary was wholly Victorian, and he missed Mann's voice," D. J. R. Bruckner declares in his review of John E. Woods's translation of "The Magic Mountain" (Books in Brief, Oct. 22).
But surely H. T. Lowe-Porter was a woman.
Indeed, when Knopf hired her in 1925, it was "despite Mann's insistence that a woman would not be equal to the task" (see TLS, Oct. 13).
I must be at least the 17th person to write you in wonderment.


Pheasants Pay the Bill for All That Good Food
At 7:56 this morning, four minutes before the official starting time, a shotgun boomed and the report rumbled across a dun-colored field of tall grass.
Then came another discharge, followed quickly by another some distance away,  instantly lost in a barrage that sounded like the opening guns at Verdun.


Talking Turkey
Dori Sanders lives where she has always lived -- on a 150- acre farm along Route 321 in Filbert, S.C., which her father, a school principal, began farming  in 1915.
Like three of her nine brothers and sisters, Sanders has never had a good reason to leave.
Harvesting the peaches, watermelons and cantaloupes, the mule corn and okra, the tomatoes, turnips and mustard greens keeps everybody busy.
To say nothing of being well fed.
The land also gives Sanders a certain serenity and a perch from which to contemplate the universe.
From the family's farm stand, she sees all she needs to know about the human condition.
In fact, one fall not long ago, Sanders saw two funeral processions pass by.
The first, she remembers, was of all black people, and a little girl looked at her and waved "the saddest wave I ever saw." Later, a funeral procession of all white mourners went by, and a woman looked at her and bowed her head.


Office Away From Home
It used to be that hotels only had to offer all the comforts of home.
Now, they are competing to include all the functionality of an office as well.
Since  last month, Westin has been offering Guest Office rooms in 32 hotels in North America, with a printer-fax-copier machine and Macintosh and IBM compatible printer cables to go with it, a speaker phone with data port and an ergonomically designed chair.
Guest Office room rates are about $20 higher than  standard rates, but an $8 breakfast credit is included.
For information: (800) 228-3000.


St. Anthony's Holds On To Hopes for a 3d Title
Bill Fowler rushed for 192 yards and 4 short-yardage touchdowns to help ST.
ANTHONY'S (10-0) edge MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL (7-2), 42-41, in the Catholic High School Football League AAA-AA semifinal at St.
John's University.
In a seesaw matchup in which the lead changed seven times, St.
Anthony's, the winner of 19 consecutive games, managed to hold off Mount in the waning minutes to earn a chance at its third consecutive title.
It was the league's highest-scoring game  of the season.
Next weekend, the Friars will take on ST.
FRANCIS PREP (7-3), which beat IONA PREP (8-2), 15-7, in the first game of the doubleheader at St.
John's.
P.S.A.L.


Looking for Love in All the Wrong Pages
MY DAUGHTERS are too smart, too independent, too capable, and they're all unmarried," a subscriber said with involuntary resignation after the first act of "Love Comics" at the George Street Playhouse.
She was commiserating with Felice, one of the musical's five characters, who  had to take the cure for a "terminal case of intelligence," the disease that drives an eligible rich guy right into the arms of "a dingbat with no I.Q."


Reducing River's Sites To a Manageable Scale
ROUNDING a curve, a train speeds past Lyndhurst, Sunnyside and Main Street in Dobbs Ferry -- all in less than a minute.
Has a bullet train begun service on the Hudson Line?
No, these sites and others appear in miniature in a new installation evoking life along the river at the start of the 20th century.
The "Hudson River Garden Railroad," built by Paul Busse, is a multilevel work, complete with river and waterfalls, two model G-scale trains and a trolley running through the Palisades.
A permanent installation, measuring 19 by 10 by 9 feet, it went on view at the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale in early September.


Reaching the Finish Line Daunts Volunteers as Much as Runners
Not just anybody can be a bandit-catcher.
Or a chute-pusher.
Or especially a  rope-puller.
Marshals, on the other hand, are as common as 4-hour finishers.
And food-and-baggage workers are so lacking in marathon mystique that there were still vacancies for their jobs late this week.


Cameron A. Bruce, Robert Masson 2d
Cameron Anderson Bruce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas A. Bruce of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Robert Louis Masson 2d of the  Navy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Masson of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Hughert performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Masson, 26, is a sales associate at Tiffany &amp; Company in San Diego.
She  graduated from Hartwick College and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father retired as a general manager at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, the advertising agency in New York.


Sturdy Flavors Are a Must for Autumn Tables
AUTUMN'S bounty beckons.
Rich squash, sturdy greens and ripe pears provide robust flavors for an autumn menu.
Butternut or other winter squash, cooked until tender, then pureed in a food  processor, easily becomes the basis for a bisque-like creamless soup.
Similarly, pears can be pureed to stand in for an egg-and-cream-custard filling for a tart.
Both these recipes are worth remembering for Thanksgiving.


Deadly Logic in Nigeria
In deciding whether to proceed with the execution of one of his country's leading human rights campaigners and authors, Nigeria's military ruler, Gen.
Sani Abacha, carefully weighed the possible repercussions.
In the weeks before the hanging of the opposition figure Ken Saro-Wiwa, the international community had been sending increasingly emphatic signals that his  execution would earn Nigeria the world's condemnation.


Savage Puritans Ripped Her Bodice
FOR most people, Billy Wilder's movie "The Seven Year Itch" is memorable for  Marilyn Monroe and a breezy subway grate.
But publishers and collectors of paperback novels thrill to another scene in the George Axelrod play on which the film is based.
The hero, a vice president in charge of sales at a 25-cent publishing house, explains that a book called "Of Man and the Unconscious" is to be retitled "Of Sex and Violence." Before the author is done stammering his protest, he is told to cheer up.
It could be worse.
The publisher is bringing out "The Scarlet Letter" under the title "I Was an Adulteress." "The cover will  be a picture of Hester Prynne with a cigarette hanging out of her mouth," the hero later confides.
"She'll be in a real tight, low-cut dress. Our big problem  is, if the dress is cut low enough to sell any copies there won't be any space on the front for a big, red letter."
First performed on Broadway in 1952, during a boom in the paperback industry, the play includes a subplot that is a not very exaggerated parody of book publishing in America after World War II.
For a few uninhibited years, the strategies of mass-market distribution, intense competition for a literate public and a relaxed attitude toward provocative imagery combined to produce a unique publishing culture.


The Mouse That Read
THE SCHOOL MOUSE By Dick King-Smith.
Illustrated by Cynthia Fisher. 124 pp.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $13.95. (Ages 7 to 10)


L.I. Vines
Cabernet Sauvignon Gristina Vineyards, Cutchogue, 1992. About $14.


PARIS
Wander about Paris this time of year, and you won't need a calendar to remind you of the season: it's fall, time for the annual ritual of "gibier," or the furred and feathered game that capture the French imagination, as well as appetite, as soon as the weather turns cool.
Just around the corner from my apartment, one local cafe proudly displays an  entire, full-furred wild boar, a not-so-subtle suggestion to come in and sample  the stews, grilled meats and well-seasoned pates the cafe offers in fall and winter months.
Steps away, the neighborhood butcher is busy setting up a display of brightly feathered partridge, grouse, pheasant and wild duck.


Corrections
A picture and a chart last Sunday with an article about the East Side social  circuit misspelled the surname of a freelance photographer.
He is Patrick McMullan, not McMullen.


BULLIES, CRASH PADS AND SOUL MUSIC
To the Editor:
In regard to Robert Lipsyte's admission that he doesn't love dogs, I would like to say:


To the Roster of Bullies, Add Some School Principals
To the Editor:
I wish you had used more than just one brief sentence about Naomi Smartt, principal of P.S. 198 in East Flatbush ("Bullydom's Realpolitik: What to Tell Your Kid," Oct. 22).
I was the school psychologist when she became principal, and her skills in calming calamities and in encouraging consensus were phenomenal.


Ehud A. Gelblum, Laura J. Crane
Laura Joyce Crane, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Crane of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Ehud Alexander Gelblum, the son of Peter Gelblum of Philadelphia and the late Hava Gelblum.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 28, is a marketing manager at the American Express Company in New  York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in New York.
Her mother is a real estate broker at Doernberg Real Estate in Scarsdale.


What About the Needs Of the Hard of Hearing?
The article "In a World Where One's Hands Speak" (Oct. 15) claims that American Sign Language is the third most frequently used language in the country after English and Spanish.
Nonsense.
A.S.L. is used by about 500,000 people mostly to one another.
Spanish, Italian, French, German, Polish, Chinese and the Philippine languages are spoken at home by people with difficulty with English,  according to the World Almanac, in every case exceeding 500,000.
A.S.L. is not even listed.
The big D Deaf are highly visible so the popular misconception is that they represent the deaf world.
They are 1 million of the 25 million hearing-impaired, about 4 percent.
The impression is reinforced by the signers on television commercials, little-used captioning on video tapes, "The Miracle Worker," "Children of a Lesser God," the National Theater of the Deaf and the TDDs and TTYs in libraries.


NASA Cancels Shuttle Liftoff, Citing Weather
NASA canceled the liftoff of the space shuttle Atlantis early today because of poor weather at emergency landing sites in Spain and Morocco.
Officials said it was only the second time that a shuttle launching had been  postponed because of bad weather at an emergency landing site; the other was in January 1986.


Coming School Board Meetings
THE BRONX


A Modernist for the Masses
NO PROBLEM IN the world of concert music is more troubling than the chasm between living composers and large segments of the audience, a situation unprecedented in music history.
Some commentators fix the blame on a band of influential composers born in the 1920's who emerged in the late 50's as post-Webernian Serialists: Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Luigi Nono, Gyorgy Ligeti, the front line of the international avant-garde.
The case of another member of that seminal group, Luciano Berio, who recently turned 70, shows the fallacy of the blame game.
Mr.
Berio yields to no one in terms of cutting-edge modernism.
Yet his work is continually intriguing, even to many listeners indifferent to contemporary music.
No matter how complex, his compositional procedures seem guided by instinctive, not intellectual, impulses; no matter how seemingly disjointed, his works unfold with visceral power and dramatic continuity.
And he possesses probably the most acute ear for sensuous sound colorings since Debussy's.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
GHOST GRIZZLIES By David Petersen. John Macrae/Holt, $27.50.


The Plain Truth About Wellesley
To the Editor:
I was pleased to be highlighted in your article "How to Succeed? Go to Wellesley" (Oct. 29).
Please note, however, that I am not above the glass ceiling, just scrunched more tightly underneath it.
Were I a man, I would be the chief economist for all of CS First Boston, not just for the equities department.
Wall Street is still diversity unfriendly at the top.


A Woman's Work
YOU WANT WOMEN TO VOTE, LIZZIE STANTON?
By Jean Fritz.
Illustrated by DyAnne DiSalvo-Ryan. 88 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $15.95. (Ages 7 to 10)


Sports of The Times;Is Greed Destroying N.F.L. Fans' Devotion?
ART MODELL keeps pleading that he had "no choice" but to take the money and run from Cleveland to Baltimore next season, as if the millions were all that mattered for his children and grandchildren.
But he had a choice.
The Browns' owner surely could have found a Cleveland buyer who would have promised to keep the team there while he got out of hock on his alleged $20 million debt and still had enough to assure his family's inheritance.


Nobel Winner Says Test Ban Seems Nearer
France's decision to resume nuclear testing may have brought a comprehensive  test ban treaty closer, the man who won a Nobel Peace Prize last month for his anti-nuclear activities said at a conference on nuclear disarmament today.
Joseph Rotblat, who was awarded the prize for his campaign for the abolition  of nuclear weapons, said the protests over the French tests had brought unexpected positive spinoffs.


Sussex Polls Opened Despite Threat of Sickout
Many election officials worry about voter turnout on election day.
In Sussex  County last Tuesday, however, election officials were worried about poll worker  turnout, when longtime Election Day workers threatened a sickout to protest their wages.
Last August, Governor Whitman gave counties the option to increase  the wage of a poll worker for the first time since 1987, from $75 to $100.
Nine  of 21 boards of freeholders voted for the raises, and most of the rest are considering a raise for next year.


Correction
An article on Sept. 24 about new attractions in eight European cities gave an incorrect spelling and telephone number for a restaurant in Brussels.
A reader's letter received on Oct. 30 points out that the name is Aglio y Olio; the number  is (322) 513-4276.


Three Sturdy Flavors For Autumn Tables
AUTUMN'S bounty beckons.
Rich squash, sturdy greens and ripe pears provide robust flavors for an autumn menu.
Butternut or other winter squash, cooked until tender, then pureed in a food  processor, easily becomes the basis for a bisquelike creamless soup.
Similarly,  pears can be pureed to stand in for an egg-and-cream custard filling for a tart.
Both these recipes are worth remembering for Thanksgiving.


An Egyptian Pyramid Closes for Restoration
One of the three famous Giza pyramids, known as the Chephren, has been closed to visitors and will remain off limits for at least six months.
This is the second time the pyramid has been closed since it was opened to the public in 1882.
The first time was in late 1986, when the Egyptian authorities began a restoration program that lasted nearly a year.
According to officials from the Egyptian Antiquities Authority, Egypt's foremost archeological group, the decision to close the pyramid was taken after a piece of the burial chamber's stone ceiling 3 feet 4 inches long and 8 inches wide fell off. (No one was injured.)


Shimizu's Daughter
ONE BIRD By Kyoko Mori. 242 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up)
KYOKO MORI'S second novel for young adults, "One Bird," is so lively and affecting that one imagines its readers will be too engaged by its heroine's situation to notice how much -- and how painlessly -- they are learning about another culture.
This gracefully written book involves us so immediately in the  emotional and spiritual life of a 15-year-old Japanese girl that only rarely do  we pause to register which aspects of Megumi Shimizu's story are specific to her country, and how much her experience has in common with the larger world of adolescence.


BAROQUE SPLENDOR IN AN OLD PORT
There is in Italy a great city by the sea that I have lately come to love.
Its name is Genoa.
For centuries it was common ground among foreign visitors to Italy that Genoa was like nowhere else and should not be missed.
From the English diarist John Evelyn in 1644 to Herman Melville in 1857, Mark Twain in 1869, Henry James in 1877, Anton Chekhov in the 1880's and Dylan Thomas in 1947, all were agreed.


Closing New York's Hospitals Will Jeopardize Health of All
To the Editor:
Dr.
Gary Kalkut's plea that we should not dismantle New York City's municipal hospital system (Op-Ed, Nov. 3) comes at just the right time.
These hospital closings will adversely affect the health of all New Yorkers.


Why a Swing District Swung to the Democrats
The phone still rings at the Republican headquarters for the 18th Assembly District.
But Charlie Smith, campaign manager for the two candidates defeated here in Tuesday's election, says there is little to do now but pack up and leave.
"It's a heartbreaker," he said on Thursday.
"Nothing left to do now but pack  up all the campaign strategies that we thought were going work."


The Marathon: An On-Line Report
Coverage of the 1995 Marathon, with a look back at previous New York City Marathons, is available to computer users on @times, The Times's service on America Online.


Disabled Marathoner Who Never Quits Shows Others the Way
ZOE KOPLOWITZ expects to make her usual last-place finish in today's New York City Marathon.
The last seven times she has run the race, the 47-year-old woman  has trailed the winner by more than a day, last year posting a time of 26 hours  30 minutes.
What makes her accomplishment more notable than those of other competitors who finish in a fraction of her time is that Ms.
Koplowitz suffers from multiple sclerosis, a neurological disorder, and runs the race on crutches.
A member of the Achilles Track Club, for disabled athletes, Ms.
Koplowitz says she and other club members serve as visual reminders of the marathon principal "of reaching past that point in life where you would ordinarily give up and kick it in." Passing that point, she adds, forever changes your life.


Watching for a Judgment of Real Evil
SPOTLIGHTS BURNED scorchingly bright at the Palace of Justice in Nuremberg on Nov. 20, 1945.
Twenty-one surviving leaders of Nazi Germany were about to enter  a court that had been invented for the purpose of judging them.
It was the largest crime in history, and it promised the greatest courtroom spectacle.
But  the first sight of the defendants, seated in two gray rows, created an unexpected reaction, something akin to disappointment.
With their cheap suits and hungry faces, these undistinguished men did not look like the archcriminals  of the age.
What ensued was an excruciatingly long and complex trial that failed to mesmerize a distracted world.
Its mass of evidence created boredom, mixed occasionally with an abject horror before which ordinary justice seemed helpless.
Its premises caused endless legal controversy.
Its finale, 10 messy hangings and a surreptitious suicide, was less than majestic.
Its one legacy seemed to be the celebrity of Albert Speer, Hitler's architect and armaments minister, who escaped death with gestures of ambiguous atonement.
No subsequent  international tribunal addressed the further atrocities that accumulated in the  20th century.


For Horse-Drawn Carts, Hurdles in Baltimore
Boom Boom knows how to make his horse cart look like a gourmet produce market on wheels.
And he, his grandfather, fiancee and son have more than a century of  knowledge among them in the Baltimore peddling tradition known as arabbing.
Loading from a sidewalk, Boom Boom, whose given name is James Chase, packs a  bounty of cantaloupes, tomatoes, collard greens, sweet potatoes and tangerines.
He crowns the spread with bunches of grapes, which he'll pluck and eat as he plods his way through some of the toughest streets in Baltimore.


Ms. Greenfield and Mr. Jacobson
Sondra Marilyn Greenfield, a retired school nurse, is to be married today to  Norman Jacobson, a real estate consultant and broker in New York.
Rabbi David K. Holtz is to perform the ceremony at the Ardsley Country Club in Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The bride, 63, a graduate of the Beth Israel Hospital School of Nursing, worked for the public schools in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Anna Silverman of Bloomfield, Conn., and the late Harry Lassow.


Ms. Kleszczewski, Mr. Schwartzman
Catherine Maud Josephine Kleszczewski, the daughter of Julie and Nicholas Kleszczewski of New York, is to be married today to Eric Steven Schwartzman, the son of Gloria and Rudy Schwartzman of Plainview, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas F. Pike, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the ceremony  at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel is to take part in the ceremony.


Plants to Keep From the Curious
NOW that the focal point of gardening has moved indoors, a practical precaution is in order.
Parents and people with animals in their homes need to remember that some common house plants are poisonous.
Especially susceptible are children under 5 and puppies and kittens.
The consequences for curious nibblers can be drastic: possibly severe illness or, in some cases, death.
Some potentially harmful plants may be received as gifts; others just may be part of a house plant collection.
Sometimes just the leaves or the fruit of a particular plant may be the hazard.


Sunday: November 12, 1995;Mama, Looka Boo-Boo
Between menacing roles in "Night of the Hunter" (1955) and "Thunder Road" (1958), Robert Mitchum recorded an album of his calypso favorites.
Back then, it bombed.
But the beat goes on, and Caroline Records, a label best known for producing the first albums of alternative rock banks like Hole, has just reissued "Calypso Is Like So . . . " Rather than promoting the offbeat disk to aging Mitchum fans, the label is going after the same hip audience that has dusted off Tony Bennett.
"He's going to become an alternative rock star," says Ashley Warren, Caroline's catalogue manager.


Thanksgiving, With No Dishes to Do
AT Thanksgiving, most people look forward to a family gathering over a big, old-fashioned, pigout turkey dinner.
But nowhere is it writ that the family must eat at home.
And for various reasons, more and more families are leaving the cooking to others.
Lest you think dining out means you lose something of the festivities, the following spots, mostly country inns with fires glowing in warm dining rooms, serve up a huge helping of tradition along with their turkey and other very good food.
Advance booking is essential; at the charming HOMESTEAD INN in Greenwich,  for example, reservations are already wait-listed.


Patricia M. Walsh, Michael I. Sovern
Dr.
Patricia Margaret Walsh, a publishing executive, is to be married today to Michael Ira Sovern, the former president of Columbia University.
Judge Leon Polsky, retired from the New York State Court of Claims, is to officiate at Mr.
Sovern's home in New York.
The bride, 48, owns Black Swan Books Ltd., a publishing house in Redding Ridge, Conn., that specializes in the humanities and contemporary arts.
She graduated from New York University and received master's degrees in library science from Rutgers University and liberal studies from the New School for Social Research.
She received a doctorate in English from St.
John's University.
She is the daughter of Margaret M. Reilly of Danbury, Conn., and the late John J. Reilly, who was a manager at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.


Campaign Reform School;Mudslinging Misses, For a Change
THE brash young operatives called it "Santa's Workshop." In the back office of the Virginia Republican Party, two men and a Macintosh churned out designs for 2.4 million lurid fliers that were mailed to districts where the party thought it had the best chance of knocking off Democratic state legislators.
Several analysts believe the young men's postal blitz helped decide last week's  election.
Against them.


Renting And Law On Young
ROSE ANELLO had a problem.
When she and her husband went apartment hunting in Manhattan recently they had difficulty finding a reasonably priced, reasonably sized two-bedroom apartment.
Twice they found what they were looking for and filled out leases for the landlord.
Twice they were rejected when what looked like a two-bedroom to them  mysteriously turned into a "legal one-bedroom" after the landlord discovered that the couple had two small children.


Foreigners Can Speak Freely
In 1987, eight Palestinian men and a Kenyan woman, living in California, were arrested; Government officials said they had supported terrorism, and they were  later charged with advocating "world Communism" and ordered deported.
But civil  libertarians argued that their real crime was that they raised money for the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
For sure, the P.F.L.P. had engaged in bombings and airline hijackings, but it also conducts peaceful political and relief activities.
In a case that evoked cold war-era efforts to control the views that foreigners may import, lawyers for the eight argued that  contributing money for peaceful purposes to a group that also commits violence is protected by the First Amendment.
Last week, a three-judge Federal panel in San Francisco agreed, ruling that foreigners in the United States have the same  right to free speech as Americans.
KENNETH B. NOBLE


Famously
MOST FAMOUSLY," The New York Times wrote last month about the retiring Senator Sam Nunn, "he opposed the war against Iraq, in part because he knew that Gen.
Colin Powell and other military leaders were among those urging that sanctions be exhausted first."
In the same week in the same newspaper, a culture reporter noted "the famously low-budget film 'El Mariachi,' " a poet quoted something "Samuel Johnson famously said of a new translation of Aeschylus" and a foreign affairs writer asked, "Isn't this the Mexico that is famously proud of its 1910 Revolution?"


Streetscapes: 3 East 84th Street;An Art Deco Precursor of the Daily News Building
WHEN the publisher Joseph Medill Patterson was planning the Daily News building on East 42d Street, he told his architect that limestone was too expensive, even though he had used it on the elegant 10-story Art Deco apartment house at 3 East 84th Street that he used as a pied-a-terre.
Now, 70 years later, the apartment house's co-op board has had to take emergency measures to secure the giant slabs on what remains one of the few Art  Deco apartment houses on the East Side.


For the Classic Car Fan
A good calendar gives a look at the months ahead.
But the new Route 66 Car Culture calendar looks backward, too.
Lucinda Lewis has photographed classic cars like a 1961 Corvette and 1958 Ford Fairlane alongside old diners and tacky  tourist traps to recall the days when Route 66 was the highway of Americans' dreams.
The calendar costs $14.95, plus $4.95 shipping.
To order, call (800) 331-1957.


Flying Predators Squirrel Away Their Meals
New Yorkers have long since become accustomed to the wild life.
But wildlife  is a different story.
Two large birds of prey -- variously described as eagles, hawks or falcons -- took up residence at Stuyvesant Town last week, startling human inhabitants and  terrorizing the local avian and rodent populations.
Perching high in trees, the birds repeatedly swooped down to feast on some of the pampered pigeons and squirrels on the parklike grounds of the apartment complex.


Thanksgiving, Retold
EVERY elementary school student has heard the tale of the Pilgrims and the first Thanksgiving.
But it's not often that the Native American perspective on celebrating Thanksgiving is aired in public.
On Saturday, children and their families can see that point of view in "Coyote Walks Around," a program of Native American storytelling, song and dance in celebration of Thanksgiving.


Despite Trail of Bodies, Suspect Crosses Country, Eluding Police
The authorities say Glen Rogers could talk a person into anything.
A ride.
A  place to stay.
A romance.
And they say that in the past two months, Mr.
Rogers has befriended at least  four women as he moved across the country.
All four died violently, and Mr.
Rogers is being sought in their deaths.


Top That, O. J.
Well, Colin Powell sold tons of books in his 15 minutes in the sun.
Can Marcia Clark do the same?
After all, at last report she isn't even not running for President.
The O. J. drama had to go on; the nation demanded it.
And the big post-trial  drama, of course, was who'd get the biggest book deal.
Mr.
Simpson wanted $6 million.
So far he has nothing.
Christopher Darden got $1.3 million.
Peanuts.
Last week Ms.
Clark set the record (so far), with $4.2 million from Viking.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
THE CONFIDENCE GAME How Unelected Central Bankers Are Governing the Changed Global Economy.
By Steven Solomon.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.


Arguable Notoriety
To the Editor:
In her article "The Happening of an Opera Waiting to Happen" [Oct. 15], on Toshiro Mayuzumi's opera "Kinkakuji," based on the Yukio Mishima novel of that name, Lindsley Cameron referred to Mishima's flamboyant ritualistic self-disembowelment in 1970 as "the most notorious suicide of the 20th century." Has Ms.
Cameron ever heard of Adolf Hitler, who shot himself in his Berlin bunker in 1945?
DAN HARRISON Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.


Setting Her Sights on a Pinkless Palette
SANDY LERNER has been thinking a lot about life, love, her career, animal rights and Jane Austen, and she has a question: Does pink make you puke?


No Headline
He heard all the crowds, all the voices, read those letters, saw those polls -- all that overwhelming stuff -- but woke up one morning and just didn't have the fight." -- KENNETH DUBERSTEIN, on Gen. Colin L. Powell. [1:5.]


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Felicia R. Newman, Michael H. Asch
Felicia Rachel Newman, a daughter of Marlene and Joel Newman of Wayne, N.J.,  was married last evening to Michael Howard Asch, the son of Esther-Ann and Morton Asch of New York.
Rabbi Harvey M. Tattelbaum officiated at the Woodcliff  Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Asch, 26, is an owner and the president of the Greenwood Group, an electronic assemblies subcontractor in Paterson, N.J.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father owns Micrometrics, an electronics assembler in Paterson, where her mother owns Jared, a clothing distributor.


High Danger: That's What Friends Are For
Gold Diggers: The Secret Of Bear Mountain Christina Ricci, Anna Chlumsky Directed by Kevin James Dobson PG 92 minutes


Warnings Urged on Some Drugs For Heart and Blood Pressure
A consumer advocacy group has petitioned the Food and Drug Administration to  put strong warnings on certain drugs for patients with high blood pressure, alerting them to the possibility of an increased risk of heart attacks or death.
The drugs are known as calcium channel blockers.
They are used to treat chest pains known as angina, brought on when the heart fails to get enough oxygen, and are also widely used for high blood pressure.


Islands Lapped by Tides of Change
NOLAN PARK is so quiet you can hear a squirrel's footfall in the golden leaves.
Now that late autumn has come, sunlight pierces the heavy canopy of sycamore, oak and maple.
It warms the eggnog-yellow clapboard houses around the  park, with their gabled rooftops and curlicue woodwork.
It dapples the red-brick sidewalks and deep front porches, festooned with American flags.
It glints off the World Trade Center nearby.
Nolan Park is not just an uncommonly pretty neighborhood.
It is less than 10  minutes from lower Manhattan.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Arts and Leisure Section 2


Juli A. Steadman, Evan J. Charkes
Juli Anne Steadman, the news coordinator for the New York bureau of the British Broadcasting Corporation, was married yesterday to Evan Jeremy Charkes,  a senior litigator and corporate vice president at Paine Webber in Weehawken, N.J.
Judge Harold Silverman of Bronx Superior Court performed the ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.
Ms.
Steadman, 29, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Barnard College, she is  the daughter of Karen Newman and the late Chester Steadman.
The bride's mother and stepfather, Derek Newman, own the English House Inn in Andover, N.H.


Kathleen M. Link, P. J. Schankowitz
Kathleen Marie Link, a director of national sales for the Hilton Corporation  in New York, was married yesterday to Peter John Schankowitz, an associate at Schnader, Harrison, Segal &amp; Lewis, a law firm in New York.
The Rev.
Steven Harris officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Paul the Apostle in New York.
Mrs.
Schankowitz, 36, graduated from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
She is a daughter of Carole and Leo Link of Fort Myers, Fla.


THE TRIUMPH OF THE PRIME-TIME NOVEL
McGrath made it possible for me to emerge from the closet of "Melrose Place"  and "Beverly Hills 90210" addicts.
Well educated and an avid reader, I've always been ashamed of my vice.
But if these shows are good enough for the editor of The Times Book Review, they're good enough for me.
VICTORIA PONTE Brookside, N.J.


Fulton Ferry Pier Open and Smiling. So Are Visitors.
The pier at the Fulton Ferry Landing was unveiled last month with new wooden  decking, benches, plaques and a fence etched with excerpts from Walt Whitman's "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry." Borough President Howard Golden, who budgeted $5 million for the pier's construction, said it "affirms the critical role of Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn's past, present and future." Ken Klein agreed.
"The view is spectacular," he said, snuggling with his new bride, Christine, on a bench shaped like a nautical cleat.
MICHAEL COOPER


Corrections
Because of a word processing error, the Word for Word column last Sunday, about sales coupons written in the first person, misstated the percentage in a coupon for Rogaine, a hair-loss treatment.
The coupon described Rogaine as "minoxodil topical solution 2%," not 3.


Jane Obee, William Hamby
Jane Ellen Obee and William Howard Hamby, patent attorneys at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington, Del., were married last evening at St.
Joseph on the Brandywine Roman Catholic Church in Greenville, Del.
The Rev.
Stephen J. Connell performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hamby, 36, graduated from Swarthmore College and received her law degree from Catholic University.
She is a daughter of Margaret and Clem Obee of Haddonfield, N.J.
The bride's father retired as a supervisory engineer in the medical supplies division of the Department of Defense in Philadelphia.


In the Bronx in the 1950's, A Way to Survive Bullying
To the Editor:
I identified with so much of your Oct. 22 article "My Bullied Days: A Smart Fat Kid's Story." I only wish I'd known some of the author's positive thoughts -- like, you'll survive -- when I was growing up in Parkchester, the Bronx, in the 1950's.
I got through the grammar school years by avoidance.


YANGON, A CITY OF LIGHT AND SHADOW
For a time earlier this year, the best show in Yangon began shortly after 3 in the afternoon, when the rapturous crowds along a leafy stretch of University  Avenue broke into cheers at the first sight of their heroine, her hair usually tied up in a bun that had been laced with fragrant blooms from her overgrown garden.
Her face is easier to remember than her name -- Aung San Suu Kyi -- which foreign visitors tend to find a mouthful.
In truth, it's not so difficult to say.
The first three names are pronounced as they are spelled, with the last name pronounced "chee."


Jackson Heights Is More Than Archie Bunkerville
To the Editor:
I admit that Jackson Heights has changed over the years, and that some absentee landlords have rented stores to cheap outfits, but I am a bit irate when I see it described in the City section as simply an Archie Bunker, hard-hat place.


Samantha Shedlin, Jeffrey Berkowitz
Samantha M. Shedlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Shedlin Jr. of Weston,  Conn., was married last evening to Jeffrey L. Berkowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Berkowitz of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Judi Lewis officiated at the New York Academy of Art.
Mrs.
Berkowitz, 27, is a former account executive at Tarlow Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Emerson College.


Musical Beds
The Hotel Lutetia, which has already applied the interior-design skills of Sonia Rykiel to its 265 rooms in the seventh arrondissement in Paris, now offers rooms decorated by the sculptor Arman.
The two-bedroom suite embodies Arman's love of music -- with a violin-shaped headboard in the master bedroom and cello-shaped chairs in the sitting room.
The suite, available when Arman himself is not in residence, costs $2,575 a night, at 4.67 francs to the dollar.
Call (800) 888-4747.
JOSEPH SIANO


Applying to N.J.I.T.?All You Need Is a Modem
High school seniors who want to attend the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark can stash their typewriters in the closet.
From now on, they can complete and send applications for admissions on a computer.
The institute is the first school in New Jersey to computerize its application process.
Students can find the institute's electronic application by accessing its home page on the World Wide Web, located at http://www.njit.edu.


Children's Books
THE TOMBS OF THE PHARAOHS. Illustrated by Sue Clarke.


No Headline
A Suit and a Sandwich


Alabama Bound
THE WATSONS GO TO BIRMINGHAM -- 1963 By Christopher Paul Curtis. 210 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $14.95. (Ages 10 and up)
KENNETH BERNARD WATSON, the bright, vibrant 10-year-old narrator of "The Watsons Go to Birmingham -- 1963," lovingly refers to his family as the "Weird Watsons." It's a quirky but misleading detail in a fine first novel that is both comic and deeply moving.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ARTISTS AT WORK


Ranger Fans Revel in Isles' Cruise to Nowhere
Compared with some of the things Ranger fans have chanted at the Islanders over the years, this line was relatively civil.
It even showed a sense of humor, tinged with ridicule.
"We want fish sticks!" they chanted. "We want fish sticks!"


Gay Advertising Campaign on TV Draws Wrath of Conservatives
If a new television campaign by Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays had only its dramatic scenes -- a teen-age girl contemplating suicide with  a handgun and a young man being beaten by a gang as the attackers shout slurs -- it would be controversial enough.
But because these scenes are interspersed with actual clips of the Rev.
Pat Robertson and other conservatives deploring homosexuality, the campaign has drawn the wrath of Mr.
Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network, which is threatening legal action against stations that broadcast the two 30-second advertisements.


Time Is Up for Hoboken's Outpost in the War Against Bugs
Plants go dormant when the weather gets cold.
That means they can be safely shipped, and that, in turn, means that things start to heat up at 209 River Street.
On the second floor of a fortress-like Art Deco building, the last working reminder of Hoboken's heyday as a bustling cargo port, Marty Feinstein unpacks a box of Danish begonia cuttings and begins sorting them under a giant magnifying glass.
Suddenly he bounds into the office of Oswald Andrade, an entomologist, clutching a tightly corked test tube.


The Homeless Huddle at City's Margins
Monica Links gave up on trying to live in Central Park.
After one run-in too  many with the police, she moved two months ago to her current crate, set near festering garbage and rotting rags on an abandoned Hudson River pier.
So far, no one bothers her there.
Kelly and Joe Mullen used to inhabit the entryway of a private building at 34th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Now, chased from there, they live in a kind of cave, fabricated largely from cast-off comforters, on another crumbling pier --  taking refuge, like Ms.
Links, at the very edge of Manhattan.


Scrambling for Airplane Seats
LAST summer Air France decided it wanted to join the other airlines in assigning seats in its coach cabins so the people using higher-fare unrestricted tickets would get aisle seats in the front of the cabin, a practice common to almost all airlines in some form.
"It sounds easy," said Bruce C. Haxthausen, the line's spokesman, "but it meant the reservationists had to use a split screen on their computers and it created a temporary tizzy."


Science Fiction
EVOLUTION'S SHORE (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $12.95), by Ian McDonald, is a triumph.
In two previous novels, "Terminal Cafe" and "The Broken Land," Mr.
McDonald displayed an admirable ambition to make the most of the large canvas that science fiction offers to serious writers.
But his efforts to wring the last drop of allegorical significance out of the futuristic nightmares he conjured led to self-defeating excesses of style and structure.
By bringing his  considerable talents under control in "Evolution's Shore," he has created an allegory whose impact is all the more powerful for being understated.
At the heart of the book is a classic science fiction nightmare: an invasion  by an enigmatic "something" from outer space.
The Chaga is what the world calls  the alien presence that has taken root in equatorial Africa, threatening civilization as we know it in an inexorable march of "smart molecules" that transform everything in their path, starting with plants but eventually altering all living creatures, including human beings.


Avalanche in Nepal Kills 26 in Camp
An avalanche struck the camp of a Japanese trekking group in the Mount Everest region of Nepal today, killing 26 people, rescue and hiking officials said.
The snow buried 13 Japanese trekkers and 11 guides and porters, as well as two residents of the Pangka region near Everest, the world's highest peak, said  Takashi Miyahara, chairman of Trans Himalayan Treks, which organized the trek.


Harper May Be Old, but He Definitely Isn't in the Way
It was 35 minutes after Derek Harper had won the game, more than half an hour after he had caught and shot a 3-pointer that deflated the Washington Bullets with 2.2 seconds left Friday night.
He was sitting in front of his locker-room cubicle.
All of his teammates had  left for the team bus.
Coach Don Nelson finally walked in to determine the nature of the delay.


BOXING: A Boxer's Darkness;Damaged McClellan Has Poignant Bouts With Everyday Life
Lisa, are you there, Lisa?" Gerald McClellan, seated in a chair in his living room, called out to his sister. Lisa McClellan, in a chair beside him, leaned toward the young man in a baseball cap.
"Yes, Gerald."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
BOND OF IRON: Master and Slave at Buffalo Forge By Charles B. Dew. Norton, $14.


Rutgers Needs a Vision? Why Not Decentralize?
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Balkan U.: Rutgers Gropes for a Vision" (Nov. 5) accurately reflects the Rutgers central administration's deeply entrenched perspective: Rutgers is New Brunswick.
In one and two-thirds pages of text and pictures, five lines (in a chart) are devoted to the Newark and Camden campuses.


Salute to Fallen Heroes


Abortion Foes Flex Their Political Muscle
The anti-abortion forces in the Republican Party appear to be enjoying a renewed sense of power and influence as the Presidential campaigns of the only three potential candidates favoring abortion rights are either dead, stillborn or precariously clinging to life.
As delegates to the Iowa Right to Life Committee gathered here today for their annual convention, there was a feeling among them that their movement was  in the ascendancy within the party and that their influence on the Iowa Presidential caucuses in February would be considerable because of their grass-roots organization.


They Won't Grow Up
DR.
SEUSS wears a red and white stovepipe hat, white gloves and a red bow tie, and he's a manic entertainer.
Roald Dahl has a black top hat, a tail coat made of plum-colored velvet and a gold-topped walking cane, which he, like Willy Wonka, waves fiercely but hypnotically.
Laura Ingalls Wilder is, well, Laura, only older and more hard-working, like Ma.
Instead of churning butter, cooking,  sewing and scrubbing, she sits at a desk and writes and writes and writes.
Margaret Wise Brown is a quiet old lady rabbit in a rocking chair whispering "Hush."
Brown herself recalled that as a child she conjured up no visions of the writers behind her favorite books.
"It did not seem important then that anyone wrote" those books, she said; "they were true." But something resembling this literary portrait gallery is likely to hang in the heads of the generation that  grew up in the postwar "golden age" of children's book publishing that Brown helped inaugurate.


Sturdy Flavors Are a Must for Autumn Tables
AUTUMN'S bounty beckons.
Rich squash, sturdy greens and ripe pears provide robust flavors for an autumn menu.
Butternut or other winter squash, cooked until tender, then pureed in a food  processor, easily becomes the basis for a bisque-like creamless soup.
Similarly, pears can be pureed to stand in for an egg-and-cream-custard filling for a tart.
Both these recipes are worth remembering for Thanksgiving.


Firefighters Suspended
Five firefighters were suspended without pay on Thursday after a recent fire  truck accident in which an elderly woman was killed, Mayor Jerry Jennings has said.
Catherine Casey, 83, was hit by the fire truck on Sunday as it backed up.
The crew of the truck violated department rules that require someone to get out the  truck and stand behind it whenever it is driven in reverse, Fire Chief James Larson said.


A City's 50th Homicide
A grim milestone was reached over the weekend.
Camden, a city of 87,000, reported its 50th homicide of the year, matching the record number of murders in 1992.
The latest victim was a young woman found strangled on Saturday in an abandoned warehouse.
The police said yesterday that they had not yet identified  the woman.
The state recently rejected a request by Camden officials to have the New Jersey state police patrol Camden, which has the highest murder rate in New  Jersey.


SERBS IN CROATIA RESOLVE KEY ISSUE BY GIVING UP LAND
Averting a resumption of the war in the Balkans, secessionist Serbs in Croatia signed an agreement today to give up the last slice of Croatian territory under their control.
The agreement, drawn up at the current peace talks in Ohio, calls on the Croatian Serbs to turn over the territory, Eastern Slavonia, to the Croatian Government during a transition period of one to two years.
An international force is to be created, according to the agreement, to insure that the turnover  and demilitarization of the area are accomplished on schedule.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Allegorical Tribute From the 17th Century 'Les Arts Florissants' Florence Gould Hall


To Our Readers
Because of the coverage of the New York City Marathon, The Arts begins today  on page A21, and radio and television news, advertising and listings appear on pages B6 and B7.


Storm Toll Rises by 17 In Nepal to 43 in 2 Days
Building collapses caused by heavy rains killed 17 people today, raising to 43 the number of weather-related deaths in the Himalayan region in two days, officials said.
On Saturday, an avalanche on Mount Everest killed 26 people, including 13 Japanese.
The 17 who died today were killed when earth buried houses and trekkers' lodges, officials said.


Uncertainty on Treasury Sales
Treasury auctions are up in the air pending resolution of the dispute between the White House and the Republican Congressional leadership over the Federal budget and the debt.
The only auction scheduled for this week was today's regular sale of three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market  on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.40 percent and the  six-month bill was at 5.29 percent.


Postcards From G.O.P. Group Were Meant to Look Democratic
A Virginia Republican group has admitted labeling one of its own mailings as  a Democratic publication in an effort to undermine a Democrat in a key race in Tuesday's elections for the State Legislature.
Although the Democrat went on to  win, a Democratic official condemned the mailing as "beyond dirty tricks," and said the party's lawyers were investigating whether postal or election laws might have been broken.
The group, the Republican Caucus of the Virginia General Assembly, sent 6,000 postcards to Democrats in Charlottesville, Va., the weekend before the election, giving "the top 10 reasons" they should vote for an independent candidate for the state Senate, Donal B. Day.
By diverting votes from the Democrat, the group  hoped to help the Republican.


Rangers Ready For Keenan
The winning streak is at four.
And next on the agenda is Mike Keenan and the  St.
Louis Blues.
The Rangers, fresh off a solid 4-1 victory over the Whalers in Hartford Saturday night, are headed to St.
Louis to take on Keenan tomorrow night for the first time since he bolted the Rangers following the 1994 Stanley Cup championship.


Bridge
One of America's top-ranked player-writers has written a lively, entertaining book for the low-level player.
It is "Points, Schmoints! Marty Bergen's Winning  Bridge Secrets," and it is available from the author at 22 Stratford Green, Farmingdale, L.I. 11735.
The price is $19.95, hard cover, including mailing but  not including New York sales tax.
Bergen offers 21 rules for being a good partner.
The first suggests that you  should not give your partner lessons and quotes the late, lamented English magazine Punch: "According to an evening paper, there are only five real authorities on bridge in the country. Odd how often one gets one of them as a partner."


Patents;Borland gets a patent for making graphs from spreadsheets; some experts don't get the picture.
SOFTWARE that converts spreadsheet data into easy-to-read graphs or pie charts has been around since the late 1980's.
So some software experts are scratching their heads over a patent just granted to Philippe Kahn, the self-proclaimed barbarian of the computer world who is known as much for his flamboyant antics as for his innovations as the founder of Borland International.
Mr.
Kahn did not apply for the patent until 1993, yet "there's a relatively broad claim of taking spreadsheet information and converting it into graphing,"  said Richard Raysman, a law partner specializing in software at Brown, Raysman &amp; Millstein in Manhattan.
"There's nothing unusual about the concept," Mr.
Raysman said.
"It would seem to me another developer of a spreadsheet might decide at some time to attack this patent if Borland plans to do anything with it."


Accounts
*
MET-Rx USA Inc., Irvine, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, to  handle advertising for MET-Rx, a nutrient food supplement, previously handled by various freelancers.
The billings were estimated at $14 million to $16 million.


CHRONICLE
Their paths have crisscrossed before in the course of their diplomatic careers, so there was a certain symmetry in the announcement last week that JACK F. MATLOCK Jr. had been named the first George F. Kennan Professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J.
Professor Matlock, who teaches international diplomacy at Columbia University, was the last United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union before its collapse.
GEORGE F. KENNAN, who has been an institute scholar since 1956 and who still works there at the age of 91, was Ambassador to the Soviet Union in the early 1950's.
The chair honoring him has been established in the institute's School of Historical Studies.
Professor Matlock is to begin his five-year tenure there on July 1.


Medical Staff Is Calling the Operation a Success
First I got hot, then I got cold, and I wasn't prepared for my muscles locking up on me," said Lorraine West, just after crossing the New York City Marathon finish line in the glacial dark last night, more than seven and a half  hours after starting.
A New Yorker who works as a college tutor, she wore a wool beret pulled over  her graying hair.
Although she had run two previous marathons, she was reduced to hobbling through the final 10 miles of this one.


Brazil's Chief Acts to Take Land to Give To the Poor
Brazil's President has signed decrees expropriating 250,000 acres from large  privately held estates, promising that the land will be used to resettle more than 3,600 poor families waiting for places to live and till the soil.
His decision accompanied a package of measures that was sent to Congress on Friday to speed up the takeovers of the large, unproductive estates by limiting  the appeal process, which can now delay takeovers for years.
The President, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, said he hoped that the steps would calm growing tensions between homesteaders on one side and landowners and the police on the other.


Same Time, Next Year: Silva and Loroupe Triumph Again
Fortified by grief and greased against the cold, Tegla Loroupe, a 78-pound Kenyan sylph, fairly slid through the wind yesterday to her second consecutive runaway victory in the New York City Marathon.
As she had last year, the 22-year-old Loroupe raised her arms in triumph as she crossed the finish line.
But this time, 13 days after the sudden death of her 31-year-old sister Albina in Kenya, the victory was bittersweet.


AIDS Risk Increases For Heterosexuals
Behavior that puts people at risk of contracting the AIDS virus increased among heterosexuals in major American cities from 1990 to 1992, a study released today said.
Joseph Catania, the study's lead author, said the findings suggested that many safe-sex messages fail to reach some heterosexuals, particularly young adults in the "dating phase" of life who may have multiple sexual partners.


Corneliu Coposu, 79, Romanian Dissident
Corneliu Coposu, the leading symbol of anti-Communist resistance in Romania for nearly half a century, died on Saturday at University Hospital after suffering a heart attack, hospital officials said.
He was 79.


Congress Doesn't Have Power to Ban Abortion;For Lore, Not Practice
To the Editor:
Passage by the House of the late-term abortion ban is comparable to legislating against crossing against the light when riding on a zebra on any Sunday afternoon in the rain.


Dodging Clouds, Space Shuttle Begins Its Chase of Russians
The space shuttle Atlantis darted through a clearing in low-level clouds today, carrying major new components and vital supplies for the Russian space station Mir.
Atlantis, carrying a crew of five, overcame threats of potentially poor weather near the Kennedy Space Center here and at overseas emergency landing sites to blast off on time at 7:30 A.M., beginning an orbital chase of Mir.


A Prosecutor Considers Monitoring Newark Police
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, said today that the Federal investigation into Newark's Police Director had so deeply undermined public confidence in the department that the police might need special monitoring by his office.
"There needs to be some monitoring to assure the confidence of the residents  of Newark in their Police Department," Mr.
Minor said.


ecord-Setting Day By Marino Is Ruined
Patriots 34, Dolphins 17


Columbia To Take Over Biosphere 2 As Earth Lab
Once envisioned as a pioneering project to test how humans could live in space, Biosphere 2 is being taken over for a new purpose: to study global warming and other environmental changes on earth.
Columbia University is expected to announce today that it will manage the 3.15-acre, $150-million terrarium in the Arizona desert and will turn it into a  laboratory and educational center for the earth sciences.
The university is not planning more missions like the unsuccessful attempt by eight men and women  to live there two years by recycling air and water, though such experiments have not been entirely ruled out.


No. 1 Spot and Heisman Emerging as Clear Cut
After another routine yet impressive trouncing of a Big Eight opponent -- by  41-3 over Kansas -- Nebraska remained in first place in both college football polls plus the ranking of the top 25 teams by the New York Times computer.
The results on Saturday also assured the return of Southern California to the Rose Bowl, after a six-year absence, and gave the 206 Heisman Trophy electors someone to favor, with conviction: Eddie George of Ohio State.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
The Sins of the Father Visited on Planet and on Son 'The Case of Kaspar Mayer' Ubu Repertory


Advertising;Classified ads are rapidly finding a new home on the Internet.
CLASSIFIED advertising, long a staple of the newspaper business, is migrating to a new venue: the Internet.
Over the last year, a tidal wave of new classified ventures has hit the global computer network, from Prodigy's Web Personals and America Online's Career Center to Monster Board and Careerpath.com, two services on the Internet's World Wide Web.
Prodigy is a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and I.B.M..


For Riders, A Bright Spot Amid Tumult
Blame it on the B train if Winnie Yiu cut classes on a few Tuesdays and Thursdays this fall.
With subways over the Manhattan Bridge disrupted by construction until yesterday, leaving high school early was the only way to make it on time from Fort Hampton, Brooklyn, to her gig as a teen-age disk jockey in a karaoke bar on the Bowery.


Charles Scribner Jr., Who Headed Publishing Company, Dies at 74
Charles Scribner Jr., the longtime head of the Charles Scribner's Sons book publishing company, died on Saturday at the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home on York Avenue in Manhattan.
He was 74 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan for half a century.
The cause was pneumonia, and he had suffered for a decade from a degenerative neurological disorder, said his son Charles Scribner 3d.


Eve of Strict Smoking Ban
The smoking lamp gets extinguished tomorrow when one of the toughest municipal smoking bans in the state takes effect in Pequannock Township in Morris County.
It will be illegal to smoke in all shops and offices open to the public.
Stores must keep smokers at least 10 feet from their front doors; restaurants must designate at least half their tables as nonsmoking.
Some local  business people and smokers said they would attend the Town Council meeting tomorrow night to demand repeal of the law, which includes fines for smokers and businesses.


Windstorms Leave 1 Dead and Thousands Without Power
Heavy storms flinging wind and rain pummeled much of the New York region, leaving nearly half a million suburban homes without power yesterday.
A falling  tree killed one person, and hundreds of other trees blocked roads and stalled trains.
Rain and wind were heaviest in a belt from the Jersey Shore through Manhattan and northeast into Westchester and Connecticut, said Pamela Joyce, a meteorologist for the National Weather Service.
The storm dropped 1.93 inches of rain in Central Park, and winds gusted up to 63 miles per hour in Rockland County.


Fired-Up 49ers Leave Stunned Cowboys Gasping for Air at Texas Stadium
They came expecting to gaze upon a meteor-like shower of footballs flying, even a blue and silver shooting star or two, all produced by the Dallas Cowboys, all in an effort to stomp and bury the hated San Francisco 49ers, the limping, struggling, bumbling, barely above-.500 San Francisco 49ers.
You know -- kick 'em when they're down.
They left with San Francisco owning 38 points, with Dallas managing only 20,  and with this rivalry increased another notch in tension and in stakes and in shock value.
The 65,180 fans in Texas Stadium this afternoon were absolutely stunned as were the millions around the country watching this anticipated matchup on television.


Arthur Loew Jr. Film Producer, 69
Arthur Loew Jr., a comedian who became a film writer and producer, died on Friday at his home in Amado, Ariz.
He was 69 and had recently begun treatment for lung cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Loew worked as a newspaper drama critic and sports reporter in the late 1940's before heading to California.
Among the films he produced were "The Rack," starring Paul Newman, "The Affairs of Dobie Gillis," with Debbie Reynolds, and "Penelope," starring Natalie Wood.


Friend of Slain Man Lied About the Police
A man who accused two black police officers of ignoring his white friend's desperate pleas for a ride 15 minutes before he was burned to death in this dangerous Chicago suburb has admitted he lied about the request for a ride, The  Daily Southtown reported.
The man who made the accusations, Cecil McCool, failed a polygraph test during a law-enforcement investigation and admitted making up parts of the story, the newspaper, which covers parts of Chicago and its southern suburbs, reported Saturday.
Mr.
McCool had said his friend, Richard Will, 32, had "begged" for a ride to the police station about three blocks away and was terrified as he was left in the gang-ridden neighborhood.


From Ashes of 'Loving'
Daytime soaps are known to be bizarre occasionally, but nothing beats the machinations that have gone into "The City," having its premiere on ABC this afternoon at 12:30.
The new series emerges from the ashes of "Loving," which for several years has remained, despite periodic doctoring, at the bottom of the daytime-drama ratings heap.
"The City" is the multimillion-dollar alternative to simply putting "Loving" to sleep, so to speak.
Some major "Loving" characters from the fictional, rather stodgy town of Corinth, Pa., have already been eliminated by a serial killer.
A dozen or so are moving to "The City," set in a grand loft in lower Manhattan.
The show opens to  the sounds of congested traffic, shouting motorists, snarling cabdrivers and the wailing of fire engines and ambulances.
Adding to the frenetic beat are zoom camera shots inspired by the MTV school of art direction, especially as used in  "The Real World." Stodgy no more, friends.


Museum by the Bay Has Undergone A Sea Change
It may well be one of the most beautiful museum buildings in America.
It's surely the most beautifully situated, resting on a summit here at Land's End in  Lincoln Park, high above the Golden Gate Bridge, which you can see, if it's a clear day, through a scrim of trees from the museum's colonnaded courtyard.
The California Palace of the Legion of Honor has just reopened after a three-year, $36.5 million overhaul that made it quake-safe, or as close as possible to quake-safe in this city.
In January, the new San Francisco Museum of Modern Art opened downtown and it has been a hit ever since.
People have flocked to it, collectors have donated to it, and it has become a pride of the city.


At Sachsenhausen, Soviets Ran Camp Too
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 4 Oranienburg Journal describes the shortage of funds for maintenance and research of the Holocaust site at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp near Berlin in the former East Germany.
You report that the Jewish community of Berlin considers this shortage a scandal.
Yet there is a consensus on the creation of a national Holocaust memorial in the historic center of Berlin.
Only the size and artistic form of the two possible projects selected by a jury are controversial, even among the Jewish community in Berlin.


After Loud Opening, a Studio Is in Retreat
Nearly four years ago, Savoy Pictures Entertainment was born with a flourish.
Supported by a grandiose infusion of money from established Wall Street investors like Allen &amp; Company, Savoy signed movie stars and directors to deals, announced film projects and labeled itself one of Hollywood's most aggressive independent distributors and producers.
Today Savoy's grand voyage into the movie business has been caught in a whirlpool of confused strategy, excessive spending and -- perhaps most important -- misjudgments about films and directors that have led to one expensive flop after another, studio executives and financial analysts said.


Congress Doesn't Have Power to Ban Abortion;A Brutal Procedure
To the Editor:
"Intact dilation and evacuation" is too bloodless a description of the procedure you defend in "Outlawing an Abortion Method" (editorial, Nov. 4).
Nor  did the delicacy of your description, "partially extracting the fetus into the birth canal and collapsing the skull in order to let it be extracted" do justice to the butchery involved.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING


In Utah, a Pitched Battle Over Public Lands
One of the last blank spots left on the map of the mainland United States is  a big swath of sandstone skyscrapers, rust-colored canyons and cake layers of earthly turmoil.
The cartographers of this region must have been in a perpetual funk, trying to attach names like Devil's Backbone, Deadman Ridge and Carcass Canyon to the luminous landscape of southern Utah.
But what looked useless and forlorn to Mormon pioneers of the 19th century is shaping up, in the last years of the 20th century, as a treasure at the center of the biggest land fight now before Congress.


WTA Opener Features Pierce
Mary Pierce, who has sputtered since winning the Australian Open in January,  is the highest seeded singles player in action today as the Corel WTA Tour Championships get under way at the Garden.
The event opens with the No. 1 doubles team of Gigi Fernandez and Natasha Zvereva, the defending champions, facing Zina Garrison and Katrina Adams at 5:30 P.M.
Next, sixth-seeded Kimiko Date goes against Jana Novotna, followed by an awards ceremony and No. 4 Pierce against Anke Huber.


Monitor Is Considered For Newark Police
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, said that a Federal investigation had so undermined public confidence in Newark's Police Department  that it might warrant special monitoring by his office.
"There needs to be some monitoring to assure the confidence of the residents of Newark in their Police Department," Mr.
Minor said.
Article, page B4.


94 Winners Do It Again In Marathon
Hot or cold, it doesn't seem to matter to German Silva and Tegla Loroupe.
The two runners who won the New York City Marathon last year in unwelcome heat repeated their victories yesterday in the coldest marathon ever in New York.


When Voting Is the Easy Part
Voters last week overwhelmingly approved a ballot question requiring the state to pay for any mandates it passes on to local governments.
But those expecting quick property tax relief from the vote may find that the devil is in the details.
First, a law must be passed.
The Senate President, Donald DiFrancesco, a Republican of Union, said implementing the referendum would be his "top priority" in the next legislative term, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Then, a committee must be formed -- a Council on Local Mandates, whose nine members will be appointed by state officials to decide which mandates the state  must fund.
William Dressel, director of the New Jersey League of Municipalities, said the League plans to meet with legislators and aides to the Governor to work on committee-selection procedures.


Andrew O. Miller Jr., Law Partner, 78
Andrew O. Miller Jr., a partner at the law firm of White &amp; Case from 1946 to  1974 and a former director of the Seagram Company, died Wednesday in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 78.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which is known as Lou Gehrig's disease.


Candid Diplomat Sees 'Wake-Up Call' for New York Jews
COLETTE AVITAL is not one to look for silver linings.
She is a realistic diplomat.
But Ms.
Avital, Israel's Consul General in New York, does think that the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin can, and should, serve as a "wake-up call" to American Jews.
Especially those in New York.
"Some of the extreme elements come from New York," she said the other night.
"Many people tend to think those are nuts and crazies. They say, 'Let's not pay  too much attention to them; it increases their importance.' But I feel that unless you recognize and deal with a problem, it can grow to larger proportions." She is, the Consul General said, deeply worried about the violent  language of extremist Jews, and their influence on New York politics.


Without Powell in Race, What's a Centrist to Do?
Charles J. Kelly Jr., managing director of Citizens for Colin Powell and a veteran of the draft-Eisenhower campaign, has not quite figured out what to do with all the volunteers who enlisted in the Powell-for-President movement.
"We'll have to think about how not to lose the positive energy he brought into people's lives," he said.


tottlemyre Heads Back to the Yankees
Twenty-one years after the Yankees unceremoniously cut him loose, Mel Stottlemyre appears to be on his way back to the team as pitching coach.
The Yankees have not announced their coaching staff under their new manager,  Joe Torre, but a club official said today that the team expects Stottlemyre to be a part of it.
"He hasn't signed," the official said, "but it looks good."


Burton I. Monasch, Film Executive, 68
Burton I. Monasch, an entertainment lawyer who became executive vice president of the 20th Century Fox film studio, died Saturday in Los Angeles.
He  was 68.
The cause was a brain tumor, said the studio's publicist, Lee Solters.


Labor's New Leaders Visit Boeing Strike
Fresh from their rout of an old guard that watched the long decline of union  membership, the new leaders of American organized labor swooped into the big Boeing Company's five-week strike here today with promises to stop the flow of highly paid factory jobs abroad and show the captains of industry that labor will be talking a lot tougher.


Algerian Expatriates Flock to Vote in France
Thousands of expatriate Algerians thronged around their country's consulates  in France today to vote in Algeria's presidential election after dozens were injured during chaotic scenes when voting began Saturday.
Witnesses said about 4,000 people massed outside the consulate in the southern city of Nice when voting resumed there after especially serious disorder on Saturday when 25 people were injured.
At least 60 people were hurt in similar scenes of chaos in Lyons while others were hurt in Lille and Marseilles.


A Show of 41,000 Teachers
The New Jersey Education Association gave its attendance report yesterday: More than 41,000 of the union's 96,000 active teachers in New Jersey were present for the annual convention on Thursday and Friday at Convention Hall, said a union spokesman, Edward J. Gallagher.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Treasury Prepares An Emergency Plan Treasury Secretary Rubin indicated that he was preparing to put into effect a costly emergency plan to forestall a Federal default by juggling the Government's books so that investors could be paid.
Walking a fine line, hoping  to scare Congress into action without shaking the markets, Mr.
Rubin's decision  comes as he and the Republican legislative leaders have sketched starkly different versions of how the bond and stock markets might react to default. [Page A1.] Republicans and Democrats refused to meet in the standoff over the Federal budget, setting the stage for a partial shutdown of the Government tomorrow.
House Republicans have approved a spending bill, which the Senate is expected to pass today, that temporarily finances the Government.
But it also includes what  Democrats call "ideological bells and whistles," such as an increase in Medicare premiums, and President Clinton has vowed to veto it. [A20.]


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Rare Bruch Oratorio Transcends Its Translation American Symphony Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall


From the Graham Repertory, a Study in Contrasts
Four and a half years after its founder's death, the Martha Graham Dance Company continues superbly to preserve the Graham repertory.
The proof was on hand again Friday night, when the company presented two strikingly different Graham works: the lyric 1949 "Diversion of Angels" and the recently revived excerpts from a 1936 social-protest piece, "Chronicle."
Every audience, nonetheless, demands what the impresario Sol Hurok used to call "novelties." The Graham troupe's three-day season at City Center, which closed Saturday night, was used mainly to give New Yorkers a view of the world premiere that Robert Wilson, as guest choreographer, created for the company earlier at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.


Crespin and Price To Give Master Classes
The French mezzo-soprano Regine Crespin is to give a public master class on Sunday from 2 to 6 P.M. at the Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street in  Manhattan.
The class, which is the culmination of a week of closed sessions, is  open to the public and free, but reservations are suggested.
Information: (212)  496-8524.
Next Monday at 2 P.M., the soprano Leontyne Price is to give a master class  at Carnegie Hall, presented by the Richard Tucker Music Foundation.
Tickets, at  $10, are available at the Carnegie Hall box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


Joke's on G.O.P. at Bipartisan Gala
Capping a rancorous weekend of partisan finger-pointing and posturing over the Republican budget bill, the President and Mrs.
Clinton sat down with Republicans tonight at the annual Ford's Theatre Presidential gala.
It was supposed to be a bipartisan night at the theater, honoring the spirit  of Abraham Lincoln.
But the joke was mostly on the Republicans.


Restless Voices of a Writer's Past
In her singular memoir, "People Who Led to My Plays," Adrienne Kennedy unpacks her life like an orderly woman laying out the contents of a suitcase after an arduous journey.
The 1987 book is written as a series of discrete fragments, from catalogues of names of movie stars to impressionistic descriptions of life-altering events, all delivered in the same semidetached, ruminative voice.
"People" is an invaluable tool for students of a writer for whom the distance between life and art has never been more than a short jump.
It lays out the bricks, so to speak, from which Ms.
Kennedy builds her disturbing, haunted dream houses of plays, works like "Funnyhouse of a Negro" and "A Movie Star Has to Star in Black and White," which were memorably produced by the Signature Theater Company last month.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-11


Subway Fares and Tempers Rise, And Riders Brace for Bedlam
Long lines at token booths, confusion over the mathematics and widespread exasperation bedeviled New York City's transit system and tens of thousands of riders yesterday as an on-again, off-again fare increase went into effect, at least temporarily.
The matter goes back to Federal court tomorrow.
Difficult as it was yesterday, straphanger advocates and transit officials said the real crisis was expected with the start of the work week this morning as millions of subway and bus riders seeking tiny new tokens lay siege to the city's 468 subway stations.
For anyone without them, a nightmare was likely.


At Airport: Safe But Late
Tightened airline procedures for checking travelers' identification papers are causing problems and delays for unwary passengers at Newark International Airport, the A.P. reported.
After terrorism warnings last summer, airlines began enforcing new security measures issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, including one that requires passengers boarding domestic flights to present either a government-issued photo identification, like a driver's license or passport, or two other forms of identification, like a birth certificate or credit card.
New Jersey residents are particularly susceptible because the state does not require photo driver's licenses.


With a Debut, a Test of On-Line Publishing
In David Talbot's view, the traditional publishing world has already begun to devolve, as "tribes" of journalists break away from newspapers and magazines to  create vibrant electronic alternatives on the Internet's World Wide Web.
Last week's announcement that the television and magazine journalist Michael  Kinsley would join the Microsoft Corporation to create an on-line magazine devoted to literary and political issues was, as some see it, the most recent indication that a mainstream digital electronic media was beginning to emerge.


The Clock Is Ticking For Jazz
Every season, it's the same song for the Utah Jazz.
Karl Malone and John Stockton have All-Star years.
Utah wins at least 50 games.
But when the playoffs start, something bad happens to the Jazz, and somebody else wins the championship.
A lot can happen between now and June, but that scenario seems to be taking shape again.
Malone and Stockton deserve a better fate.
Utah made its annual appearance at Madison Square Garden yesterday, and the Knicks dominated most of  the game, cruising to a 24-point lead and hanging on for a 120-110 victory.
Malone (29 points, 12 rebounds) and Stockton (17 points, 10 assists) would not let the Jazz quit.
They never do.
While some of the Knicks were thinking about dinner plans, the Jazz grabbed their lunch pails and mounted a comeback, closing to within 98-90 with 4 minutes 46 seconds left.
But once again, an admirable Jazz effort fell short.
And the same thing is likely to happen next spring.


Loob Sets Record
Hakan Loob, one of three players to win the Stanley Cup, an Olympic gold medal and a world championship, broke the career points record today in the Swedish Elite League.
Loob, 35, had one goal and three assists as Farjestad beat Vastra Frolunda,  6-3, giving him 248 goals and 210 assists for 458 points in 373 games.


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AMX Corp., Dallas, an initial public offering of 3 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.


Ewing Hits the Big Shot Despite His Sore Knees
The shot was only his ninth of the game, but as with many of the fallaway shots Patrick Ewing makes from the baseline, this one was huge.
The Utah Jazz was crawling back into a game it had nearly been blown out of early, and Coach Don Nelson had just put his All-Star center back in the game for a reason.
Catch, shoot, swish.


Weapons Offenses Up Among Young, Study Says
Nearly a quarter of the people arrested on weapons charges are juveniles, and weapons offenses are the fastest growing crime among young people, the Justice Department reported today.
A study by the department's Bureau of Justice Statistics found that 23 percent of all weapons arrests in 1993 were of juveniles, compared with 16 percent in 1974.
From 1985 to 1993 weapons-related arrests of juveniles more than doubled, to more than 61,000 from less than 30,000, while adult arrests for such crimes grew by one-third in that period.


Drop the Medical Savings Accounts
A key element of the Republican Medicare reforms, the misguided medical savings accounts, has been knocked out of the comprehensive budget bill on a technicality.
But there are plans to revive it.
That would be a disservice.
The  accounts would be costly and benefit only the healthy and wealthy.
Republicans buttress their claim that the accounts would be affordable and attractive to Medicare enrollees by citing a study from a respected actuarial firm.
But the study, by Milliman &amp; Robertson, is irrelevant.
It analyzes a plan  very different from the bills the Senate and House passed.


NFL Prospect With a Knack for the Screen
Scott Curry, a senior at Amherst College, speaks of the high-powered Unix operating system on his personal computer with unabashed affection.
"I just love it," he said.
He is fluent in C++, the modern language of programming.
He confesses to trying, not always successfully, to cut back on the time he squanders playing Doom, the violent computer-game classic.
His senior thesis: "A History of the Internet."


Rethink SUNY -- but Preserve It
The State University of New York -- a network of 64 state-subsidized campuses -- was largely constructed during the 1960's, when New York was still the richest state in the country.
Obviously times have changed.
Plagued by an enormous deficit, scrambling to shrink a bloated government, Gov.
George Pataki  is right to insist that SUNY accept fiscal constraints.
But the Governor will jeopardize New York's future if he cuts too deeply and too quickly -- or decentralizes the system to the extent that some trustees and college presidents want.
This has been a dramatic year for SUNY.
In March, after Mr.
Pataki suggested  that the SUNY budget be trimmed by a third, the trustees complained that they would have to merge or close eight campuses and increase tuition, which traditionally has been held at affordable levels.
Now Mr.
Pataki's appointees to the board have proposed decentralization, allowing each campus unprecedented freedoms, including the right to set tuition at whatever the market will bear.
At present, the state provides just under 50 percent of SUNY's operating budget.
Tuition is turned over to a central fund, then redistributed partly on the basis of need, which differs from school to school.
Under the new plan, campuses would keep tuition paid to them and spend it as they saw fit.
The state would pay each school a subsidy, based on the number of students it enrolled.


METRO DIGEST
EXASPERATION MARKS A FARE INCREASE


Ancient History For Today
It was one of television's early news spectaculars.
Millions of Americans who had tuned in to watch the Democratic Party name its 1968 Presidential nominee found themselves watching police beat young demonstrators on the streets of Chicago.
It was a scene that may have won the Presidency for Richard M. Nixon and prolonged the war in Vietnam.
The politics and passions of the time are vividly brought back by "Chicago 1968," tonight's offering of "The American Experience." The pictures of the standoffs and confrontations have lost none of their drama; those who were in the protest ranks, on the police lines or in the convention hall cannot forget the emotions that seemed to be tearing America apart.


Israeli Security Neglected a Tip Of a Rabin Plot
The Israeli secret service, already under attack for letting an assassin approach Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin unchallenged, acknowledged today that it had received a tip last June about the confessed killer's intentions and did not follow up.
The latest twist in the widening investigation of the killing and its roots in extreme religious nationalism came as more than a quarter million Israelis, the largest such gathering anyone could recall, gathered at the square where Mr.
Rabin was assassinated a week ago to hear his widow declare, "The silent majority will be silent no more."


As Comics Are Taxed, Some Fail To Laugh
In some quarters, cartoons are considered a form of ideological commentary; in others they are seen as amusing insights into the human condition.
But there  seems to be a consensus on one point: quirky or sedate, raucous or staid, the drawings are meant to convey ideas.
That consensus has broken down in California, however, where ideas are free of tariffs but the stuff of commerce is subject to the state's 7.25 percent sales tax.


Whose Spies Turned
To the Editor:
Re "Thanks, Maxwell Smart!" (Op-Ed, Nov. 5): Richard Klein suggests Soviet intelligence officers were harder to turn than those of the C.I.A. - ignoring the long list of K.G.B. and Soviet intelligence officers who worked for the Central Intelligence Agency and other Western intelligence services.


In China, 3 Generations, Much Trouble and Rice
RICE By Su Tong Translated by Howard Goldblatt. 266 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Latest Offer Is Spurned in Budget Talks
The White House invited Republican Congressional leaders late today to meet on Monday to try to avert a pending Government shutdown, but only if the Republicans agreed to scrap their plan to raise Medicare premiums for the elderly.
But the Republicans said no deal, not until the President was willing to meet the leaders unconditionally and without Congressional Democrats.


After Years of Saying No, Nuns Give Up Evergreen;A New Jersey Convent's Prized Spruce Is Becoming Rockefeller Center's Tree
Every few years since 1984, the suitors from Rockefeller Center came calling, and every time, the nuns demurred.
They were flattered.
But they were not going to part with the towering, perfectly sculptured evergreen that had stood by the front door to their convent for more than half a century, blessing them with shade in summer, solace in winter and a reminder of God's deft hand in creation all year round.


The Devils Wake Up And Derail the Flyers
The Devils have a simple explanation for their play over this weekend, when they displayed form reminiscent of last season.
The Stanley Cup champions said they needed a marquee opponent to raise their standard of play, and the Flyers provided all the inspiration they required.
Playing their best hockey of the season after just one victory and a tie in their previous seven games, the Devils swept the home-and-home series with the Flyers, winning by 3-2 today at the Spectrum after the 4-2 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena Saturday night.


Odd Allies Seek Changes For Welfare
Citing an impending sea change in Federal welfare, an unusual alliance of advocates for the poor, charitable groups and Fortune 500 companies has proposed radically revising the state welfare system to push more welfare recipients into work much faster.
The proposal, which is circulating among crucial state legislators and aides  to Gov.
George E. Pataki, calls for setting time limits on welfare grants, allowing recipients to keep much more of their earnings from work and dismantling much of the state's welfare bureaucracy.


Ah, the Perils of Overexposure
It has been little more than a year since "Pulp Fiction" opened.
Here are just a few things that have happened since then to Quentin Tarantino, the film's 32-year-old writer and director:
*He was praised as cinema's second coming.


Taking In the Sites;Custom Company Gifts In Time for the Holidays
It's mid-November and time to think about sending holiday greetings and gifts to favored clients and new prospects.
Unfortunately, the incredibly organized person in marketing who supplied you with embossed coffee mugs took the buyout and no one has taken over the job.
How do you find a company that prints the corporate logo on card cases in time for holiday giveaways?
A place to start is the World Wide Web -- assuming that Yahoo! or the other serviceable search engines are not overwhelmed, which can happen at certain times of day.
Entering the term "business gifts" yielded more than a thousand possible locations.


A Plan to Lock Up Bridges
Neptune Township, which includes the seashore town of Ocean Grove, wants to put gates across two footbridges between Ocean Grove and Asbury Park.
The gates  would be locked from midnight until 5 A.M., the A.P. reported.
"There is a significantly higher crime rate in that area," said a Neptune business administrator, John Gross.
But the Asbury Park solicitor, Raymond Shebell, said: "We certainly oppose any restriction of the ability of pedestrians to cross from one town to another." Neptune would have to get permission to build gates from the Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association, which owns the bridges.


Insecurity Rocks Mexico's Cradle-to-Coffin System
By late afternoon, when the coffins are gone and a cleaning man is vacuuming  the carpets, Felipe Flores Duran finally has time to finish the paperwork.
Of the three funeral parlors on his Mexico City intersection, the one run by the Mexican Social Security Institute is by far the biggest and classiest, with seven viewing rooms and a snack bar, and in this quiet moment, Mr.
Flores Duran, its director, says that is how it should be.
"Having the best possible service for the dead is something that's really important to Mexicans," he said.


Sega's Opening Move in Multiplayer Games
Sega Enterprises Ltd., one of the world's two leading video game makers, plans to announce on Monday that it is creating an independent software company  to develop multiplayer games for personal computers and Sega video game machines.
The new computer games would be accessible over the Internet and could be joined simultaneously by players at sites all over the country or, in some cases, the world.
Analysts believe that multiplayer gaming is poised to become the fastest- growing segment of a $4.4 billion United States video game industry.


Essay;Unveiling Israel's Goal
At the heart of the political division within Israel is the failure of Labor  and Likud to set forth their different visions of the goal of the "peace process."
Yasir Arafat, on the contrary, has made the P.L.O. goal clear, at least for now: a sovereign state encompassing all the West Bank and Gaza, with all Israeli settlers out, and the Palestinian capital in Jerusalem.


Professor Talked of Understanding But Now Reveals Ties to Terrorists
When the radical organization Islamic Jihad selected a new leader late last month, its choice struck people at the University of South Florida like a sucker punch, a painful blow out of the blue.
News reports from Syria showed a face of jaw-dropping familiarity: the face of a bespectacled man known on campus as Ramadan Abdullah, an adjunct professor  who taught Middle Eastern politics until he left last spring.
Now identified by  his full name, Ramadan Abdullah Shallah, he vowed a "hard war" against Israel, which he accused of killing Islamic Jihad's founder, Fathi Shiqaqi, on Oct. 26 in Malta.


In America;Welfare Stampede
Our children and our country cannot afford another four years of neglect from Washington," said Bill Clinton, in the campaign book he put together in 1992 with Al Gore. "The next generation of young people should not be America's  first to grow up with less hope than their parents.
It's time to act to help our children."
That last sentence was the important one.
I misunderstood it when I first read it on page 47 of the amusingly titled book "Putting People First." I did not understand at the time that the future President's idea of helping children  was to support legislation that would push another 1.2 million of them into poverty.


Tailor School Vouchers to Meet Need
To the Editor:
The proposal for school vouchers in the District of Columbia (news article, Nov. 3) illustrates a crucial flaw in most current versions of what is otherwise a good idea.
The moral argument for vouchers was well stated by Speaker Gingrich: "The poorest children in D.C. in the poorest neighborhoods" should have "the same opportunity as the President's family" to send their children to  the school of their choice.


New York Subway Riders Get Bargain, Even at a Higher Fare
To the Editor:
As one who relies on the New York City subway to get to and from work each day, I can think of nothing more equitable than to have those of us who use city transit pay for its operating costs.


For Wheelchair Racers, High Winds and Arguments to Start the Day
When gale-force winds ripped across the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge yesterday at the start of the New York City Marathon, the 75 wheelchair competitors were told by officials that their event would have to be shortened for safety reasons.
Two wheelchair athletes defied the edict and completed the 26 miles 385 yards in a breeze.
The wind tore loose plywood boards that were placed as a safety measure on the four expansion joints of the bridge.
Consequently, the bridge grating was exposed, and Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority officials were concerned that the wheelchairs could become stuck in the grating and that the racers could be subjected to injuries from the sudden stop.
According to the race director Allan Steinfeld, the T.B.T.A. decided the wheelchair participants would have to  be transported off the bridge by bus and start the event at about the two-mile point in Brooklyn.


Assassination of Rabin Raises Alarm Over Role of Kahane's ViolentFollowers in U.S.
On Jan. 5, 1994, a bomb was found outside the New York office of a Jewish group supportive of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord.
A note was left warning of a civil war in Israel.
A few months later, law enforcement officials said, 13-year-old boys were studying the Bible and firing automatic weapons at a training camp in the Catskills run by a right-wing Jewish organization known as Kahane Chai.


Giants Huff, Puff, but Can't Blow Raiders Down
Cornerback Phillippi Sparks tried his best to explain his involvement in a controversial penalty near the end of the Giants' 17-13 loss today to the Oakland Raiders.
But in the end, whether he was right or wrong is irrelevant.
In a season gone terribly wrong for the Giants, these things seem to always happen to them.
They happen to teams that lose.
And on the faces of the 3-7 Giants after their most recent loss appeared the  looks of men who knew their season was over.
Several admitted it outright; others just winced and shook their heads when asked, What do they do now?
Others talked about playing the role of spoiler for the rest of the season, which is code for raising the white flag.
They will still play hard -- they are professionals, after all -- but most know it is done.


The New Internet Gatekeepers;Beware, David, the Goliath Providers Are Coming!
St.
Peters is his name and when he first went into business as a gatekeeper,  all seemed so right that he called his Internet access business Net Heaven.
But 18 months later, Dick St.
Peters finds himself working at such a hellish  pace that he cannot remember when he last took a day off and cannot imagine when he'll find time for another.


Giants Are Still Missing Hostetler
Giants quarterback Dave Brown described yesterday afternoon's 17-13 loss to Oakland as one of the most frustrating he has experienced as a football player,  going all the way back to Pee-Wee football.
Raiders quarterback Jeff Hostetler spoke of life going on and everything working out for the best because of God's will.


NATO Search: A Public (and Not-So-Diplomatic) Falling-Out
When Britain, France and Germany publicly backed Ruud Lubbers last month to become NATO's senior civilian official, Mr.
Lubbers, a former Dutch Prime Minister, seemed a shoo-in to lead the 16-nation alliance as it prepares to send up to 60,000 troops to Bosnia to enforce a peace plan.
But the Clinton Administration, piqued that a normally private selection process had suddenly turned very public, insisted for the first time on interviewing the two leading candidates for the Secretary General's post: Mr.
Lubbers and Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, a former Danish Foreign Minister.


Rowan Vying For Crown
Rowan College of Glassboro, N.J., the New Jersey Athletic Conference champion, was included in the 16-team field that will play for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III football championship.
On Saturday, the Profs (7-2-1) will be on the road to face Buffalo State (9-1), the No. 1-rated team in the East region.


Israeli Court Backs Non-Orthodox on Conversions
The Supreme Court today struck down a requirement that conversions to Judaism in Israel must be authorized by the Orthodox rabbinate, removing a major obstacle to official recognition of conversions by Reform and Conservative rabbis.
The court stopped short of ordering the state to recognize non-Orthodox conversions.
But in canceling the longstanding restrictions, it left the door open to parliamentary legislation and further legal action to secure such recognition.


China Rejects Choice of Boy As Tibet Lama
In a step that sets up one of the most serious religious confrontations in Tibet in recent times, China's Communist Party leadership said on Sunday that it would not recognize the 6-year-old son of a herder as the reincarnation of Tibet's second most holy religious figure, the Panchen Lama, because the boy was selected by Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama.
The decision by the Communist leadership to exclude the boy, Gedhum Choekyi Nyima, who was proclaimed a living Buddha in May in an announcement from the Dalai Lama's headquarters in India, was announced on the official New China News Agency, which also carried statements by President Jiang Zemin and other senior  Chinese leaders.


Citibank in St. Petersburg
Citibank's Russian unit said on Friday that it would open an office in St.
Petersburg, Russia's second-largest city, in January.
William R. Rhodes, Citibank deputy chairman, said the bank would have a full range of banking services, excluding handling private accounts.


Flagstar Planning To Change Agencies
The Flagstar Companies plans to change agencies handling one of its restaurant-chain accounts for the fourth time in less than three months.
The El Pollo Loco unit of Flagstar, which is based in Irvine, Calif., said on Friday that it had placed its account in review after four years at dGWB in Irvine.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.


No Headline
This is no way to run a country. -- TREASURY SECRETARY ROBERT E. RUBIN discussing emergency plans to prevent a national default. [A1:6.]


Apple Gives Messagepad a Tuneup
New software for Apple Computer's Newton Messagepad is winning positive early reviews.
But just when Apple's long-ridiculed hand-held computer is finally earning some respect, there are reports around Silicon Valley that the computer  maker is thinking about deserting the project.
"Michael Spindler is absolutely adamant about not continuing to pour money into Newton," Andrew Gore, an executive editor at Macweek, an industry weekly, said, referring to Apple's chief executive.
"On the other hand, it's hard to kill a product that got as much bad publicity as this one, just when it starts to look good."


Fallon McElligott Wins and Loses
Fallon McElligott Berlin in New York is losing one account and gaining another.
Fallon McElligott Berlin and BWIA International Airways said on Friday that they had mutually decided to end their relationship only three months after the  agency was awarded the account from Romann &amp; Tannenholz in New York.
The billings were not disclosed.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP MUSIC
One Peruvian Voice That Blends Two Cultures Susana Baca Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity


Conagra Completes Offer for Malting
ConAgra Inc. said Saturday that it received 97.5 percent of Canada Malting Company's outstanding shares, completing a $405 million (Canadian) offer for the brewer.
Conagra received 19.44 million Canada Malting shares and expects to buy the remaining shares this year.
The company said payment for shares would start Wednesday.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Elite French Vocal Ensemble In a Rare 14th-Century Mass Ensemble Organum Church of the Blessed Sacrament


Cuomo Rebukes Pataki Over New Token Price
Prompted by the increase in the transit fare today, former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo lashed out for the first time since last year's bitter campaign, at the man who unseated him: Gov.
George E. Pataki.
In a television appearance, Mr.
Cuomo said Mr.
Pataki had delivered much of what he promised on the stump last year -- an agenda he said included not just restoring the death penalty and cutting taxes but also reducing state aid to New York City.


European Voices Added To Rebukes to Nigeria
The European Commission said today that it would suspend development cooperation with Nigeria and recall its head of delegation there to protest the  execution of the environmentalist and author Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other members of the Ogoni minority who were critics of the Government.
The Commission, the European Union's executive body, also said it will propose tightening restrictive measures already imposed on Nigeria's military Government.


Dublin Leader Urges London to Compromise With the I.R.A.
In a change from his Government's approach toward peace efforts in Northern Ireland, Prime Minister John Bruton of Ireland has publicly urged Britain to compromise in a way that would allow representatives of the Irish Republican Army to take part in full-fledged peace talks.
The compromise, Mr.
Bruton said in a speech in London on Saturday, would force Britain to drop its demand that the I.R.A. begin disarming before Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political wing, can be admitted to talks by all the parties in  Northern Ireland.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday None


Same Time, Next Year: Silva and Loroupe Triumph Again
German Silva of Mexico and Tegla Loroupe of Kenya grew up in heat and have trained in heat.
So they felt right at home last year when they won the New York City Marathon on a day when the temperature was 68 degrees and the humidity was  78 percent.
So what happened yesterday when the temperature dived to 40 degrees, by far the coldest ever for this five-borough spectacle?
What happened when the wind blew at 21 to 32 miles an hour, when gusts on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge at the start reached 58 m.p.h. and the windchill factor was a February-like 18 degrees?


Mexico City Isn't Artists' Sole Patron
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 8 Ocotlan Journal, on the artist Rodolfo Morales: The assertion  that the Mexican Government overwhelming sponsors and controls the arts has been untrue for nearly a half-century.


Technolog: ON THE NET;Today's Willie Suttons mug corporate users, not the little guy from Hackensack.
DOZENS of electronic merchants are dreaming of a byte Christmas.
But is this  the year that all the pieces for electronic consumerism will fall into place?


Editorial Notebook;Ancient Feuds Infuse Israel's New Battles
The grief and acrimony surrounding the murder of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin have introduced a poisonous and dangerous concept: that somehow there is a basis in Jewish law for an individual to assassinate a leader deemed guilty of betraying the interests of Jews.
Revolted as they are by the assertion by Yigal  Amir, who confessed to the murder, that his action was an "obligation," many Jews find themselves confused about the legal underpinnings of the claim.
In fact, there are none.
In recent days, many leaders of the religious Jewish community have addressed this question.
They argue that even under the most literal interpretations of Jewish traditions, there is no basis for anyone taking the law into his own hands and carrying out an execution.
Freelance individuals are not qualified to  determine whether someone is a traitor, and violence is condoned only if all other efforts to stop a threat are exhausted.


Register Sex Offenders
To the Editor:
Matthew Stadler (Op-Ed, Nov. 7) asserts that less than 5 percent of the sex crimes in the United States are committed by strangers, and therefore registration of former offenders is an unproductive response to sexual crimes.
He underestimates the number of sexual crimes committed by strangers.


Pulse;Sex Offenses
Reported cases of rape have been declining in New York City and the region, but at a slower rate than in other major crimes.
Preliminary 1995 figures show that reported rapes are down about 2 percent in the city compared with the first six months of 1994.
But the rate of other sex crimes, such as sodomy and sexual  assault, is as high as ever.
Law enforcement officials say rape is still the most underreported major crime and some experts estimate that only about half of all sexual assaults are reported to the authorities.
But calls to state-funded rape crisis centers in the region were up 12 percent in fiscal 1995 from three years ago.


Abroad at Home;Truth And Its Effects
Four years ago this Sunday the Croatian city of Vukovar surrendered to besieging Serbian forces.
The Serbs went to a hospital filled with refugees, took away hundreds of men, killed them and buried them in a mass grave.
It was the first reported atrocity of the Serbian aggression in the former Yugoslavia.
In the years afterward Western governments tried to avoid confronting, head on, the fact of Serbian atrocities.
In diplomacy and in the U.N. operation they  essentially closed their eyes to Serbian responsibility for most of the horror taking place.


Molinari's Election Defeat Energizes the Democrats
Guy V. Molinari's defeat in the race for district attorney last week, his first after two decades in politics, has Democrats seeing wider implications and Republicans insisting that the loss indicated only how much Staten Islanders wanted Mr.
Molinari to remain their Borough President.
Mr.
Molinari, the longstanding king of Staten Island's Republicans, suffered  a lopsided loss on Tuesday in his race against William L. Murphy, the Democratic incumbent.
The vote has energized the borough's battered Democrats, who say it shows the low currency of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement and could even signal vulnerability for Mr.
Molinari's daughter, Representative Susan Molinari.


Food Bank Needs 2,000 Turkeys
With some supermarkets now advertising Thanksgiving turkeys at prices as low  as 39 cents a pound, the Food Bank of Monmouth and Ocean Counties is making an appeal for donations.
The organization -- which serves soup kitchens, shelters and other emergency food programs -- said it urgently needed 2,000 turkeys for Thanksgiving, but had only collected a few dozen so far.
JOE SHARKEY


U.S. PLANS TACTICS TO AVOID DEFAULT WITHOUT DEBT BILL
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin indicated today that he was preparing to carry out a costly emergency plan to forestall a national default at midweek by  juggling the Federal Government's books to pay off investors.
Mr.
Rubin's comments came as Speaker Newt Gingrich forwarded to President Clinton a bill passed by Congress on Friday to raise the debt ceiling temporarily, a bill that is laden with restrictions on the Treasury's ability to use its small arsenal of weapons to delay default.
Mr.
Clinton has vowed to veto the measure, probably on Monday, because he views it as an effort by Congressional Republicans to corner him into signing their version of the Federal budget or being forced into default next month.


A Publishers' Slugfest Over Postal Rates
If the United States Postal Service has its way, Time Warner Inc. can cut the cost of mailing magazines like Time and People by a total of $16 million a year.
But The Nation, the leftist political weekly magazine with about 92,000 subscribers, would see its mail costs jump about 17 percent, or $125,000 a year.
Those contrasting possibilities are at the heart of a raging battle over proposals by the Postal Service to revamp the country's system of postal rates for newspapers and magazines.


CHRONICLE
LISA and DEBBIE GANZ may well someday have a monopoly on twins who like to work in restaurants.
Identical twins themselves, they are the owners -- along with TOM BERENGER, the actor -- of a restaurant called Twins, on Second Avenue and 89th Street.
Tonight, they will give a party to celebrate the first anniversary of the restaurant, which is staffed by twins, and the opening of a branch in West Hollywood, Calif., in January.
While the New York restaurant's staff has 37 sets of identical twins, "in California, we will have a set of identical male triplets, Tim, Tom and Ted," Lisa Ganz said.
"If I fire one, I have two left and I don't lose the concept."


Separate but Unequal Subsidies at Root of Subway Fare Debate
At the heart of the legal effort to roll back the new $1.50 transit fare is Federal civil rights legislation.
But even lawyers in the case concede that the  lawsuit is as much about politics, and whether government can be forced to be more generous to the poor.
The case brought by advocates for mass transit contends that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the state discriminated against the predominantly black and Hispanic riders of the buses and subways by raising their fares by a larger percentage than it did the ticket prices on commuter train lines and express buses, used mostly by whites.
The argument is not that government was out to get members of minority groups, but that the groups suffered anyway.
Motivation, in other words, is not the issue.
It is impact, intentional or not.


Wattenberg on Clinton: Reprise of a Book
As you may have read somewhere, Bill Clinton called Ben Wattenberg the other  day to tell him he agreed with many of the criticisms of the Clinton Presidency  in Mr.
Wattenberg's new book, "Values Matter Most" (The Free Press).
You can get the gist of those criticisms tonight in the author's "television essay" of the same title.
Mr.
Wattenberg -- who identifies himself as "an old center-right Democrat" despite his neo-consorting with neo-conservatives at the American Enterprise Institute -- faults President Clinton for failing to carry out the promises of Candidate Clinton on four emotion-stirring matters: crime, welfare, education and affirmative action.
He uses polls, focus groups and like-minded academics and think-tankists to back up his argument that those issues -- and not economics, smarty -- brought the Republicans their astounding Congressional victory in 1994 and promise to carry them into the White House next year if the  Democrats fail to respond to public concern and anger.


'Ballo in Maschera,' at Home in Sweden
The Metropolitan Opera contends that the day-to-day standard it maintains is  the highest of any company in the world.
That may be.
But keeping this in mind doesn't help much on routine nights.
Friday night's performance of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera," the first of the season, was disappointingly routine.
The 1990 production by Piero Faggioni rightfully restores the opera to its original setting, Sweden in the time of King Gustav III. (Censors in Verdi's day banished it to Colonial Massachusetts, where the Governor of the Commonwealth improbably enjoys the trappings of royalty.) The Swedish locales call for grandeur, to be sure: the throne room of the overreaching king; the mansion home of his closest aide, Anckarstrom; the climactic masked ball at the royal opera house, where the king is murdered.
But the sets are cumbersomely monumental, and all the scenes are framed by a stagewide row of black marble stairs and imposing gilt-trimmed, turquoise marble columns.
Even the scene in a remote mountain gorge, where the king has a liaison with Amelia, Anckarstrom's wife, with whom he has fallen in love, relies on this incongruous framing device.


As Welfare Compromise Emerges, Clinton Aide Says Veto Is Certain
After taking two days to consider the compromise struck by Republicans on welfare, the White House said today that President Clinton would veto the bill now emerging from Congress.
The statement by Mr.
Clinton's chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, comes after months of conflicting signals on the subject by the Administration.
It creates a new point of conflict just as the President and Congress are lurching toward a fiscal showdown.


Richard L. Coe, 81, Washington Theater Critic
Richard L. Coe, a longtime drama critic for The Washington Post, died at his  home in Washington yesterday.
He was 81.
The cause was lymphoma, his family said.


INSIDE
Militant Rabbi's Followers


Apple Led Domestic PC Sales In 3d Quarter, 2 Surveys Find
Apple Computer Inc. was the nation's largest maker of personal computers in the third quarter, according to surveys to be released on Monday by two leading  market-research companies, Dataquest and the International Data Corporation.
Apple had led the industry in the 1980's and early 1990's.
Since then, its market share has significantly declined.


3 Midwest Utilities Join Rising Trend Toward Consolidation
The frenzied merger activity among utilities continued over the weekend with  the announced combination of three Midwest companies into one with about $1.9 billion in revenue.
The dominant company in the new utility, to be called the Interstate Energy Corporation, is WPL Holdings Inc. of Madison, which will exchange shares valued  at $1.21 billion for those of the Interstate Power Company of Dubuque, Iowa, and IES Industries of Cedar Rapids, Iowa.


Russia's Old Elites Thwart Reform
Vasily N. Dyakonov, a huge and noisy man, was the first governor appointed by President Boris N. Yeltsin after the failed coup of August 1991.
"Then the battle really began," Mr.
Dyakonov said with a touch of wistfulness.
A former builder and director of a big construction company, he regards himself as a radical democrat.
He lit happily into fierce battles, one with the  Communist Party bosses who ran the Krasnodar region in southern Russia and who mostly supported the coup attempt against Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and another with Mr.
Yeltsin, who favored more radical change.


Gingrich Backs Further Away From Bid in Presidential Race
Speaker Newt Gingrich today threw more cold water on any bid for the Presidency this year, saying the chances were "very, very, very slim" that he would run.
He also said that if the race came down to a personality contest, Bill Clinton would win.
"If it's about personalities, he'd win," Mr.
Gingrich said today on NBC's "Meet the Press." "I think he has a great personality. He's remarkably good at pleasing people."


SUNY's New Trustees to Press for More Campus Independence
Gov.
George E. Pataki does not yet control the governing board of the State University of New York.
But his seven appointees have made their agenda clear: bringing a free-market approach to the government-run university system.
Beginning in June, Mr.
Pataki took advantage of an unusual opportunity to name a large proportion of the SUNY board at once, because his predecessor, Mario M. Cuomo, had not filled some vacancies.
With two more openings to be filled, the Governor could have a majority on the 16-member board by December.


Affiliated Managers
Affiliated Managers Group said last week that it had sold a minority interest in its partnership to units of the Nationsbank Corporation and the ITT Hartford  Insurance Group for $20 million.
Affiliated Managers is a closely held investment company.


CBS Executives Killed Story, '60 Minutes' Broadcast Says
The CBS News program "60 Minutes" offered its own explanation last night for  why it decided not to broadcast a planned interview with a former tobacco industry executive, saying on the air that because of fears of a lawsuit, "CBS management told us we couldn't do that."
Instead, the program reported on the lengths the tobacco industry has gone to muzzle its critics.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP MUSIC
A Mixer of Accents And Musical Ideas Shaggy Irving Plaza


Sri Lanka's Leader Presses Drive to Take War to Rebels
When two terrorist bombs rocked the heart of this capital on Saturday morning, many shoppers along Galle Road, a busy commercial strip that flanks the pounding surf of the Indian Ocean, thought immediately of President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga.
Mrs.
Kumaratunga lives in a heavily guarded colonial mansion, Temple Trees, that sits amid palms and flaming bougainvillea on Galle Road.
In recent months,  she has narrowly escaped several assassination plots by an elite squad of suicide bombers sent by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a guerrilla group  that is locked in a do-or-die battle for a separate Tamil state in Sri Lanka.


Media: MAGAZINES;In a changing marketplace, publishers turn elsewhere to improve their bottom line.
STRUGGLING to redefine its identity in an increasingly interactive world, the magazine industry is facing some of the most profound challenges in its history.
One thing is clear: once the dust settles, things will probably never be the  same again.
Or, in the words of Frank Lalli, managing editor of Money and chairman of last week's American Magazine Conference in Boca Raton, Fla., "This  isn't your grandfather's magazine business anymore."


McCann-Erickson Shuffles Executives
McCann-Erickson Worldwide is making top-level management changes at its McCann Japan unit in Tokyo, effective on Jan. 1.
Koji Oshita who has been chairman of McCann Japan for almost two decades, will become chairman emeritus.
John Fitzgerald, president and chief executive, will succeed Mr.
Oshita as chairman and continue as chief executive.
And Koh Sakata, executive vice president, will succeed Mr.
Fitzgerald as president and add the new position of chief creative officer.
McCann-Erickson is owned by the  Interpublic Group of Companies.


Congress Doesn't Have Power to Ban Abortion
To the Editor:
Republicans in Congress who are anxious to pass Federal laws banning abortion need to think about where Congress could possibly get the power to do such a thing.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues  was down 54.10 points, or 0.30 percent, at 17,789.46.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 22.52 points.


A Hardware Bazaar


Sports of the Times;Most of These Runners Trained Far Too Hard and Long to Stop
IT is always amazing to see how varied the faces are in the woods beyond the  finish line.
Some are beatific, others are anguished, still others are calm, and then there is the vacant look that James Jones called "the thousand-mile stare."
All of these normal marathon expressions were found in Central Park yesterday afternoon, after the coldest New York City Marathon in history.
In different languages and different accents, everybody talked about the wind-chill factor of 18 degrees.
They used words like "cold" and "cramps" and "freezing" and "wind" and "shivering."


Sports of The Times;Raiders and Chiefs Carrying 'A.F.L.' Banner Again
NEARLY 30 years later, it's as if the Oakland Raiders and the Kansas City Chiefs were in the American Football League again, hoping to prove themselves against the National Football League's best.
In the 1960's, Vince Lombardi's Green Bay Packers reigned as the N.F.L.'s best, beating the Chiefs and the Raiders in the first two Super Bowl games.
Now  the Dallas Cowboys are considered the National Football Conference's best, despite their 38-20 upset by the San Francisco 49ers after quarterback Troy Aikman departed early with a damaged left knee.


A Prescription for Healing


Gridlock Foils Run at Boston
Mary Gilligan, a 34-year-old teacher from Monmouth Beach, N.J., got stuck in  running traffic on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge in yesterday's New York City Marathon, undermining her goal of meeting the 3 hour 40 minute qualifying time for the 100th Boston Marathon in April.
In the midst of the huge field, she could only walk across the bridge, reaching two miles in 29 minutes, far off her pace.
"I was so upset I was crying," Gilligan said.


Peru's Leader Suffers Setback as Close Ally Loses Lima Election
In a major setback for President Alberto K. Fujimori, one of his closest political allies was beaten today in the election for Mayor of Lima, underscoring growing discontent with Mr.
Fujimori's concentration of power.
Mr.
Fujimori's candidate, Jaime Yoshiyama, a former president of the Congress, conceded his loss soon after the polls closed at 3 P.M. and pledged to work with the winner, Alberto Andrade.


New York Subway Riders Get Bargain, Even at a Higher Fare;Suburban Payback Time
To the Editor:
While the Federal District Court in Manhattan was right to find that the proposed 20 percent subway fare rise was racist in its effect (front page, Nov.  9), we should recognize that the motivation was not racist but political.


A Runner Catches Up With His Dream
At 5 A.M., the sign atop the Mony Building said 35 degrees.
By 6, it was 34 degrees.
By 8, as I boarded a bus at a midtown hotel, it was snowing.
The 26th New York City Marathon threatened to become the Iditarod.
As the temperature dropped, so did my hopes of running the race in under four hours.
This would be my third marathon in New York.
In 1991, on a perfect day in the mid-50's, I had run 4:21.
In 1993, I slogged to a 4:36 in the heat and humidity.
This year, the most I could hope to beat was frostbite.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about how Colin L. Powell reached his decision against running for President referred incorrectly in some copies to a past position of  Jack F. Kemp, who was pushing a Powell candidacy.
Mr.
Kemp was Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under President George Bush, not President Ronald  Reagan.


CARSON PIRIE SCOTT &amp; CO. (CRP,N)
Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company said yesterday that earnings in its fiscal third quarter fell 11.2 percent, as sales declined 10.3 percent.
Nonetheless, the results exceeded analysts' expectations.
The Midwestern department store company said that net income fell to $4.1 million from $4.6 million, but that earnings per share rose to 24 cents from 23 cents, with 18 percent fewer shares outstanding.
The earnings forecast of seven analysts surveyed by Zacks Investment Research had been for 21 cents a share.


But How Does It Taste?
Here is some health news that many people may find hard to swallow: a cholesterol-lowering candy bar.
The Cardiobar, as it is called, is not on the market yet, but its inventors at the University of Massachusetts say it, or something like it, could have a powerful effect on people's cholesterol levels.


Texas-Sized Questions for Switzer and the Cowboys
No, Jerry Jones did not slit his wrist.
He did not trash his office or wallow in tears over the $70 million -- including the $45 million on signing bonuses alone since February -- that he has spent on Dallas Cowboys' player salaries this year.
Yes, Jones said, the sun did rise yesterday morning and was shining brightly even though fewer than 24 hours earlier his team had been duped in Dallas, 38-20, by those testy rivals, the San Francisco 49ers.
Jerry Jones could be found on the day after the debacle with his feet firmly  planted and with visions of Super Bowl XXX still dancing in his head.
And with a few stark, candid observations about the three lingering questions of this day:


Glasses for the Ears' Easing Children's Language Woes
SCIENTISTS have developed a radically different treatment for children with severe language and reading difficulties, one that may have applications for millions of children with dyslexia.
They call it "glasses for the ears."
The treatment uses a special form of computer-generated speech to train the children to hear differences in sounds that they could not hear before.
The researchers believe their program actually results in changes in the parts of the brain that process simple sounds.
Unlike eyeglasses the treatment is designed to produce permanent changes in the ability to understand spoken and written language.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Composer and Players With Shared Roots Budapest Festival Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Takeover Trend Sweeps Up 2 Life Insurers
Continuing an industry trend, two smaller life insurance companies are being  sold to bigger companies.
The GE Capital Corporation said yesterday that it planned to buy the Union Fidelity Life Insurance Company from the Aon Corporation, for $400 million.
And  SunAmerica Inc. of Los Angeles agreed to buy Ford Motor Company's life insurance business for $172.5 million.


Thuggish Cuckoos Use Muscle To Run Egg Protection Racket
BIOLOGISTS had ranked them among nature's most laughable dupes, inexplicably  gullible bird-brains that dutifully tended eggs dumped into their nests by other bird species.
For evolutionary biologists, the many species of birds that so devote themselves to a stranger's young have been something of a mystery, for even when the dumped eggs and young look nothing like their own, the birds often favor the parasites' offspring at the expense of their own.
Now a study in the journal Evolution offers the first evidence to support what had been considered an unlikely explanation for this behavior.
Biologists studying magpies and the great spotted cuckoos that dump eggs into their nests say that the magpie hosts are not dupes at all, but have been forced into cooperation by an avian extortion scheme.


Billboard Blight
Billboards bring blight to the highways, but the billboard industry brings cash to members of Congress.
That is why Congress is close to undoing a modest achievement in the long struggle to limit the spread of roadway signs.
Billboard lobbyists have held up $6 billion in highway construction funds while pressing to repeal a ban on new billboards on roads designated as scenic byways.
Their strategy may be working.
The Senate, whose highway spending bill did not mention billboards, is yielding to House conferees who insist on gutting a billboard ban enacted only four years ago.


Bracing for Furloughs and Locked Offices
With the failure of attempts by President Clinton and Republican Congressional leaders to reach an 11th-hour compromise over a temporary spending bill, there will be no ferry service to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island today.
Both American landmarks will be closed.
The State Department will issue no new passports.
The Social Security Administration will shut down more than 100 area offices.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service will turn away hundreds of immigrants without appointments.


Moving Light-Years From Dewey Decimal
It is not enough anymore for a library just to lend out a few million books.
That is, amends Paul LeClerc, president of the New York Public Library, books are still of the essence and long will be.
But with the new vistas opening in cyberspace, "We're moving away from this almost fetishistic obsession with the object itself," he said.
"Now what counts is to be able to get to a thing where  it resides, and technology lets you do that."


Franklin Spier Forming New Unit
Franklin Spier Inc. in New York, which specializes in advertising for book publishers, is forming an entertainment division, the Spier Group.
Len Fogge, 45, president of Franklin Spier, was named to the added post of president of the Spier Group.
Before Mr.
Fogge joined Franklin Spier in the spring, he had been president of the Grey Entertainment unit of Grey Advertising in New York.
The Spier Group opens with eight employees and assignments from four clients including Capital Cities/ ABC, which hired the division to create and produce opening credits for the revamped soap opera "The City," formerly "Loving." An ad campaign for "The City" has been created by Grey Entertainment.


Corrections
A film review of "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision" in Weekend on Nov. 3 referred incorrectly to the background of its director and producer, Freida Lee  Mock.
Her tenure as chairwoman of the documentary division at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences was two years, not longtime.


Fund's Plan Is Cleared by Chinese Airline
Shareholders of Hainan Airlines have approved a plan by American Aviation Investment, a fund partly controlled by the United States financier George Soros, to buy a quarter of the company for $25 million, officials said today.
Mr.
Soros has already bought slightly more than 100 million shares, or a quarter of the total, in the airline run by Hainan province, airline officials said.


McNeeley Is Facing an Assault Charge
PETER McNEELEY, beaten in the first round by MIKE TYSON in August, is to be arraigned today on a charge of assault with a dangerous weapon.
The arraignment  was originally scheduled for yesterday in Boston Municipal Court.
The 228-pound heavyweight is accused of hitting the 5-foot-7-inch, 145-pound ALDO HERNANDEZ of Revere, Mass., on the forehead with a beer bottle.
The incident happened about 2 A.M.
Sunday at the Roxy nightclub in Boston.
McNeeley, 27, was released on bail following his arrest.
Hernandez 28, was treated for lacerations at Massachusetts General Hospital and released.


World News Briefs;China Leader Is in Seoul, A Hint of Warming Ties
President Jiang Zemin of China arrived in South Korea today for a five-day visit, signaling a possible warming of relations with Seoul, diplomats said.
Mr.
Jiang, the first Chinese head of state to visit South Korea, was accompanied by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and other leaders.


Customer Slain During Robbery at Grocery
Frank Costantino was sipping a beer, relaxing on a wooden stool by the front  door of Zokari's grocery at 551 Lenox Avenue in Harlem on Sunday night when mayhem descended.
Two or three young men with handguns burst into the store at 9:48 P.M. and announced a robbery, the police said.


New Subway Fare Brings Headaches but No Chaos
Michael Williams, who is raising five children on a messenger's wages, stood  in the morning cold at 125th Street in Harlem and called the $1.50 subway fare murderous.
On Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, Pentland Phillip, 78th on line and late for his trip to the unemployment office, said he felt "no better than a slave." In Flushing, Queens, Norma Chassagne said the fare increase for the subways and buses should have been a nickel, although she said she would pay $2  a trip if the system actually worked.
Bedlam was averted yesterday on the first working day that the new fare took  effect.
But lines to buy tokens were still long and subway riders were grumpy about handing over an extra 25 cents per trip.
As they swept through turnstiles  during the morning rush hour, riders seemed particularly moved to gripe about service, provoked by the day's inconveniences and the added cost to their daily  lives.


Injury Ends Season for Syracuse's Ponds
The sophomore linebacker ANTWAUNE PONDS, who leads Syracuse with 107 tackles, will miss the remainder of the season after sustaining a major leg injury in the Orangemen's 42-10 victory over Pittsburgh on Saturday.
Ponds fractured the fibula of his left leg in two places and his tibia in one place.
Ponds's ankle bone is also out of joint, indicating ligament damage, said the team doctor, IRVING RAPHAEL.
The full extent of the damage will not be known until surgery, which is scheduled for today, he said. (AP)


Yankees Are No. 1, On Payday, at Least
The Yankees and the Mets stood in stark contrast to each other today in baseball's salary standings.
In a season when the average major league salary dropped more than 5 percent, the Yankees had a runaway No. 1 average salary and  payroll that were more than four times the Mets' figures, which ranked 27th.
Payroll figures, which have everyone's attention in baseball because of the continued economic impact of the labor dispute, were presented to the general managers today at the start of their annual meetings.
The general managers are most immediately affected by the figures because club owners are constantly telling them to reduce their payrolls.


UAL Decides It Won't Make Bid for USAir
Ending six weeks of intense speculation in the airline industry, the parent company of United Airlines, the UAL Corporation, said yesterday that it had called off talks with USAir Group about a possible merger.
Although United officials declined to discuss their decision, their unusually public deliberations about a possible merger had disclosed concerns about creditworthiness and about resistance from employees and Wall Street.


Mexico to Break Up State Rail And Sell It, Starting Early in '96
The Mexican Government announced today that it would break up its creaky 16,000-mile railroad system into four lines that would be sold to private investors, probably including American companies, starting next year.
In announcing the terms of the railroad privatization, Carlos Ruiz Sacristan, Mexico's communications and transportation minister, said the first bids would be accepted early in 1996.
The concessions are to last at least 50 years.


Skirting Disaster
Investigators say an American Airlines jet, landing in a storm near Hartford  early Sunday, narrowly avoided catastrophe when it sheared off treetops on a ridge more than two and a half miles from the runway, jamming large branches into both of the plane's engines.
Article, page B7.


Life Term in Wife's Death
Henry Ramm, convicted last month of murdering his wife by setting her on fire, yesterday avoided the death penalty that Hudson County prosecutors had sought.
Mr.
Ramm, 35, of Secaucus, was spared by a Superior Court jury.
He was sentenced to life in prison, said Robert Bianchi, an assistant prosecutors who tried the case.
JOE SHARKEY


King's Fate Now Rests In Hands Of a Jury
After being described once more by the prosecution as a liar and the only person to benefit from a wire-fraud scheme to defraud Lloyd's of London, Don King yesterday began facing the judgment of the jury in his Federal trial in Manhattan.
Following the United States Attorney's hourlong rebuttal summation and short, additional rebuttals by both sides allowed by United States District Court Judge Lawrence McKenna, the panel deliberated for an hour in late afternoon.
It then broke for the evening and will resume today.


First Interstate Gets New Bid, $10.7 Billion, By Wells Fargo
Wells Fargo &amp; Company raised its hostile offer for the First Interstate Bancorp to $10.7 billion in stock yesterday and took steps to take its offer directly to First Interstate's shareholders.
After the San Francisco-based Wells Fargo made its initial unsolicited $10.2  billion bid for its Los Angeles rival last month, First Interstate's board decided to accept a white-knight offer from First Bank System of Minneapolis for $10.1 billion in stock, contending that the deal offered greater long-term prospects and would preserve more jobs in Los Angeles, despite its lower value.


Japanese Aide Quits After Citing 'Good' of Korean Occupation
A Japanese Cabinet member resigned today after creating an uproar in South Korea by saying "Japan did some good" during its colonial occupation of Korea early in this century.
The incident underscores how Japan's relations with other Asian countries are sometimes guided not by the economics of the 1990's but by the traumas of the 1930's and 40's.


Wallace Board Is Moore Goal
The Moore Corporation said today that it had begun a bid to take control of the board of Wallace Computer Services Inc., a rival maker of business forms that Moore has offered to buy for $1.38 billion.
Moore, based in Toronto, said it had sent materials to shareholders of Wallace to try to win support for its offer.
At Wallace's annual meeting, scheduled for Dec. 8, Moore will try to cut the size of Wallace's board to five  directors from eight and will try to elect three of its own representatives to the new five-member board.
Those moves would require 80 percent approval by Wallace shareholders.


U.S. Jewish Groups Abandoned Rabin
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's Nov. 8 column taking to task American Jewish organizations for their failure to mobilize support for the peace policies of the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel will undoubtedly bring on howls  of protest.
Mr.
Friedman could not be more on target.


Week In, Week Out, Yale Bowl Is Home
The Yale Bowl opened 81 years ago on Nov. 21, 1914, with Yale playing Harvard.
Al Ostermann was there that day and will be there again Saturday when Yale plays Harvard at the Yale Bowl for the 40th time.
In between, Ostermann was at every Yale home game but one, a total of 507 games.
In most cases, Ostermann, now 89, was present in an official capacity.
On Saturday, with his friend Bob Stefanowski, Ostermann will operate the stadium's  electronic scoreboard by punching buttons in the press box, a task he has enjoyed for several decades.


Municipalities Trade Expertise
More than 10,000 mayors, council members, clerks and town lawyers from 567 New Jersey municipalities -- along with lobbyists and vendors -- are to attend the annual three-day League of Municipalities convention starting today.
On the agenda are sessions about selling municipal water and sewer departments to private businesses, dealing with state and Federal mandates, and exploring alternatives to property taxes.
There is also a session on preparing for weather emergencies.
Officials of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said they might have to bow out of that one -- not because of the weather (a northeaster is forecast for today), but because of the Federal budget impasse.


Stockholm Journal;The Shame of a Swedish Shopper (a Morality Tale)
Diaper bills and a handful of unpaid parking tickets altered the course of Swedish politics last week.
The unusual series of events began in August, when Prime Minister Invar Carlsson, who is retiring after three decades in politics, appointed Deputy Prime Minister Mona Sahlin, 38, as his successor.
Energetic, attractive and highly popular, Mrs.
Sahlin seemed the ideal figure to continue dismantling Sweden's welfare state without losing touch with ordinary citizens.


Ramapoughs Seek Recognition
About 50 New Jersey Ramapoughs in full regalia protested outside the Bureau of Indian Affairs yesterday to demand that Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt personally review their application for recognition.
In 1993, the bureau rejected the Ramapough application; a final ruling on their appeal is due at the end of this week, said Linda Powell, a spokeswoman for the 2,500 Ramapoughs who  live in northern New Jersey and Rockland County, N.Y.
Opponents claim that the group is composed of descendants of immigrants, not aboriginal North Americans,  and that they are seeking recognition to open a casino.


Traders Focus on Budget Impasse, but Dow Keeps Rising
Stocks were little changed yesterday even as the Dow Jones industrial average reached a new high for the fourth consecutive session.
"There were crosscurrents throughout the day, but the market reached an equilibrium," said Ricky Harrington, senior vice president of Interstate/Johnson Lane in Charlotte, N.C.
"It was almost an exact carbon copy of Friday's action."


Executive Changes
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Valley Forge, Pa., appointed John Stuart, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman, succeeding Ray Mundt, who retired.
Mr.
Mundt continues as a board member.


ROLLERBLADE CO-OWNER SELLS STAKE TO NORDICA
Rollerblade Inc. said yesterday that its co-owner and chairman, Robert O. Naegele Jr., had sold his interest in the company to Nordica, a company that is  part of Benetton Sportsystem of Italy, which has owned 50 percent of Rollerblade since 1991.
The company also said that G.S.
Capital Partners 2 L.P., an affiliate of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, had acquired a minority interest in Rollerblade from Nordica.
Financial terms of the transaction were not disclosed, but an executive close to the deal said that Bennetton paid at least $150 million for Mr.
Naegele's stake in Rollerblade, which is based in Minnetonka, Minn.
Benetton Sportsystem is a division of Edizione Holdings, a private holding company controlled by the Benetton family, which is unrelated to Benetton Group  S.p.A., the clothing company.


Budget Crisis Jeopardizes Clinton's Diplomatic Plans
For months, President Clinton planned to devote late November to foreign policy.
First there would be a six-day visit to Japan to discuss trade in Asia and to renew the Japanese-American security alliance.
Next would come a swing through Great Britain and Ireland to highlight America's commitment to peace in troubled regions.
But with Mr.
Clinton and Congress on a collision course that threatens to lead to a prolonged Government shutdown, White House officials made some quick political calculations about the trip to Japan on Thursday:


INTERIM SERVICES TO BUY COMPUTER POWER UNITS
Computer Power Group Ltd., an Australian computer-services company in which the News Corporation has a 43 percent stake, agreed yesterday to sell its United States and British operations to Interim Services Inc. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., for $71 million.
Interim, which supplies temporary office workers, has been planning to expand its specialty corporate services.
Computer Power sells flexible staffing and information-technology consulting services.
The deal includes Computer Power's 15 sites in the United States and 2 sites in Britain.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-15


Munsingwear Hires an Investment Adviser
Munsingwear Inc. said today that it had hired the New York-based investment bank Bridgeford Group to identify possible licensing or joint venture agreements.
Munsingwear's chief executive, Lowell Fisher, said a major goal would be to increase the sportswear maker's return on brand and market position.


A Czech Wields Hatchet On Arts
Pavel Tigrid would like to close down the Czech Republic's Culture Ministry,  which may seem odd since he is the Culture Minister.
But he is quick to defend his position.
For the 78-year-old writer, who returned from exile last year to take up his post, the very notion of "cultural policy" smells of Communism.
A democratic government should therefore interfere as little as possible in the arts.
Stocky, bearded, outspoken, Mr.
Tigrid smiled at the neatness of his logic.
" 'Culture' did very well with Communism," he said in an interview in the French-style mansion that still houses the Culture Ministry.
"The party was a milking cow, and it had plenty of milk. It gave money left and right, to theaters, to make films, but on one condition: don't mix with politics, don't be citizens. It was a kind of bribery."


Hardaway Proves as Good as Gold
Anfernee Hardaway's nickname is Penny, but he is invaluable to the Orlando Magic.
Orlando has faced a major early season challenge: trying to win consistently  without Shaquille O'Neal (broken thumb), who is not expected back until late December.
Thanks to Hardaway, who has played as well as anyone in the league, Orlando is 5-1 heading into tonight's home game against the unbeaten the Chicago Bulls (5-0).


With Habitat Restored, Ducks in the Millions Create Fall Spectacle
NOT in four decades has the United States witnessed such a spectacular migration of waterfowl as the one this year.
Millions of ducks -- more, even, than in the banner season of 1994 -- have filled the skies of the midcontinent this month in a "grand passage," as wildlife biologists call it, of a kind last  seen in 1955.
An estimated 83 million ducks, some 12 million more than last year and 24 million more than in 1993, are making the trip south across the nation's midsection this year.
What has made this fall's passage such an eye-popping rarity is that most appear to have taken off for warmer climes at once.
Usually, they leave their breeding grounds in the northern plains a group or two at a time, in leisurely fashion over several weeks.


Killer of Kitty Genovese Is Denied a New Trial
A Federal judge yesterday denied a request for a new trial by the man convicted in the 31-year-old murder of Kitty Genovese, a crime that became a metaphor for the failure of urban residents to help fellow citizens in trouble.
Judge Fredric Block of Federal District Court in Brooklyn rejected a contention by Winston Moseley that his conviction should be overturned because the chief defense lawyer at his trial had had a conflict of interest stemming from his representation of Miss Genovese in a minor gambling case several years  before she was slain in March 1964.


Cinderella As Recast In Black For the 70's
As the embittered Mama Rosie of "Black Girl," J. E. Franklin's 1971 play about a bickering, matriarchal Texas family, Leslie Uggams has the prickly composure of a queen in exile.
Wearing a synthetic cherry-color housecoat, she sashays through drab matched furniture with a rolling, imperial gait that conveys an unmistakable message: Mama Rosie was meant for better things.
It could also be argued that Ms.
Uggams, the eternally silky singer and actress who won a Tony for "Hallelujah, Baby!" in 1968, is meant for better things.
Following the well-deserved success of its revival of Ntozake Shange's "For Colored Girls" last summer, the New Federal Theater has resurrected another play from the same decade that shows its age far more than Ms.
Uggams shows hers.


A Pacific Vision in Search of Reality
Leaders of 18 nations in the Pacific region will meet in Osaka, Japan, this week in an effort to keep their grand vision of a vast trans-Pacific free trade  zone from unraveling.
President Clinton and the 17 other leaders of the countries belonging to the  Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, or APEC, met a year ago in Bogor, Indonesia, and announced a "declaration of common resolve" to achieve "free and  open trade and investment" among themselves by the year 2020, with the industrial nations in the group realizing that goal 10 years earlier.


Syria Maintains a Studied Silence on Rabin Killing
This Arab capital is awash in celebration as its residents hang banners, posters and festive lights to honor President Hafez al-Assad, who on Thursday will mark 25 years in power.
But in reaction to the assassination of the Prime Minister of Israel, there has been only official silence.
Unlike Iran or Libya, Syria has not rejoiced at the death of Yitzhak Rabin.
But neither has there been any expression of sorrow.
Still formally at war with  the neighbor he has battled in countless ways since seizing power in 1970, President Assad has simply said that he remains committed to the battle of peace.


Debt Bill Veto Brings Relief As Federal Default Is Avoided
President Clinton's veto of legislation to raise the Federal debt ceiling was greeted yesterday with relief by investors and financial markets.
Although the bill Mr.
Clinton vetoed would have temporarily increased the Government's borrowing authority, it would also have taken away the Treasury's flexibility to avoid default by juggling funds.
If Mr.
Clinton had signed the bill, once the temporary increase expired, the threat of default would have been more intense than it is now.


Capital Gains Cuts Would Be Retroactive
Investors and families could see part of the Republican tax cut soon after they filed their returns next spring under a tentative agreement reached by House and Senate negotiators, people familiar with the Congressional negotiations said today.
A 50 percent cut in capital gains taxes for individuals would be effective on Jan. 1, 1995, under a preliminary deal struck in long, closed sessions over the  weekend to fuse separate House and Senate tax bills, those people said, and the  Republicans' $500-per-child-tax credit would be retroactive to Oct. 1, 1995.


For Rock Fans, It's a Battle Getting In
Bruce Hornsby's recent show at the Manhattan Center was a celebrity-packed event, attracting Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead, Don Henley of the Eagles, Bonnie Raitt, Pat Metheny and Gregory Hines.
But for Howard Bolotsky, it was yet another reason that living around a concert capital is not always a blessing for a rock fan.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Joe Hall, outfielder, to a minor-league contract.


Quality of Mercy Crosses Class Lines;A Boy's Illness Draws Communities That Are Worlds Apart
Francisco Ahumada has a sharp mind, is good with computers and speaks two languages.
He likes sports, makes friends easily and is adjusting to his baldness.
Those who know him say he is at ease with all kinds of people, which helps to explain why he has united so many in the community of Port Washington, L.I.
He has even managed, in a way, to redefine what "community" means.
His illness has  helped unite, for the moment, the people in two villages that are close to each  other and yet worlds apart in culture and class.


No Headline
We used to play 11-man ball here. But we're running out of boys."
CARTIS WHITE, 92, discussing high school football in the small towns of west Texas. [A1:5.]


CHRONICLE
Don't even suggest to SAMMY SHORE that there is something second-rate about doing the warm-up act for a celebrity.
"We all start out that way and some of us are lucky enough to get to the top, but we are all warm-ups for somebody, for our boss, our husband or wife," he said the other day.


Quick Apology From Reeves
While talking about his decision to keep quarterback Phil Simms over Jeff Hostetler, Giants Coach Dan Reeves made a wife-beating joke in his news conference today, then instantly regretted the remark and apologized.
Reeves made the decision to keep Simms three years ago, but Simms spent only  one more season with the Giants before a shoulder injury forced him to eventually leave football.
Hostetler, now with the Oakland Raiders, beat the Giants on Sunday.
When talking about the decision in the past, Reeves has become agitated, as he did again today.


Fire Destroys Florida State Uniforms
Florida State, ranked No. 7 by the New York Times computer, is scrambling to  replace about $300,000 in football equipment that burned last weekend.
A truck carrying the team's equipment from Chapel Hill, N.C., after Saturday's 28-12 victory against North Carolina caught fire Saturday night and destroyed nearly all of its contents.
Equipment included 275 jerseys, 200 pairs of garnet pants, nearly 400 pairs  of shoes, 85 helmets, video equipment and warm-up jackets.
Shoulder pads that were salvaged must be certified for safety.
The garnet pants the team wore Saturday had been donated by the actor and former Seminole player BURT REYNOLDS.


N.B.A. and Referees to Meet
The National Basketball Association and its locked-out referees will meet tomorrow in Manhattan in an attempt to resolve their labor dispute.
The two sides have not met since Oct. 28, and have been far apart on financial issues.
Mike Mathis, a veteran official who has been negotiating for the referees union, hopes that Commissioner David Stern will attend.


Fund Gives $2 Million To 4 Hospitals for Care
The Henry and Lucy Moses Fund, freely admitting that it was reviving the charity of a bygone era, announced yesterday that it would give a total of $2 million to four leading New York City hospitals to help pay for care for uninsured patients as government cutbacks are made in Medicare and Medicaid.
Most foundation executives see payments for direct aid as largely fruitless since the problems the money is being spent for will remain long after the money is spent.
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, for example, already spends more than $25 million a year on free care out of its annual hospital budget of $600 million.
Mount Sinai, Montefiore and Columbia-Presbyterian, the other three hospitals that received gifts yesterday, also absorb large amounts on unreimbursed care and see these needs growing as Medicare and Medicaid are reduced.


Maradona Must Sit After 4th Yellow Card
DIEGO MARADONA will watch Boca Juniors' match against Rosario Central from the bench on Friday after losing his temper and receiving his fourth yellow card of the season in Sunday's 2-0 victory against Banfield in the Argentine league.
Maradona, playing his eighth league match for his new team after a 15-month suspension for failing a drug test at the 1994 World Cup, was cited for arguing  with the referee. (Reuters)


World News Briefs;Airlift Saves 237 People After Avalanche in Nepal
Rescuers evacuated 237 people trapped in the Himalayas after one of Nepal's worst avalanche disasters near Mount Everest, officials said today.
Close to half of them are foreigners, including 12 Americans.


Bidding Starts For Wireless Cable Rights
Round one in the Federal Government's auction of video broadcast rights attracted $3.4 million in high bids today.
Paradise Cable Inc. was the highest bidder, offering $188,750 for the right to provide wireless cable television to a Florida market.
The license is one of 493 on the block.


CHRISTOPHER SETS A LAST-DITCH PUSH FOR BOSNIA PEACE
With Bosnian peace talks at a standoff over territory, Administration officials said today that Secretary of State Warren Christopher would begin a last-ditch attempt on Tuesday to prod the parties toward an overall settlement.
"The Serbs and the Bosnian Government are taking irreconcilable positions on  territory right now," said a senior official close to the negotiations.
"So we're bringing Christopher in for as much as two days and my guess is we'll either close this thing down or come out with a success."


Corrections
A report in The Living Section last Wednesday about the dangers faced by restaurant employees, with an article about kitchen-related injuries, referred incorrectly to an increase in cases of musculo-skeletal disorders -- a total of  142 cases in 1992, 262 in 1993 and 409 in 1994 -- at the Center of Occupational  and Environmental Medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
Those figures were for all occupational-related musculo-skeletal disorders, not just for kitchen-related injuries.


Israeli A.D.R.'s Met Cautiously
For the first time since the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 10 days ago, a major Israeli company tried yesterday to sell shares on world capital markets.
The company, Koor Industries Ltd., found a cautious reception.
Koor, a Tel Aviv-based conglomerate, sold 6.95 million American depository receipts at $17.25 each, off from the last reported price mentioned in the company's prospectus dated Oct. 3.
The stock closed at $17, after 2.1 million A.D.R.'s were traded.


H. J. Robinson Sr., Pharmacologist, 82
Dr.
Harry John Robinson Sr., a former director of the Merck Institute for Therapeutic Research in Rahway, N.J., died last Wednesday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 82.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


J. Walter Thompson Reorganizes Board
The J. Walter Thompson Company in New York has reorganized its board, adding  more executives like top account managers.
The board will grow to 31 members from 20 as 14 newcomers join and 3 current  members leave.
The board is the worldwide policy-making unit for Thompson, a unit of the WPP Group, which has offices in 75 countries and billings estimated last year at more than $6.3 billion.


Observer;Bang Bang Chop Boom
For most of this century America has relied on movies to keep it supplied with great lines.
This source is now drying up.
Less talk and more action is the rule in today's movies.
If it keeps up, Americans may be forced back on that old great-line reliable, William Shakespeare.
From the sinking of the Spanish Armada to Al Jolson's "You ain't heard nothin' yet," Shakespeare was the undisputed king of great lines.


Space Tunnel Job Near
The astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis geared up today for NASA's first major space-station assembly job, erecting a 15-foot docking tunnel that will enable shuttles to couple with the orbiting Russian outpost Mir.
"We're doing something no one's ever tried to do before, trying to build this thing and install it," said Maj.
Chris Hadfield of the Canadian Air Force, the shuttle crew's crane operator.
"It's definitely a challenge."


Getting Less for More on the Subways
While thousands of marathoners thundered through New York City this weekend,  thousands of subway riders were going nowhere fast.
Lines at many stations stretched up the stairs and outside, where people waited in the chilly wind for  their turn to buy the new $1.50 tokens.
Paying more for less service seems to be the theme at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, at least as far as the city is concerned.
The new tokens were put on sale only sporadically in the days before the turnover, and officials claimed they could not afford to assign extra clerks to sell tokens on Sunday, the day the new fares went into effect.
As a result, some riders waited an hour for the privilege of paying the highest fare increase in the history of the city subway system.
Yesterday, additional workers did help keep the lines under control, particularly in midtown Manhattan.
But waits of half an hour or more were reported in some parts of Brooklyn and Queens.
Some stations ran out of tokens, or change.
Automatic token-selling machines were inoperative.


Real Stakes In Shutdown
The crisis the Government is facing this week -- doors locked, workers sent home, a financial default threatened -- has become standard procedure when Congress and the White House are controlled by opposing parties.
To one degree or another, it happened when George Bush was President and Thomas S. Foley was Speaker of the House.
It happened when Ronald Reagan was President and Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was Speaker.


Bonds Gain As Treasury Will Resume Its Auctions
The Treasury virtually removed chances of a default this week with an 11th-hour announcement yesterday that it would resume its auctions.
Prices rose  immediately, for the first time in three days, as investors rushed to buy Government securities.
Traders said the announcement by the Treasury Secretary, Robert E. Rubin, erased early losses brought on by the President's veto of a bill that would have raised the debt ceiling.
Word of the veto led to selling as investors sought to  protect themselves against a possible default.
The Treasury's announcement of the revised auction plans not only overcame concerns of a default this week, but also led to short-covering, which contributed to the rally.


By Design;Creative Black-Tie Preferred
With the holidays approaching, the black-tie season moves into high gear.
Most men attending formal functions -- James Bond included -- simply slip on traditional evening wear.
But if Bond were every inch the stylish adventurer he  would have us believe he is, he would be more creative this fall, as high fashion has given its imprimatur to alternative formal dress.
Bergdorf Goodman Men has Richard Tyler's black jacket with metallic braid trim ($2,195) and black flat-front trousers with satin-trimmed pockets ($825).
It also has Issey Miyake's black crystal-pleated cutaway jacket with a shawl collar ($1,780) and matching pants ($890).


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pianist in Control Of Instrument and Music Ursula Oppens 92d Street Y


Corrections
A headline on Nov. 5 about bird flocks that caused trouble at three Midwestern airports misstated the result.
It was the radar systems that shut down, not the airports.


Delicate Juggling Act For U.S. Credit Rating
So how long can Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin keep up his juggling act?
The answer to that question is at the heart of the Clinton Administration's strategy of holding off the Republican-dominated Congress without actually ruining the impeccable credit rating the country has had since 1789.
Every few days for the past month, Mr.
Rubin has proclaimed that default is imminent, unless he takes extraordinary, and costly, action.
And every few days, showing just a few cards at a time, he has come up with a strategy that keeps the United States afloat, and the markets and Congress guessing.


TOYS "R" US INC. (TOY,N)
Toys "R" Us Inc. said yesterday that its fiscal third-quarter earnings fell 56 percent because of slow sales and lack of a big seller like last year's Mighty Morphin Power Rangers toys.
Net income for the retailer, which is based in Paramus, N.J., fell to $20.9 million, or 8 cents a share, from $47.4 million, or 17 cents a share.


Soviet Refugee's Novel Wins the Goncourt Prize
Andre Makin, a political refugee from the former Soviet Union, won France's most prestigious literary award today, for a semi-autobiographical novel about growing up in Russia.
The literary award, the Goncourt Prize, earns the winner the equivalent of only $10, but most novels that win the prize become best sellers.


3 Companies Agree to Settle Implant Cases
The boards of three companies that are being sued by women who had silicone breast implants agreed today to a new multibillion-dollar settlement.
Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. of Federal District Court in Birmingham, Ala., who is overseeing the class-action case, announced the settlement yesterday evening.


Jersey City Officers Are Accused Of Turning Stolen Cars to Profit
Extortion, kickbacks, nepotism, padded payrolls, frauds ingenious and diabolical: the tradition of corruption in Jersey City has wiped out whole slates of officials and their "reform" successors in the gritty town across the  Hudson from lower Manhattan.
Yesterday, a new chapter in the Jersey City story came to light as local officials and New Jersey state police investigators disclosed "Operation Boneyard," aimed at a bizarre scam involving the city car pound.
No malefactors  have been arrested and many details and the extent of skulduggery are still murky.


Compromise Eases Restrictions on Farmers
House and Senate Republicans working on a compromise budget bill agreed today to allow farmers to collect Federal subsidies regardless of how much they plant  or what happens to prices.
Budget negotiators concluded a deal this morning to eliminate Federal programs that pay farmers not to plant certain crops and compensate them when prices are low, said a Congressional aide who insisted on anonymity.
The Federal Government would instead make slightly smaller, fixed payments to farmers in the next seven years.


Enough Smoking Guns to Go Around
Sunday night's filtered "60 Minutes" report on what Mike Wallace called the "hardball tactics" used by tobacco companies to keep unfavorable news about smoking from reaching the public was most notable for what it did not include: an interview with a former tobacco executive giving the lowdown on his industry.
Since the executive had an agreement with the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company not to disclose confidential corporate matters, CBS lawyers feared that  "60 Minutes" would be inviting a large lawsuit.
Even though Mr.
Wallace later said that the interview would have provided information that viewers would not now receive, management ordered it deleted.


On My Mind;Two Enemies of the Press
Colin Powell did make one slip during his elegant news conference declining to run for the Presidency.
He was too nice to the press.
That was generous, but it does not help the press, which has two increasing problems.
One comes from the tobacco business.
The other comes from ourselves.
To meet them, news people have to be clear-minded about both.
Let's begin with ourselves.


After 20 Years, Dan Hedaya Is Fading Out of Anonymity
Dan Hedaya is not a movie star.
Never has been.
In New York, his hometown, he has traveled unnoticed for years on buses and subways.
His meals in restaurants  have gone undisturbed.
Walking around his SoHo neighborhood, he has always seemed like a perfectly average -- and anonymous -- fellow.
Until now.


Gold Prices Stage a Pullback; Coffee Climbs to 2-Month High
Gold prices, which often rise in times of crisis, pulled back on the Commodity Exchange of New York yesterday after the Treasury Department outlined  a plan that would allow the Government to avoid a default this week.
On other markets, wheat prices fell and coffee rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities fell 1.06 point, to 242.81.


Norwest Seeks a Bank in Texas; Offer Is Below Investors' Hopes
The Norwest Corporation agreed today to acquire Victoria Bancshares Inc., but Victoria's stock fell because the offer was below what traders had expected.
Norwest offered about $33.40 a share, while some investors had expected an offer above $36.


Uncovering The Clues In a Series Of Fires
Nova" is going in for tales of detection. Having opened its season with the  mystery surrounding the fate of Anastasia, daughter of the Czar, it turns tonight to the mystery of a dozen or more suspicious fires that destroyed stores from San Francisco to Los Angeles in the 1980's and 90's. In the company of sleuths on their "Hunt for the Serial Arsonist," we learn quite a bit about the  ways of fires and of the people who set them on purpose.
The big problem about finding clues at the scene of a successful fire is of course that everything is likely to be destroyed by the time an investigation starts.
Still, as training sessions for arson investigators demonstrate and the  narrator says, "Every fire has a story to tell for those who know how to read the remains."


Showalter Has Deal With Diamondbacks
Eighteen days after Buck Showalter rejected a contract to manage the Yankees  for two more years, his agent completed negotiations today for a contract that will pay him not to manage for two years.
Jim Krivacs, the agent, and Jerry Colangelo, the aggressive managing partner  of the Arizona Diamondbacks, negotiated most of the contract on Sunday night.


Q&amp;A
Edible Nests


What Nature Leaves Behind


PRESIDENT VETOES STOPGAP BUDGET; SHUTDOWN LOOMS
President Clinton on Monday vetoed two bills intended to keep the Government  in business as he and Republican leaders exchanged accusations of partisan irresponsibility and much of the Government prepared to shut down later today.
A last-ditch effort to reach agreement ended shortly before midnight without  any progress between Mr.
Clinton and Republican leaders.
While Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate majority leader, called the 90-minute session "constructive," he said, "We went around and around, but we don't have an agreement." Senator Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, was even more emphatic, saying, "No progress was made."


Singer to Buy Back Furniture Operation
The Singer Company N.V. said today that it would buy back the Singer Furniture Company, reversing a spinoff in the mid-1980's, as well as purchase the Italian operation that makes Singer sewing machines and other home products  from Semi-Tech (Global) Ltd. of Hong Kong.
The Singer Company, which is incorporated in the Dutch Antilles and based here, said it would pay $15 million to $25 million for the North Carolina furniture maker and $11.1 million for the Italian operation.


Justices to Rule on Limiting Cable TV's Sexually Explicit Programs
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13
The Supreme Court agreed today to hear a constitutional challenge to a Federal law intended to curb access to sexually explicit programming on certain  cable television channels.


UNION CARBIDE TO ACQUIRE POLYPROPYLENE BUSINESS
The Union Carbide Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the polypropylene business of the Shell Oil Company, a unit of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies.
Terms were not disclosed, but one analyst speculated that the deal could be worth $200 million to $300 million.
Union Carbide, the chemical company based in Danbury, Conn., said the purchase would include Shell's polypropylene technology and manufacturing plants, as well as polypropylene assets previously held jointly by Union Carbide and Shell.
Polypropylene is a plastic used in products like carpeting, housewares and appliances.


Bill to Ease Mandates Is Signed
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed a bill yesterday that she said would ease  state-mandated financial burdens on local governments by giving towns greater flexibility in setting police chiefs' salaries, publishing proposed ordinances and testing storm water runoff, among other changes.
On Election Day, voters strongly approved a ballot question that requires legislators to provide municipal government with the money to pay for most state mandates, the A.P. reported.


Council Members Denounce Plan on Legal Aid
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to strip the Legal Aid Society of 20 percent of its caseload came under sharp criticism yesterday from several members of a City Council committee who said the Mayor was simply punishing the society for its unsuccessful strike a year ago.
The hearing by the Council's Contracts Committee came three weeks after the Giuliani administration issued a request for bids from other legal groups or law firms to defend the poor in the city's courtrooms.
The 119-year-old Legal Aid Society would continue to defend about 220,000 cases a year.
But under the city's plan to diminish the group's role, outside groups would defend about 50,000 cases a year.


A History of Battling Trouble, on Both Sides of the Law
Trouble is nothing new to William R. Celester, the Newark Police Director.
In one way or another, he has been fighting trouble his entire life.
He was one of four children reared by a single mother in one of Boston's meanest neighborhoods.
He ran with a gang, the Marseilles Dukes, and was known as Blast.
By age 17, he was a divorced father and a ninth-grade dropout, and had served a six-month jail sentence for fighting.


IMMUNEX REBUFFS AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS' BID
The Immunex Corporation in Seattle rejected a $263 million offer from its majority shareholder, American Home Products Corporation, based in Madison, N.J., for the Immunex shares it does not already own.
The offer worked out to $14.50 a share in cash.
Immunex shares, which had closed at $12 on Nov. 2, the day before the offer, rose 6.3 cents yesterday to $16.063.
The decision came from a committee of Immunex directors that studied the American Home offer.


Surgery Sidelines Young for 4 Weeks
After nearly a month on the sideline with a badly sprained and bruised left shoulder, Steve Young underwent arthroscopic surgery yesterday morning at Stanford University Hospital to have loose cartilage removed.
He will be out of  the lineup for another four weeks.
Young decided to have the surgery because there was little improvement and he felt the condition could be career threatening.


Reservoirs at Healthy Levels
Summer's last drought warning is over.
With fall's heavy rains continuing through November, three Catskill Mountain reservoirs that serve 14 counties of southern and central New Jersey are back to healthy levels, and the Delaware River Basin Commission ended all drought measures, The Associated Press said.


Bankers Trust Shuffles Top Management
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation has reassigned top executives of its $200 billion asset management business, people at the bank said.
The bank's executives declined to comment.
The reorganization -- the second in two years -- comes as Bankers Trust is trying to increase profits by increasing the amount of assets it actively manages, the people said.
About half the assets Bankers Trust manages, or $100 billion, are in passive investments, such as tracking stock indexes, which earn  lower fees.


Bomb Kills 4 Americans in Saudi Arabia
Two powerful explosions ripped through an American-run military training center in the heart of the Saudi Arabian capital of Riyadh today, killing four Americans and shocking a vast desert kingdom unaccustomed to the terrorism that  has plagued its neighbors.
The blasts, which the Pentagon said injured 35 to 40 people, were caused by at least one bomb, probably set off in a van.
Officials said that one soldier and three civilians were killed.


Mexico's Ruling Party Trails in Races, but Leads in a Big One
Mexico's battered and increasingly unpopular governing party appears to have  lost control of several major cities, but seems to have won the race for Governor of the important state of Michoacan, the stronghold of the leftist opposition.
The Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has ruled Mexico for 66 years, also took early leads in official results for legislative races in several states.


Cogeco Considering CFCF Bid in Canada
Cogeco Cable Inc. said today that it was considering a bid to acquire CFCF Inc., a television broadcasting, production and cable company, for about $259 million (Canadian), or $192 million (United States).
Cogeco, a cable television operator, said the offer would value CFCF at $18.50 a share and would consist of at least $10 a share in cash and the rest in Cogeco stock.
Both figures are in Canadian dollars.


Public Housing Is No Success;Poverty's New Face
To the Editor:
At last, Susan Mayer and Christopher Jencks (Op-Ed, Nov. 9) set the record straight on the War on Poverty, but they do not go far enough in explaining why  the American public is so ready to believe the myth that the war was not only a  total failure, but actually encourages dependency.
The key to public opinion is  the "changing face of poverty."


So Captain Bligh Wasn't That Bad?
PAST IMPERFECT History According to the Movies General editor: Mark C. Carnes Edited by Ted Mico, John Miller-Monzon and David Rubel Illustrated. 304 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $30.


Dollar Edges Up After Treasury Takes Steps to Avoid a Default
The dollar rose against the Japanese yen yesterday after the Clinton Administration took steps to avoid a default on debt payments this week.
The dollar's gain against the yen was helped in part by large trades by hedge funds.
But against the German mark, the dollar retreated from earlier gains.
Political and economic uncertainty in the United States typically bolsters the mark.


Before Debris Is Cleared, Area Braces for Another Storm
With the buzz of chain saws still echoing in suburbs and towns as homeowners  and clean-up crews cut away tree branches that came crashing down in fierce windstorms over the weekend, the metropolitan area braced for another battering  today.
Weather forecasters said that a major northeaster would hit by late afternoon, bringing wind gusts above 50 miles per hour and flooding in some low-lying areas.
They said the storm should pass quickly, unlike the northeasters that stalled over the region in 1991 and 1992, causing extensive flooding, destroying sand dunes and boardwalks and driving thousands from their  homes.


Alitalia Deal
The Italian national airline, Alitalia S.p.A., said today that it had signed  a deal worth $30 million over three years to provide jet services to Gemini Air  Cargo of Reston, Va.


With 6 Boys and a Football, Tiny Texas Towns Stay Alive
This cotton-farming town on the Texas prairie has lost three of its four cafes, all three gas stations, both pharmacies, both barber shops, the three-story Coleman Hotel and its picture show.
It has lost more than two-thirds of its peak population and about half its school football team.
But only half.


USA Networks to Sponsor Charlie Rose's PBS Program
It may sound a little strange, but starting in January, something like this will be heard on Channel 13 at around 11 o'clock each weeknight: "Major funding  for 'Charlie Rose' is provided by. . . . USA Networks."
Kay Koplovitz, the chairman and chief executive officer of USA Networks, one  of the nation's highest-rated cable networks, announced yesterday that her company would spend $1 million next year to underwrite Mr.
Rose's hourlong interview program on PBS.


College Soccer Report
N.C.A.A. Tournament


Suspected Serial Killer Is Arrested in Kentucky
A man who is suspected of killing at least four women across the country was  captured today after leading the police on a 100 mile-an-hour chase.
The suspect, Glen Rogers, 35, was forced off the road by more than a half-dozen police cruisers after the 15-mile chase near Waco, a small town about 40 miles south-southeast of Lexington.
Mr.
Rogers was then taken to the state police station in Richmond for interrogation.


Chess
It may be that Gary Kasparov thinks he's superman.
Other world champions take a long rest after a tense title match like his recent battle with Viswanathan Anand in New York.
But less than two weeks after the match ended on Oct. 11, Kasparov started to play in a tournament, the elite Credit Suisse Masters, in Horgen, Switzerland.
And after yielding draw after draw and finishing with a modest 5-5 score, he looked as though he should have stayed in New York and revitalized himself with some sightseeing.
Meanwhile, Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Vladimir Kramnik of Russia tied for first with 7-3 scores.
The United States champion, Boris Gulko of Fair Lawn, N.J., got off to a fast start, defeating Viktor Korchnoi of Switzerland and Rafael Vaganian of Armenia, before slipping back into the middle of the pack.
His victory over Korchnoi was an interesting amalgamation of strategy and tactics, although it ended prematurely on a blunder.


State Asks Why Some Students Don't Spend More Time in Class
The State Department of Education has ordered New York City school officials  to explain why as many as one-third of the students at 14 high schools are spending fewer than five and a half hours in class each day, below the minimum required by law, state officials said yesterday.
In many cases, state officials said, they were worried that the schools were  prohibiting the students from taking a full course load -- usually seven 45-minute periods, including lunch -- as a way to cope with city-imposed budget  cuts, which have left some classrooms bursting at the seams.


Rip Van Digital's Software Hangover
AS he watched an electronic message crawl across his screen at a glacial 300  bits per second, Rip Van Digital fell asleep at the keyboard of his wonderful new personal computer.
The desk calendar was open to November 1981.
Mr.
Van Digital awakened last week and called his stockbroker.
His shares in  the manufacturer of his computer, he learned to his great chagrin, had not made him a wealthy man.
But when he ventured next door to borrow a fresh carton  of milk, Mr.
Van Digital was flabbergasted.


CanWest Moves To Acquire WIC
The CanWest Global Communications Corporation said today that it intended to  offer $24 (Canadian) a share, or $17.76 (United States), for all of the class A  voting shares and class B nonvoting shares of a fellow broadcaster, WIC Western  International Communications Ltd.
The offer values WIC at $636 million (Canadian), or $470.8 million (United States), and expires Dec. 15.


Coating to Stop Project-Stairwell Blazes Is Expected Soon
A fire-retardant wall coating intended to stop or slow the rapid acceleration of blazes in the stairwells of city housing projects could be ready within the next two weeks, officials of the New York City Housing Authority said yesterday.
In the wake of the most recent of more than 30 such fires, the search for a retardant has gone around the clock for the last week at VTEC Laboratories, a fire-testing company in the Bronx.


GENERAL ELECTRIC PLANS TO SELL ON-LINE SERVICE
The General Electric Company plans to sell its struggling Genie on-line service.
General Electric Information Services, a unit of G.E., is selling Genie because it does not fit with its core business, which is to allow companies to buy and sell products over its computer network, John Berry, a spokesman for the unit, said yesterday.
Genie accounts for about 5 percent of the unit's $700,000  in annual sales, he said.
The Wall Street Journal reported the sale plans yesterday.
General Electric hired the investment banking firm Allen &amp; Company to find a buyer for Genie.
Analysts said Genie, started in 1985, would be a tough sell.
"Genie is a proprietary service without much brand recognition," said Gregory Wester, associate director at the Yankee Group, a Boston market research firm.
"To compete in this market, you have to make a significant investment in marketing and in acquiring customers."


Complaint Against Newcomer School
A civil rights advocate filed a complaint with the United States Department of Education yesterday, charging that New York City's new high school for immigrants violates the civil rights of its students by segregating them from mainstream public schools.
Both advocates for immigrants and education officials called the claim groundless, saying that the school was designed to do just the opposite: to help immigrants who do not speak English become integrated into society faster through a program that caters to their needs.


REPUBLIC INDUSTRIES PLANS TWO ACQUISITIONS
Republic Industries, a solid-waste management company, said yesterday that it would acquire the J. C. Duncan Company and the Fennell Container Company and its related companies for about $177 million in stock.
The company said the acquisition of Duncan, which provides solid-waste collection and recycling services in Texas, would add about $40 million to its annual revenue.
Fennell, a solid-waste management company in South Carolina, will increase Republic's annual revenue by about $30 million, it said.
Republic, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., provides services to solid-waste generators.
Its stock rose 43.75 cents, to $23.4375, in Nasdaq trading.


Arendt Played Down Heidegger's Nazism
To the Editor:
The response to Elzbieta Ettinger's study of the relationship between the German-born Jewish philosopher Hannah Arendt and the philosopher Martin Heidegger (news article, Nov. 5) constitutes a form of denial.


Police Official For Newark Put on Leave
Mayor Sharpe James put his embattled Police Director on paid leave today, responding publicly for the first time since raids by Federal agents on the homes and offices of the director and another top aide brought the corruption inquiry here one step closer to Mr.
James.
Mr.
James said at a news conference that the Federal investigation of the Police Director, William R. Celester, was hurting the 1,290-member Police Department, which was already struggling to tame one of the highest crime rates  in the nation.
The department has been in disarray since Mr.
Celester's home and office were searched by dozens of Federal agents last week.


Cruise Talks Are Broken Off
The Carnival Corporation, the world's largest cruise-ship company, said today that it had broken off talks with Kloster Cruise Ltd.'s management about helping with a restructuring of the financially troubled cruise operator.
Carnival did not give any reasons for the move, and a company spokeswoman declined to discuss the matter further.
Kloster officials were not immediately available.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- ADDENDA;People
*
Steve Hayman has rejoined the Seiniger Advertising Group, Beverly Hills, Calif., in the new posts of general manager and chief operating officer.
He was  previously president for marketing at Savoy Pictures Entertainment, Santa Monica, Calif., and before that was an executive vice president at Seiniger.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Taking Over Teamsters Local
After pasting a bill of particulars on the front door, trustees from the International Brotherhood of Teamsters took over the office of Local 999 yesterday, accusing its officers of financial improprieties, "reckless spending" and gross mismanagement.
The North Haledon local -- whose 1,800 members work in metal, plastics, novelty and other manufacturing jobs in Passaic and Bergen Counties -- is the seventh in New Jersey and the 25th in the New York metropolitan area to be placed in emergency receivership.
The action comes under a national crackdown on internal corruption led by the International Teamsters president, Ron Carey.
Among the improprieties discovered during an audit of Local 999, the Teamsters said, were excessive expense reimbursements, poor bookkeeping, excessive salaries and bonuses, and misuse of dental plan money.


No Hope in 567 M.I.A. Cases, the Pentagon Says
In the first estimate of its kind, the Pentagon said today that the bodies of more than 500 American servicemen killed in the Vietnam War will never be recovered.
It said recovery is still possible for about 1,500 others.
The conclusions are based on a yearlong review of individual cases of American troops missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia -- all of whom the Pentagon says were killed.


Cutback in Offering Of Indonesia Phone Stock
PT Telkom sharply reduced the size of its initial stock sale yesterday.
The 36 percent reduction, to $1.59 billion, came as investors balked at the price of the Indonesian telephone company's shares.
The sale by the state-owned company,  although cut from the original goal of about $2.5 billion, was still the largest stock offering in Indonesia's history.


White Sox Dismiss Hriniak After 7 Years
WALT HRINIAK, one of the most prominent hitting coaches in baseball, was dismissed yesterday by the Chicago White Sox.
Hriniak, 52, spent seven years as  Chicago's batting coach.
The White Sox were second in the American League with a .280 average last season and fifth in the league with 755 runs.
A Charlie Lau disciple, Hriniak replaced him as the White Sox hitting coordinator in 1988 when Lau died.
Hriniak's pupils include OZZIE GUILLEN of the White Sox and the Yankees' WADE BOGGS, whom he instructed while in Boston. (AP)


Why Should Transit Riders Subsidize Drivers?
To the Editor:
As the 20 percent increase in the New York City transit fare kicks in, the irony that's been missed is the extent to which transit users are subsidizing those who drive.
The latest statistics from the Federal Highway Administration (1993) show that drivers pay only 61 percent of money budgeted for highway use.


ALCOA AGREES TO BUY ALUMIX OPERATING ASSETS
The Aluminum Company of America, based in Pittsburgh, agreed yesterday to acquire the principal operating assets of Alumix S.p.A, Italy's state-owned aluminum producer, for about $280 million.
Alumix has annual revenue of $550 million and 2,700 employees.
The deal with the owner of Alumix, Ente Participazione e Finanziamento Industria Manufatturiera, would give Alcoa several plants in Italy, including two smelters in Porto Vesme and Fusina with a combined capacity of 170,000 metric tons a year.
Alcoa's only aluminum smelters in Europe are in Norway, where it operates a joint venture.


One Young Patient's Long Way Home
Nearly 11 years after Justin Bates was carried into the emergency room at the Broward General Medical Center, he was met in the lobby today by his mother and  stepfather, Cynthia and Matthew Mendat, as he left a second-floor room that has  been his home since he was 16 months old.
More than a dozen relatives and friends and as many reporters joined the parents to greet Justin, who can barely see or hear.
He cannot talk or eat without the help of tubes and machinery.
Originally brought to the hospital for  treatment of an asthma attack, he is in what doctors call a vegetative state because of a series of errors by the hospital's staff that caused irreversible brain damage.


4 Are Accused in Oklahoma of Bomb Plot
Four people, including a self-proclaimed prophet who opposes the Government,  were charged today with plotting a series of bombings against targets that included abortion clinics, welfare offices, gay bars and civil rights organizations.


CHRONICLE
The jewelry collection of PRINCESS SALIMAH AGA KHAN went on the auction block in Geneva yesterday, and prices reached as much as eight times estimates, Reuters reported.
Every piece was sold, bringing a total of $27,682,601.
The presale estimate was $15 million.
The sale, conducted by Christie's, took place in the Hotel Richemond after an appeals court in Geneva struck down the Aga Khan's effort to prevent it.
He had argued that though the jewelry had been granted to the Princess in a divorce settlement, she was not permitted to sell it except for extreme financial need.


Running on Good Intentions
Dr.
Abraham Lakshin, a 66-year-old obstetrician from Santa Ana, Calif., and his 67-year-old wife, Linda, flew here to run in Sunday's New York City Marathon.
But his arthritis ached so much that he could not run.
On Saturday night, he was in a hotel elevator here with several runners from  the Netherlands.
All except one were entered in the marathon.
The exception, 25-year-old Gerhart Klein, had run a half-marathon but never a marathon and desperately wanted to run this one.


Corrections
A brief report by Dow Jones in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the purchase of 65 percent of the Indspec Chemical Corporation by the Occidental Petroleum Corporation misidentified the New York merchant bank that is selling the stake.
It is Castle Harlan Inc., not Harlan Inc.


Asia Guide Calls Local Partners Key to Success
When Jim Rohwer was writing about Asia from the genteel surroundings of the London offices of The Economist, he was convinced he knew what he was doing.
It  turned out, he confesses now, that he did not.
"I realized within three or four months of arriving in Asia that I understood nothing about it at all," he said recently.
"The same is generally true about Western business people who haven't set foot here."


Sir Robert Stephens, British Actor, Dies at 64
Sir Robert Stephens, a leading actor in the formative years of Britain's National Theater who won fresh acclaim as a major Shakespearean performer late in his career, died on Sunday at a London hospital.
He was 64.
Last year he had undergone a liver and kidney transplant, and recently had suffered rejection problems.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SECOND CUP LTD., a Canadian coffee retailer, completed its $30 million purchase  of Gloria Jean's Gourmet Coffees from Brothers Gourmet Coffees Inc., a coffee roaster and retailer based in Boca Raton, Fla.


No More Mr. Nice Guy for G.O.P. Hopefuls
Just days before a high-stakes straw poll in Florida, Republican Presidential candidates are engaging in the kind of blistering negative attacks that are usually reserved for the heat of a primary season.
Senator Bob Dole has begun a telephone and direct mail campaign devoted to alerting delegates that his rival, Senator Phil Gramm, missed several votes related to the Republican manifesto, the Contract With America.


Market Place;The Tao of the Dow: Climbing From One Peak to Another
If happiness is a new high in the Dow, then this year is the happiest year in more than three decades.
By the end of the week, it could be the happiest year ever.
Yesterday's new high for the Dow Jones industrial average -- with the index rising 2.53 points, to 4,872.90 -- was the 56th time this year that a new peak has been registered.
That topped the recent high of 55 times, set in 1987, a year that ended badly with a stock market crash.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues stood at 17,802.51, up 13.05 points.
On Monday, the index fell 54.10 points.


Mr. Clinton Wields the Veto
President Clinton was right to veto two offensive budget bills yesterday, wielding his only weapon against Republican excesses.
But both vetoes carry some risk of causing damage.
The first veto knocked down a bill to raise the Federal debt limit, raising fears that the Government may soon default on its bonds.
The second veto blocks  a bill that would have provided temporary authority to keep Government offices open until Congress and the White House could agree on a permanent budget.
Most  Government services will shut down for at least part of today.


Pierce's Year Ends in an Upset to Huber
Mary Pierce sometimes seems to struggle as much with herself as with an opponent.
Last night, she struggled mightily with both.
And she saw a year that had begun so promisingly end with a shocking 6-2, 6-3 loss to Anke Huber on the opening night of play of the WTA Tour Championships at Madison Square Garden.


In the High Season for Giving, Competition for Castoffs Begins
AFTER four years of unloading donation bins for Goodwill Industries, Eric Jackson has learned to tell good will from bad.
A twin-bed mattress, stained black with what looks like oil?
Obviously bad.
"We usually don't even pick something like that up," Mr.
Jackson said, trying to sidestep the mattress, which was lying flat against the side of a Goodwill bin at the Union Market parking lot.


Utah Lawmaker's Husband Vanishes
As Federal investigators zero in on the personal and campaign finances of a Utah Congresswoman, her office said today that her husband had vanished.
The lawmaker, Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz, 37, a freshman Republican from Salt Lake City, released a statement today saying that her husband, Joe Waldholtz, has been missing since Saturday.
Mrs.
Waldholtz has had a relatively  high profile on Capitol Hill, in part because she gave birth to the couple's first child in August and because she was the first freshman appointed to the powerful Rules Committee in 70 years.


Privatization Begins For Pechiney of France
France began the privatization yesterday of Pechiney S.A., Europe's biggest aluminum company and the world's biggest maker of beverage cans.
The Finance Minister, Jean Arthuis, said the Government would sell 21 million shares in Pechiney for a total of 3.5 billion to 4 billion francs ($716 million to $818 million).
The preliminary placing of shares with big financial institutions will begin today; private investors will be offered shares later.
The ministry said that consulting banks had estimated that the Government could get 187 to 215 francs ($38.25 to $43.97) a share from institutions.
The price for private investors is usually lower than the institutional price.
Reuters


Newfound Brain Protein May Be 'Smoking Gun' in Huntington's
Scientists have found a brain protein that they say could be the "smoking gun" in deaths due to Huntington's disease.
The finding, described here today at a meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, suggests that the newly found protein is an accomplice of the mutated Huntington gene and the defective protein it produces.
Acting together,  the two proteins apparently set off a cascade of events that kill cells in Huntington patients' brains.


Keenan and Old Baggage Meet Rangers in St. Louis
A couple of weeks ago, after a Ranger victory at Madison Square Garden, the players were getting dressed in the locker room while watching hockey highlights on a big-screen television.
Suddenly, the faces of Brett Hull and Mike Keenan appeared, one after the other.
Conversations hushed and all eyes turned to the screen.
Hull and Keenan gave  their versions of the day's news: Keenan, the St.
Louis Blues' coach, had taken  away Hull's "C" as team captain.


Marie Callender, Restaurateur, 88
Marie Callender, a California woman who started baking pies at home for a delicatessen and turned that into a chain of 146 restaurants and a frozen-entree business, died on Saturday at the Rossmoor Regency Residential Community here.
She was 88.
The cause was cancer.


Voting With Their Famous Feet
There is one problem for celebrities, with their strong images and distinctive characters, in being dressed by designers: designers have strong images and distinctive characters, too.
That could be one reason for the biggest trend in Hollywood dressing right now: buying brands.
And in no category is the brand more popular than shoes.
The three most fashionable names here are Hush Puppies, J. P. Tod's and Gucci.


Date Switch Is Certain, Weather Is Unknown
The New York City Marathon used to be run on the next-to-last weekend of October, but sometimes it was too hot for the comfort and safety of runners.
So  the race was pushed back a week (same problem), then another week (same problem).
Last year, it was moved to the second weekend in November.
Still too hot.
This year, same weekend, and a different kind of weather problem: cold, windy and miserable.
Better luck next year Allan Steinfeld, the race director and the president of the sponsoring New York Road Runners Club, said yesterday that the 1996 race would be run a week earlier.
The decision was apparently made weeks ago.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- ADDENDA;Accounts
*
SFM Media Corp., New York, and the G. Heileman Brewing Co. unit of Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst, said they had mutually ended a three-year relationship on the media planning and buying parts of the Heileman account.
Advertising Age reported that the billings, once estimated at $30 million, are projected to decline to less than $10 million in 1996.
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, handles the creative part of the account.


Phones Down, Police Make Do
Police officers say that A.T.&amp; T. wanted to reach out and touch the Police Department for $259 early Sunday, when heavy winds and rain knocked out the department's automated phone system, which handles police, fire and ambulance calls.
An officer who called A.T.&amp; T. Global Business Communications Systems for emergency repairs was told that a technician could not be dispatched until the department paid a $259 balance, Lieut.
Sal DeSena said.
Resourceful officers instead rigged an emergency line through a fax machine.
An A.T.&amp; T. technician showed up to fix the system nine hours later.
The company said the delay was caused by the storms.
A spokesman, Wes Dvorak, said the company is investigating the police description of events.


Glitches Close Down Nasdaq Market Again
An unspecified flaw at a computer center in Trumbull, Conn., shut down the Nasdaq stock market yesterday for a quarter of an hour at the end of the session.
Nasdaq, the country's second-largest arena for trading stocks, has been plagued all year by computer bugs as millions more shares change hands than its  systems were designed to handle.


Public Housing Is No Success
To the Editor:
Re "War on Poverty: No Apologies, Please" (Op-Ed, Nov. 9):


INSIDE
Court to Hear Cable Case


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


U.S. Jewish Groups Abandoned Rabin;Violence, Right and Left
To the Editor:
Frank Rich (column, Nov. 8) is correct to point out that Jewish fratricide in Israel began long before the Rabin assassination.
He is wrong, however, to suggest that this violence has always come from the political right.


Women Wary About Aiming To Be Priests
A group that has been struggling for 20 years to have women ordained as Roman Catholic priests spent the weekend debating whether it was still interested in the priesthood at all.
"Ordination means subordination," said Dr.
Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza, a feminist scholar at Harvard Divinity School, as long as the Catholic Church remained what she called "an elite, male-dominated, sacred pyramidal order of domination," based on structures inherited from Roman imperialism.


MERRY-GO-ROUND ANNOUNCES 375 STORE CLOSINGS
Narrowing its focus in an effort to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc. said yesterday that it would close 375 of its 950 stores and convert about 40 of its Chess King stores to other types of stores.
Company officials did not specify how many of the company's 7,000 to 8,000 employees would lose their jobs.
Merry-Go-Round filed for Chapter 11 protection in January 1994.
Since then, it has closed more than 460 stores and laid off 4,000 employees.
The company's flagship Merry-Go-Round stores focus on  urban 15- to 25-year-olds, while Cignal markets unisex sportswear for the 25-to-45 age bracket.
Dejaiz-Attivo sells to men who are 18 to 30 and Chess King aims for a slightly younger, more cost-conscious male customer.


Here's to Commissioner In Case of Abused Dog
To the Editor:
Hats off to Police Commissioner William J. Bratton for doing the right thing  in firing two New York City police officers who beat their station house dog virtually to death, then turned him into the city pound as a stray, hiding their identity and accepting no responsibility for his condition (news article, Nov. 8).


Woman Found Slain At Scene of a Fire
The burned, stabbed body of a Brooklyn woman was found in the basement of her Sheepshead Bay home yesterday by fire marshals investigating the scene of a suspicious fire.
Detectives said the woman, Shelly Kaplan, 45, suffered multiple puncture wounds to the chest before her body was set ablaze in her home at 923 Homecrest  Court about 2:30 A.M.
Lieut.
Walter Wilfinger of the 61st Precinct said the police had not found a murder weapon and knew of no motive for the killing.


HARRIS SAVINGS BANK TO BUY FIRST HARRISBURG
Harris Savings Bank agreed yesterday to acquire First Harrisburg Bancor Inc.  for $14.77 a share, or about $40 million.
Both companiews are based in Harrisburg, Pa.
First Harrisburg is the parent holding company of First Federal  Savings and Loan Association of Harrisburg, a savings company with $307 million  in assets and eight offices in Pennsylvania.
The acquisition also includes the Avstar Mortgage Corporation, a wholly owned full-service mortgage unit of First Federal Savings and Loan.
First Harrisburg Bancor's shares jumped $2.75, to $14, in Nasdaq trading.
Harris Savings Bank's shares rose 25 cents, to $19.25, on the Nasdaq.


Mice That Don't Necessarily Look Like Mice
LIKE it or not, you have to use a mouse.
Both Windows and Macintosh systems offer keyboard substitutes, but the mouse is unavoidable some of the time.
Besides, why learn dozens of key commands?
It is not the days of DOS anymore.
The mouse need not be one of those bars of soap with a ball on the bottom, one or more buttons on top, and a tail to attach it to the computer.
The Macintosh Quadra 660AV on which this is being written has the Apple Desktop Bus  Mouse II, a smooth beast with one button.
The Zeos 486/DX2/66 next to it is equipped with a Kensington Expert Mouse, actually a trackball with its poolball-sized controller on top and buttons to left and right.
Downstairs, the  Zeos 486 Contenda subnotebook has an awkward little trackball at the upper right of the keyboard, and the Macintosh Powerbook 540C has a trackpad, a surface that senses the movements of a finger.


Hudson Foods' Cutbacks
Hudson Foods Inc. said today that it would close its Wichita, Kan., processing plant, effective Jan. 13.
Hudson Foods said about 300 full-time Hudson employees at the plant would be dismissed.
The plant produces ham, bacon  and a variety of other luncheon meats under the brand names Ohse and Roegelein.
Last month, Hudson Foods reached an agreement to sell most of its luncheon-meat division to the closely held Farmland Foods Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
The company said its Topeka, Kan., plant was expected to remain open and be sold to Farmland.


As Peres Draws Up Cabinet, Role of 3 'Young Turks' Is Seen as Molding Party's Future
When Shimon Peres is formally installed as Prime Minister this week and announces his new Government, attention will focus on three "young Turks" of the Labor Party, all Israeli-born men in their 40's or early 50's whose appointments will not only determine the shading of the new Cabinet, but could also help shape the future of Israeli politics.
One is a macho former general, another is a former soccer player and impressive political infighter and the third is a dovish, soft-spoken intellectual.
All three are at ease on television and in the modern, booming Israel, and for all their differences in style, leanings and background, they loom in the public perception as contenders to lead the liberal Labor coalition  in the future against another member of their generation, Benjamin Netanyahu, the 46-year-old leader of the conservative Likud.


Biodiversity Study Sees More Species in Danger
HUMAN activities like farming, logging and commercial fishing are endangering plants, animals and entire ecosystems at much higher rates than ever before in recorded history, according to a report issued by the United Nations Environment Program.
The document, the Global Biodiversity Assessment (Cambridge University Press, $44.95), is being described by the United Nations as the first comprehensive, peer-reviewed report ever to examine earth's biodiversity.


Jack Mann 81; Was Beirut Hostage
Jack Mann, a former British hostage in Beirut, died on Sunday. He was 81.
He had suffered from heart and lung problems for years.


PERES SIGNALS LINE OF POST-RABIN ERA
As Israeli warplanes shrieked over Lebanon and newly liberated Palestinians celebrated in the West Bank, Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres settled briskly  down to business today, the first day after the formal period of mourning for his assassinated predecessor.
Moving down the mandated stations of succession, Mr.
Peres, ringed tightly by security men, was confirmed by a full session of the governing Labor Party as its new leader, clearing the last formality before President Ezer Weizman can officially ask him to form a new Government.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Shades of Hollywood In a Backstage Ballet Felice Lesser Symphony Space Felice Lesser's "Running Backwards on the Treadmill" is good hokey Hollywood fun of a sort that is in woefully short supply in dance today.
But the ambitious full-evening presentation by Ms.
Lesser's Dance 2000 company on Saturday night at Symphony Space had unexpected depth and complexity.


Fertilizer Maker IMC Global to Grow With Vigoro Deal
IMC Global Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy the Vigoro Corporation for $1.16 billion in stock, creating North America's largest fertilizer maker.
Fertilizer companies, profiting from rising prices, are using acquisitions to expand their presence in developing countries such as China and India.
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan bought the Occidental Petroleum Corporation's fertilizer unit for $286 million last month and acquired Texasgulf Inc. for $810 million in April.
Last year, Terra Industries, another large fertilizer maker, bought Agricultural Minerals and Chemicals Inc. for $400 million.


Patterns
At Bendel's, More Cosmetics


A Win-Win Situation: A Week With No Loss
After all they have been through, and with the worst record in the National Football League, the Jets (2-8) came together again today after their bye week.
And many players did it with a smile, even though the first-place Bills loom and there is little left to salvage this season.
In their fashion, the Jets were looking for significance.


Astronauts Prepare Mir's Orbiting Dock
The astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis geared up today for NASA's first large-scale space-station assembly job, erecting a 15-foot docking tunnel  that will enable shuttles to couple with the orbiting Russian outpost Mir.
The Atlantis, launched into orbit on Sunday, is to dock with the space station Mir early on Wednesday.


From Chickens to Chemicals;Family Conglomerate Finds Fast Growth in China
Under their adobe tile roofs, the barracks seem to stretch to the horizon in  this bleak suburb of Shanghai.
Inside, hundreds of thousands of chickens shuffle about noisily, and aromatically, pecking at feeding machines, plumping themselves for the city's woks.


Maddux Dominates Voting, Too
From 1963 through 1966, Sandy Koufax compiled such incredible numbers as a pitcher that it won the former Los Angeles Dodger endorsements as the greatest left-hander ever.
Greg Maddux of the Atlanta Braves has finally provided the right-handed bookend for such accolades: four straight incredible seasons, each deemed worthy of the National League's Cy Young Award.


Steelers Show No Sympathy on the Field
Art Modell was wrong.
The Cleveland Browns aren't going anywhere -- at least  not in the standing, and probably not with the rookie Eric Zeier at quarterback.
Modell was missing, and so was the Browns' offense in probably their last visit to Pittsburgh as the Steelers seized a two-game lead in the American Football Conference Central Division with a 20-3 victory tonight.


Theory of Plate Movement Marks Zones That Breed Frequent Quakes
GEOLOGISTS have known for decades about the cause of most of the planet's earthquakes, strings of blockbusters that release more than 80 percent of the destructive energy that shakes the earth.
These convulsive jolts occur as the dozen or so ambulatory slabs that make up the surface grind past one another.
Deep in the earth, this movement stores up stress energies that periodically explode along rocky fault lines to level cities and cleave mountains.
The mystery has been why some plate movements produce so many earthquakes and others cause very few or none at all -- an enigma of no small importance to the  millions of people who live near earthquake zones and are anxious to know the probabilities of future calamities.


Sony Planning Computer Sales
The Sony Corporation said yesterday that it would begin selling its own personal computers next fall, a decision that may erase the difference many consumers still perceive between home electronics and high technology.
The company will join its Japanese rivals Matsushita Electric, NEC, Sharp and Toshiba as makers of personal computers as well as stereos, phones and televisions.


France Seems Cool To Danish Minister Seeking NATO Post
The former Foreign Minister of Denmark asked France today to support him for  the post of NATO Secretary General, but French officials said he got no encouragement.
Diplomats said it was virtually certain that the French President, Jacques Chirac, would veto the Danish candidate, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, despite entreaties from the United States and the three Nordic countries that support him -- Denmark, Norway and Iceland.


Beatlemania '95: It's not the real thing, but an incredible simulation.
WHAT seven-letter word evokes images of hysterical fans, dismissive skeptics  and a relentless, seemingly omnipresent publicity barrage?
Windows? Yes, but also Beatles.


Ralph Blane Dies; Songwriter Was 81
Ralph Blane, a composer and lyricist who, with Hugh Martin, created the songs for one of Hollywood's most beloved musicals, "Meet Me in St. Louis" (1944), died yesterday at his home in Broken Arrow, Okla., the town where he was born.
He was 81.
Mr.
Blane, whose full name was Ralph Blane Hunsecker, began his career in show business as a tenor who sang regularly on NBC radio in the 1930's and was featured in the Broadway productions of "New Faces of 1936" and the Irving Berlin musical "Louisiana Purchase" (1940).


Tremors in Saudi Arabia
It is too early to draw firm conclusions about the explosion that rocked Saudi Arabia's capital yesterday, destroying a United States-run National Guard  training building and killing four Americans.
They were part of a group of about 100 Americans training Saudi forces in the use of weapons imported from the United States.
Two obscure Islamic groups claimed responsibility.
Both Washington and Riyadh continue to investigate the incident.
The attack is a reminder of the inherent vulnerability of the American position in Saudi Arabia, the world's leading oil producer and the largest pro-Western state in the Persian Gulf region.
As the gulf war made clear, the Saudi regime depends on American military protection against larger neighbors like Iran and Iraq.
Yet the regime, while it remains firmly in control, has seen its grip challenged in recent years by the radical brand of political Islam that is sweeping the Middle East.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL


BUSINESS DIGEST
Government Ready to Close As Clinton Vetoes 2 Bills President Clinton vetoed two bills intended to keep the Government in business.
He and Republican leaders exchanged accusations of irresponsibility, and much of the Government prepared to shut down today.
Mr.
Clinton vetoed a two-week extension of spending authority and a four-week extension of the Government's authority to borrow money.
He said that provisions attached to that bill would set back three decades of environmental and public health protection. [Page A1.]


Dr. Charles Vevier, 71, Professor And Medical School Executive
Dr.
Charles Vevier, a professor and former senior administrator at the Newark-based New Jersey Medical School, died on Thursday at Englewood Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
He had suffered a brief illness, his family said.


METRO DIGEST


World News Briefs;Challenging Vote, Parties Withdraw in Tanzania
All opposition candidates, denouncing widespread election irregularities, withdrew from Tanzania's presidential election today, opening the way for the governing party's candidate, Benjamin Mkapa, to become head of state.
At a news conference, a coalition of 10 opposition parties said they had no confidence in the first round of voting on Oct. 29 and that they would boycott presidential and parliamentary elections in the capital Sunday, which are to be  repeated because of problems with the voting.


Intuit Joins America Online To Create Banking Services
Intuit Inc. and America Online Inc. said yesterday that they would work together to develop electronic banking services for America Online's four million customers next year.
The alliance brings together the maker of Quicken, the most popular personal  finance program for personal computers, and America Online, the largest and fastest-growing consumer on-line information service.
Terms were not disclosed, but both sides described the financial details as insignificant.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about new competitive pressures facing small Internet access providers misidentified one such provider that has been acquired.
It is Pipeline Network Inc., not Panix.


Leaders of Club In Chinatown Denounce Suit
The leaders of a Chinatown civic association that prosecutors charge was a front for racketeers denounced the Federal Government's effort to seize their building yesterday, saying it would unfairly punish elderly people and students  who depend on the group's charity.
But Federal prosecutors said they would press ahead with a civil suit against the Tsung Tsin Association, a faded and smoke-filled social club crammed with mah-jongg tables at 1 Division Street.


Sports of The Times;Better Than a Stick In the Eye
A DISPUTE has arisen over whether a no-holds-barred event -- known as "Extreme Fighting" or "Ultimate Fighting" -- should be held in the Brooklyn Armory next Saturday.
State Senator Roy Goodman of Manhattan last week called for a total ban on what he calls "this type of organized street brawl in New York State" and plans to introduce legislation outlawing it.
The forces for "Extreme Fighting," which include Bob Guccione, the publisher  of Penthouse magazine and the chairman and chief executive officer of General Media Inc., which formed Battlecade Inc., said that this is a wholesome undertaking: "Extreme fighters wish to express themselves in this very elemental, human way."


War Crimes Tribunal Indicts 6 Bosnian Croats
Six Bosnian Croat leaders were charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity today in connection with the deaths of scores of civilians in Muslim towns and the burning of whole villages in central Bosnia.
"The crimes they are charged with were carried out on such a large scale and  widespread basis, and implemented in such a systematic fashion, that they have effectively destroyed or removed almost the entire Muslim civilian population in the Lasva Valley," said a statement from the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague.


Inquiry Into Air Incident Near Hartford Continues
Investigators say an American Airlines jet, landing in a storm near Hartford  early Sunday, narrowly avoided catastrophe when it sheared off treetops on a ridge more than two and a half miles from the runway, jamming large branches into both of the plane's engines.
The aircraft, a McDonnell Douglas Super 80 with 77 people on board, scraped across the trees for 270 feet but remained airborne until it reached Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, Conn.
The plane, Flight 1572 from Chicago, touched down just short of the landing area on the runway, bounced and  came down again, blowing out a tire in the process.


Reeves Feels the Pain Of Giants' 3-7 Season
Coach Dan Reeves today compared the Giants' 3-7 season to having a knife cut  him open.
So he will do anything to dull the pain.
And in the immediate future,  there could be some changes in the lineup in an effort to spark something -- anything.
Reeves just wants the team to wake up.
Reeves, in a candid news conference, said that what disappointed him the most in the 17-13 loss to the Oakland Raiders on Sunday was how his team was dominated physically.
"That's the big disappointment," Reeves said.
"We did not play with emotion and we were not physical.


Open Bidding for Biggio Can Begin
CRAIG BIGGIO, Houston's All-Star second baseman, became available to negotiate with other teams yesterday after declining a $20 million, four-year offer from the Astros.
"Craig has been an invaluable part of this organization and we're just very disappointed that we weren't able to get it done," BOB McCLAREN, the Astros' vice president, said.


Energy Dept. Used Management Sense
To the Editor:
Re "Energy Secretary Used Fund to Monitor Reporters" (front page, Nov. 10), on the United States Energy Department's spending of Government money for a consulting organization to monitor the reporters who cover the department and to rank them as to how favorable they were:


CINCINNATI MILACRON TO BUY FAIRCHILD UNIT
Cincinnati Milacron Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire the Fairchild Corporation's D-M-E business for $260 million.
D-M-E, which has annual sales of  $175 million, is one of the nation's largest producers of parts and supplies for plastic injection-mold makers.
Separately, Peregrine Investment Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong said it had agreed to buy $75 million of bonds in a Fairchild unit, RHI Holdings Inc., in a deal that could give Peregrine a 26 percent stake in Fairchild.
Fairchild's stock climbed $1, to $8, on the New York Stock Exchange.


No Chaos but Plenty of Waiting for New Tokens


Most Retailers' Profits Shrink as Competition Heats Up
The fierce competition that has kept consumers awash in bargains has taken a  heavy toll on retailers, industry figures showed today.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest chain, eked out a modest increase  in profits for its third fiscal quarter, but the Dayton Hudson Corporation, the J. C. Penney Company and the Woolworth Corporation all posted declines.


Record Number of Homicides
John Wayne Garrett, 37, who died Monday from wounds suffered during a bar stabbing last month, became the 51st homicide victim this year, setting a record, the authorities said yesterday.
Camden has had more homicides per capita than any other municipality in the state.


Stock Prices Turn Downward, With Dow Slipping 1.09
Stocks edged lower yesterday as investors and traders focused on the impasse  over the budget and the partial shutdown of the Federal Government in an otherwise dull trading session.
"The markets are being held captive by the political posturing in Washington," said John H. Shaughnessy, senior vice president of Advest Inc. in Hartford.
"It is keeping everything in a state of suspense."


No Study Connects Breast Implants to Disease
To the Editor:
Re the Nov. 8 letter of Fredric L. Ellis and Ernest Hornsby, the plaintiffs'  lawyers in the Reno breast implant case against Dow Chemical:


Metropolitan Diary
RUBBER baby buggy bumpers," the giggling girl recited, or at least tried to say.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues  was down 119.77 points, or 0.67 percent, at 17,682.74.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei ended almost unchanged, rising 13.05 points.


Divorced Father's Case Raises Difficult Issues Of Who Pays Tuition
When Amber Kline turned 18 in 1992, her father, Philip, went to court in Pennsylvania to terminate the order that required him to pay $375 a month for her support.
He argued that she had become an adult, in the eyes of the law, and that he should not be forced to put her through college or contribute in any way to her living expenses.
Meanwhile, the Pennsylvania Legislature was taking a different view of parental obligations.
In 1993, the Legislature enacted a law that made divorced  parents responsible for their children's college expenses, or at least as much of those expenses as the parents could afford.


Food Notes
All About, Yes, Turkey


3M to Cut Jobs And Businesses Lagging in Profit
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said today that it would lop off some of its best-known but least-profitable businesses, cut 5,000 jobs from  its work force of 85,000 and take a $600 million charge against profits in the fourth quarter.
The scope and timing of the moves startled Wall Street, but also pleased it.
The company's shares jumped $2.625, to $61.625, on the New York Stock Exchange,  for a gain on the day of 4.4 percent.


Message for Democratic Mayors
New Jersey's Democratic mayors got a pep talk yesterday from the state Democratic Party Chairman, Tom Byrne, who called on them to change political attitudes on government grant programs that perpetuate the cycle of poverty and fail to "attract the assets needed to rebuild our cities and our school systems." Mr.
Byrne said he would try to rally Democratic mayors this week at the three-day League of Municipalities convention in Atlantic City.
About 10,000 municipal officials are to attend the convention.


Accounts
Divot Golf Ball Co., Tampa, Fla., a unit of the Divot Corp., to Watson Earl &amp; Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were not disclosed.


Revising the U.N. Security Council: All Agree They Don't Agree
The most potentially significant debate in the General Assembly so far this year has focused on how best to restructure the Security Council, with as many as 70 countries advancing their disparate proposals -- and often blatant self-interest.
But after two days of speeches, the debate wound down today with little visible progress, underscoring the rift between developing countries, which want more representation on the Council, and developed countries, which are reluctant to see their advantage eroded.
"The only thing that we would seem to have agreed on is that we are in profound disagreement on how to enlarge the Council," Italy's chief delegate, Francisco Paolo Fulci, said on Monday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HARRIS CORP., Melbourne, Fla., a supplier of telecommunications equipment, bought a 25 percent stake in Cia. de Telefonos of Chile, a closely held telephone and communications company, for $18 million.


Pirates Are Almost Sold
KEVIN McCLATCHY signed a final agreement yesterday to buy the Pittsburgh Pirates and needs only the approval of major league owners at a meeting in January to acquire the team.
AP


World News Briefs;Russia to Ask for Delay In Rules to Protect Ozone
Russia will ask for a four-year delay in meeting a global ban on ozone-destroying gases scheduled to start in 1996, Interfax news agency said today.
Economic crisis and a lack of money meant that Russia needed more time to comply with the 1987 Montreal protocol on phasing out the production of chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, the news agency quoted Environment Ministry officials as saying.


FED APPROVES MERGER OF FLEET FINANCIAL AND SHAWMUT
The Federal Reserve gave formal approval yesterday to the merger of Fleet Financial Group Inc. and the Shawmut National Corporation.
When the merger is completed, the combined entity will be the 10th-largest commercial bank in the nation, with assets of $86.2 billion, the Fed said.
The approval comes two weeks after the Justice Department approved the deal when Fleet agreed to sell 64 of its 850 branches to maintain competition in banking in New England.
Plans for the merger were announced in February.
Fleet is based in Providence, R.I., and Shawmut is based in Hartford.


McKay Musters Game-Winner Again
When the Stanley Cup champions face a mediocre opponent, they usually stoop to a lower standard of play.
Last night was no exception.
Just two days after completing a home-and-home series with an impressive sweep over the Philadelphia Flyers, the Devils barely squeezed out a 1-0 victory over the Hartford Whalers before a lifeless crowd of 11,916 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Ex-Nazi Loses Appeal
Argentina's top court today rejected a last-ditch appeal by a former Nazi officer to avoid extradition to face trial for his part in Italy's worst wartime atrocity.
The Supreme Court, in a brief written ruling, dismissed an attempt by the 82-year-old former SS captain, Erich Priebke, to annul its decision two weeks ago to send him to Italy to face charges of crimes against humanity.


Lawmaker Set to Divorce Her Husband
Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz announced today that she would divorce her missing husband, whose handling of her campaign finances has drawn the interest of Federal investigators and apparently led to his abrupt departure last weekend for points north.
The Congresswoman's office issued the statement late this afternoon saying that Mrs.
Waldholtz, 37, a first-term Republican from Utah, was filing for divorce from her husband, Joe Waldholtz, 32, whom she married in 1993.
As the investigation into their finances intensified, today's statement, like one issued on Monday, essentially blamed Mr.
Waldholtz for the financial irregularities that could threaten Mrs.
Waldholtz's nascent political career.


Graf Dresses for Success And Defeats Coetzer
It is nothing new when Steffi Graf wins a match.
What was new last night was  that she wore a tennis dress in competition for the first time.
And though she was uncomfortable talking about her sporty, one-piece white dress after the match, she has seldom seemed more at ease on the court.
It took  Graf just 65 minutes to dispatch the usually troublesome Amanda Coetzer, 6-2, 6-2, at Madison Square Garden in the opening round of the WTA Tour Championships.


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;Beloved Rolls, Scorned Pecans
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
ONE of my favorite Thanksgiving foods is my grandmother's pecan rolls.
As a  child, I would stare at those dinner-spoilers -- sticky, delicious and too big for me to finish -- long before the turkey hit the table.
The problem was, I never really cared for the pecans.
I would gnaw away at the tops of the buns, chewing my way around the pecans before discarding them behind a couch pillow or under someone else's napkin.
My grandmother, unfooled, frowned upon this procedure and would slap her slender hand on the dining-room table and bellow, "Do you know how much pecans cost a pound?" (The price varied, depending on whether she got them from the Daughters of the American Revolution. I assumed $4 was a lot. It was, at least,  more than a bubble-gum-flavored Bonne Bell lip gloss.)


Robinson Leads the Winners, Mason the Whiners
As he headed toward the bench with 36 seconds left in the third quarter, Anthony Mason began to percolate with frustration.
He crinkled his nose and rolled his eyes, looking like a child who was just told to go to his room by his mother.
Mason, like many of his Knicks teammates, needed a timeout tonight.
They needed to contemplate their inability to hold a lead and how to cool off Clifford Robinson.


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;Holiday Apologies From the Chef
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
EXPERIMENTATION has its place, but not at Thanksgiving dinner.
I discovered  that in the early 1980's at the New Boonville Hotel in Northern California near  Mendocino.
The restaurant was run by dreamers who made everything they served themselves.
When you ordered a BLT, you got home-cured bacon on homemade bread with just-picked lettuce and tomatoes from the organic garden.
They raised ducks, so they had eggs to make noodles, and goats, for milk to make cheese.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


London Exchanges In Talks to Merge
The London Commodity Exchange and the London International Financial Futures  Exchange said yesterday that they were in talks to merge by the middle of next year.
The merger would combine Europe's largest trading center for coffee, cocoa and sugar futures, the London Commodity Exchange, and the world's third-largest  futures exchange, Liffe.
The two exchanges already have substantial overlap, with 29 of the London Commodity Exchange's 45 authorized floor members having associations with Liffe.


World News Briefs;Egyptian Diplomat Is Slain in Geneva
Swiss authorities opened a top-level investigation today into the killing of  an Egyptian diplomat and prosecutors said they were treating the death as a possible assassination.
The diplomat, Ahmed Alaa Nazmi, 42, who belonged to the Egyptian delegation  to the World Trade Organization, was struck by six bullets late Monday near the  apartment where he lived with his wife and 4-month-old daughter.


Audit Says Transit Agency Ignored Worst Bus Drivers
The New York City Transit Authority has done a poor job of investigating bus  accidents and often fails to retrain or punish bad drivers, according to an audit released today by the State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall.
After reviewing 1993 records for the city's 13 most accident-prone bus drivers, the auditors found that the Transit Authority failed to take appropriate action in 10 of the cases.


From Sean Penn, a Raw Style and a Vision
Sean Penn is a slugger of a film maker, whether pummeling his audience with the obvious or hammering home the heartfelt and true.
His second feature, "The Crossing Guard," has the same brute force that made his "Indian Runner" such a gripping oddity, bearing the distinctive stamp of Mr.
Penn's raw, searching style.
Once again, for all the embarrassments that come with such frankly risky  film making, Mr.
Penn also conveys a wrenching seriousness about his characters and their trials.
"The Crossing Guard" conquers its clumsiness with a stirring, spiritual vision of the path to grace.
Its protagonist, who may just be the only movie character ever identified as  a jeweler-poet, is a lost soul.
Freddy Gale (Jack Nicholson) saw the joy extinguished from his life with the hit-and-run death of his young daughter, and he has lived for nothing but revenge since the accident occurred.
One of Mr.
Penn's typically broad strokes is the sight of Freddy's calendar, blank except for a red line indicating when John Booth (David Morse) will be released from prison.
Freddy wants to kill him that day.


Marathoners Really Appreciated the Help
To the Editor:
Re "Reaching the Finish Line Daunts Volunteers as Much as Runners" (news article, Nov. 12): Those contemplating volunteer service at next year's New York City Marathon should seek out opportunities in the food and baggage section.


$1.08 BILLION CHARGE IS PLANNED FOR JOB REDUCTIONS
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it would take a pretax charge of $1.08 billion against earnings in the fourth quarter as a result of previously announced job cuts.
BellSouth said the charge would reduce its net income by about $665 million, or 67 cents a share.
That is expected to produce a loss for the quarter, although the company expects to save $500 million a year from the work-force reduction.
The company also raised its estimate of the number of jobs to be cut to 11,300.
In May, the company had said it would cut 9,000 to 11,000 jobs by the end of 1997.
BellSouth provides local telephone service in nine Southern states.


THE BIG BUILDUP
1.
Knight, Circa 1300.
Before there were corporations, there were raiders, and this was their business  suit.
The linen-armorers who made the cloth suits worn under the knight's armor  can be said to have to have been the first tailors.


Teacher Is Charged in Student Assault Case
A teacher at a Brooklyn junior high school was charged yesterday with assaulting a 12-year-old student whose knee was fractured in what prosecutors said was one of two violent encounters with the teacher.
The teacher, Richard Maxwell, 51, of Junior High School 391 in East Flatbush, was arrested on Monday and arraigned yesterday in Brooklyn Criminal Court on charges of third-degree assault and endangering the welfare of a child, each punishable on conviction by up to a year in jail.


Living on Despair And Peanut Butter
The mean streets and blasted tenements of the Lower East Side have never looked grimmer than they appear in Matthew Harrison's no-budget film, "Rhythm Thief." In a place where everyone seems to be living on the edge of catastrophe, a nickel-and-dime music pirate named Simon (Jason Andrews) sells his bootleg tapes on a corner of Delancey Street.
By day Simon hovers on the sidewalk hawking homemade cassettes he has surreptitiously taped in nearby rock clubs.
Evenings he returns to his nearly bare apartment to feed his cat, spoon peanut butter out of a jar and swig liquor from a pint bottle as the walls and ceiling around him vibrate with screams and  gunshots.
Sometimes a tough neighborhood woman named Cyd (Kimberly Flynn) drops  by for perfunctory, joyless sex.


Ripples From a Failed Drug Test
The county pool at suburban Christopher Morley Park is Olympic-sized, the same size Jessica Foschi's dreams were before she was accused of trying to achieve her athletic goals the dirty way, by beefing up her freestyle strokes with an obscure anabolic steroid from the black market.
The 15-year-old Foschi still does her practice laps here, splashing dutifully alongside her teammates some 30 hours each week, but suddenly this is the only pool where she is welcome.
Somehow she has become famous before she has become a champion.


Appeals Court Sides With 2 Top Lobbies Over Campaign Rule
A Federal appeals court ruled today that the Federal Election Commission went too far when it improperly limited the ability of the United States Chamber of Commerce and the American Medical Association to endorse Federal candidates.
In a unanimous opinion, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said that the election commission had improperly infringed on the free-speech rights of the lobbying groups, two of the most powerful in the capital.
As a result of the commission's action, the chamber and the medical association stopped endorsing candidates for the last election cycle in 1994.


Book Notes
Stern Guns Down Powell Book


Clinton Makes Case to Congress For Putting U.S. Troops in Bosnia
President Clinton made his strongest and most detailed case to Congress on Tuesday for why 20,000 American troops should be sent to help enforce an eventual peace settlement in Bosnia, but acknowledged that he could not predict  the number of casualties the United States might suffer in the course of the operation.
Mr.
Clinton laid out his views in a nine-page letter to Representative Newt Gingrich, Republican of Georgia, the Speaker of the House.
The letter was dated  Monday and released on Tuesday.
And at an Air Force base near Dayton, Secretary  of State Warren Christopher met with Balkan leaders for 12 hours on Tuesday in an effort to move them closer to peace.


Sparks's Bliss Is a Blessing for the Giants
There could be several reasons why Phillippi Sparks has finally become the cornerback the Giants thought he would be when they selected him in the second round of the 1992 draft.
It could be his decision to rededicate his life to Christ during the off season.
Or maybe it's because he is in the final year of his contract and will be an unrestricted free agent at the end of the season.
Maybe it is simply because his luck has improved.
Maybe it is all three.


Rabin's About-Face Angered Many Israelis;State or Theocracy?
To the Editor:
Ze'ev Chafets's "Israel's Quiet Anger (Op-Ed, Nov. 7) places the blame for Yitzhak Rabin's murder squarely in the camp of religious fundamentalists. It's a neat solution, but I don't see it that way.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Federal Workers Sent Home Because of Budget Impasse Nearly half the civilian functions of the Federal Government halted as President Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress remained at loggerheads over spending priorities and appeared to put off any resolution until next week.
"We  are at an impasse," Leon Panetta, the White House chief of staff, said.
Some 800,000 employees were suspended. [Page A1.]


CHRONICLE
RICHARD TAUBMAN, the real estate developer and estranged husband of the supermodel CHRISTIE BRINKLEY, was told yesterday that he would be allowed to visit his 5-month-old son, Jack, The Associated Press reported.
"I'm very happy," Mr.
Taubman said after a conference with Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Giuliani Agrees to Create Budget Monitor Amid Court Appeal
After five years of procedural stalling and legal challenges stretching through the administrations of two mayors, the City of New York has grudgingly agreed to create an independent fiscal monitor's office required by law to keep  an eye on the city's budgets.
The city had lost five consecutive court rulings in its effort to block or delay creation of the agency.
But this week, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani promised to set aside money to establish the Independent Budget Office before the end of the fiscal year, in June.


When Patients' Records Are Commodities for Sale
Individual medical records, carrying more sensitive personal information than ever before, are increasingly being gathered and stored by the tens of thousands in commercial databanks maintained by institutions like hospital networks, health maintenance organizations and drug companies.
And although there is a Federal law that protects the privacy of video rental lists, private medical information is being bought and sold freely by companies that have ignored a patchwork of varying state laws that should have made it difficult to transfer those records across state lines.
The issue of medical privacy touches virtually everyone.
"It is true to say that if you know  a person's history of health problems, then you know more about that person than you would with any other data," said Lawrence O. Gostin, a professor at Georgetown University Law Center who is the chairman of a national privacy project for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Carter Presidential Center in Atlanta.


Dealing With Official's Death


No Headline
It is just extraordinary.
At the same time we are talking about bringing high-tech to the schools, the reality is we have workmen stoking boilers with coal as if it were 16th-century England. -- HAROLD O. LEVY, an investment banker who recently made a study of the New York City schools. [B1:4.]


Rabin's About-Face Angered Many Israelis;Wearing the Yarmulke
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 9 front-page article refers to the knitted yarmulke as "a symbol of settler militants." Surely, if the yarmulke is a symbol of anything at all, it is a symbol of commitment to full participation in modern society and appreciation of Israel in religious terms.


An Account Is Put In Review by Mobil
The Mobil Oil Corporation said yesterday that it had placed in review its worldwide corporate image advertising and public relations account, now handled  by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York.
The billings were not disclosed.
"As part of our ongoing review of corporate programs and practices, we are holding discussions with several advertising agencies on a invitation-only basis," Gail Campbell Woolley, a spokeswoman for Mobil in Fairfax, Va., said, confirming a report of the review this week in Adweek.
She added that DDB Needham, part of the Omnicom Group, was included in the review, but she declined to identify the others.
A decision is expected by mid-February.


Redevelopment Planned for Ship Terminal
City officials announced plans yesterday that could begin the redevelopment of the Passenger Ship Terminal, possibly turning the hulking structure on the midtown shore of the Hudson River into television studios or recreational and sports complexes.
Though neighborhood and environmental leaders expressed concern about the effect of the proposed project on the surrounding area and on another plan for a state park along the adjacent riverfront, city and state officials said the park would be unaffected by the plan.


Electronic Data Systems enlists Bates Worldwide to help it build name recognition.
FOR years, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation has had something of an image problem.
The problem was simply that it did not have much of an image beyond a select  circle of customers, which were mainly large companies and government agencies.
And whatever image it had was frequently overshadowed by its outspoken founder,  Ross Perot, who sold E.D.S. to the General Motors Corporation in 1984, or by G.M.


Ex-Labor Employee Is Sentenced
Gretchen Smyth, a retired supervisor in the State Department of Labor who rigged computer files to generate as much as $800,000 in false unemployment benefits from 1989 to 1993, was sentenced yesterday to two and one-half years in prison for mail fraud and bribery.
Mrs.
Smyth, 64, of Elizabeth, was helped in the scheme by two men who worked out of a bodega in Elizabeth.
Both of them have also been convicted in the case.


Washington Becomes Guinea Pig Today in Test of Wireless System
Some dozen years after cellular telephones became commercially available, the Washington area is becoming the first market in the nation where people will be  able to choose among three wireless phone networks, rather than just two.
The question is, will anybody care?
Billions of dollars are hanging on the answer, which will probably not come for months or even years.
The Sprint Corporation and American Personal Communications Inc. are partners in offering the "personal communications service" throughout the Washington and Baltimore markets, starting Wednesday.


Brooklyn Armory Officials Want to Bar 'Extreme Fighting' Event
When the Division of Military and Naval Affairs agreed last month to lease the Brooklyn Armory for an "extreme fighting" event, the state agency thought it was providing an arena merely for a martial-arts exhibition.
Now it knows better.
Having learned a little more about these violent, bare-knuckled contests, the agency joined a growing dispute between promoters and state politicians yesterday.
It said it was looking for ways to back out of the lease, thus halting the match, which is scheduled for Saturday.


Coast to Coast, Americans Are Denied and Denied
Trying to get to Italy to see a brother who was desperately ill, Sudjai Pattuma, a native of Thailand who now lives in St.
Louis, took a plane this morning to Chicago, the only place in the Midwest that issues same-day passports.
But when he arrived at the Federal Building, he was told that the passport office was closed.


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;1 Man, 1 Chicken, 1 Merry Old Time
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
THANKSGIVING has always been my favorite holiday, the day when I truly feel  the warm embrace of our extended clan of family and friends.
No football on the  television in our house.
When I was growing up, Thanksgiving meant my parents' friend Fred backing his Jeep Wagoneer up the driveway and hauling a gallon jug of cider over his shoulder (he was always the first to arrive).
It meant getting to spend a whole day with my cousins and being in charge of basting the turkey.
So, it's odd that the Thanksgiving I remember best is the one I spent alone.
I was done with college and had just moved to Chicago to work at The Sun-Times.
I had to work on Thanksgiving, but not until 6 P.M., so I was on my own.
I tried to create that Thanksgiving feeling in my drafty one-bedroom apartment as best I could.
I watched the Detroit Lions on television (well, I was by myself).
I lighted a fire in the fireplace.
But turkey was not an option.


Sports of The Times;Rich Kids With Their Big Toys
THE Charlotte Hornets, who used to have an All-Star center, play the Nets, who have never had one, tonight at the Meadowlands Arena.
From the worst nightmare collection of David Stern, this game could come down to a post-up battle between George Zidek and Yinka Dare.
But that's not Pat Riley's problem.
He has got his big man to build around, the erstwhile Hornet Alonzo Mourning, whom I happened to run into after Riley, Mourning and their Miami Heat absorbed  their first loss of the season last Saturday night in Orlando.


Executive Changes
ARI NETWORK SERVICES INC., Milwaukee, named Brian Dearing to the vacant positions of president and chief executive.


Teen-Ager Gets 27 Years in Tourist Killing
A teen-ager whose slaying of a British visitor in 1993 put a chill into Florida's tourism industry was sentenced to 27 years in prison today.
Aundra Akins, 16, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder for firing the shots that killed the 34-year-old tourist, Gary Colley, during a bungled robbery at an Interstate rest stop near Tallahassee.


Islanders Are the Better of N.H.L.'s Worst
Islanders 5, Sharks 3


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;A Holiday Bomb: The Tarte Tatin
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
A FEW years ago, I decided to rebel.
There would be no endless drive through holiday traffic to have Thanksgiving dinner with relatives who crowd into overheated rooms and play out their passions and hostilities over the turkey.


Reunion With the Man in the Mirror Is Played to a Draw
There were many rows of unsold seats in beautiful Kiel Center tonight for the somewhat-anticipated match between the Blues, the fourth National Hockey League  team coached by Mike Keenan, and the Rangers, his previous N.H.L. team.
The teams hadn't met since Keenan coached the Rangers to the Stanley Cup in 1994.
The Rangers were trying to stretch their winning streak to five games; the Blues were trying to extend theirs to three.


STOCK REPURCHASE IS PLANNED BY BANK OF NEW YORK
The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that it planned to buy back up to 16 million shares on the open market through 1996.
The company said that about five million of the shares would be used in connection with the bank's purchase  of the Putnam Trust Company of Greenwich, Conn., which was completed in September, and for employee benefit plans.
The bank has 196.6 million shares outstanding, a spokesman said.
The shares closed at $42.875, down 50 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange, making the buyback worth up to $686 million at yesterday's price.


Ausanio Changes His Stripes
Joe Ausanio, who spent the past two seasons traveling between New York and Columbus, Ohio, put himself in position today to shuttle from New York to Norfolk, Va., after he agreed to a one-year contract with the Mets.
The relief pitcher, who will be 30 years old next month, accepted a split contract calling for a $130,000 salary and $8,300 a month if he plays in the minor leagues.
Ausanio opted to become a free agent last month when the Yankees  sent him outright to the minors a second time.
He appeared in 28 games for the Yankees last season, gaining two victories and a save but compiling a 5.73 earned run average.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a bombing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, referred incorrectly in some editions to the year of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
It was 1988, not 1989.


Canton Journal;A New Film Brings Back The Old Pain of Racism
Men in Ku Klux Klan sheets and hoods fought with black protesters on the courthouse steps the other day in this small town in central Mississippi.
The National Guard rushed in, and even Dan Rather was in town to do some reporting.
But when Joel Schumacher, a Hollywood director, yelled, "Cut!" the Klansmen and protesters laughed and helped one another off the ground.
The National Guardsmen put down their weapons, and Mr.
Rather settled in for an interview with John Grisham, whose first novel, "A Time To Kill," is being filmed here with the help of about 2,000 townspeople as extras.


Balkan Equation: Flawed Peace Hurts Less Than War
The Balkan conflict has always been a three-way puzzle.
Put one piece in place and another would be dislodged.
Through more than four years of diplomacy, the reconciliation of Serbs, Croats and Muslims has proved impossible.
But now that the last difference between between Serbs and Croats has apparently been settled with an agreement on Eastern Slavonia, the political landscape has changed.
For if Serbs and Croats really want and have reached peace, the potential for the Muslim-led Bosnian Government to fight on appears limited.


TELE-COMMUNICATIONS TO GIVE SCHOOLS A FREE SERVICE
Tele-Communications Inc. said today that its direct broadcast satellite TV service, Primestar by T.C.I., would provide free equipment and service to more than 10,000 primary and secondary schools.
Direct broadcast satellite service is similar to cable television but uses a pizza-sized satellite dish and a set-top  box and has greater channel capacity.
The program will provide schools in Primestar's service areas with the satellite dish equipment necessary to allow "underserved schools to take advantage of the educational programming" available by direct broadcast satellite, the company said.


Yanks Hire Two Veterans
The Yankees announced two appointments in their farm system yesterday involving the former major leaguers ROY WHITE and DARRELL EVANS.
White, a Yankee outfielder from 1965-1979, was named to the new position of roving outfield instructor.
Evans, who hammered 414 home runs in a 21-year career, was hired as  a roving hitting instructor.


World News Briefs;Sri Lankan Army Takes Guerrilla Stronghold
Sri Lankan forces have captured the main political headquarters of Tamil Tiger rebels on the outskirts of the guerrilla stronghold of Jaffna, civilians and the army said today.
Tamil residents from Jaffna arriving in the Government-held town of Vavuniya said the army had seized the headquarters in Kondavil, three miles north of the  town of Jaffna.


Boeing Beats Rival for $12.7 Billion Order
In a major victory for the Boeing Company, Singapore Airlines said yesterday  that it would order as many as 77 of the aircraft maker's 777 commercial jets, with a total value of about $12.7 billion.
The airline has in the past purchased airplanes from both Boeing and the European Airbus Industrie consortium and had been expected to split this order as well.


$600 Million More in Medicaid
New Jersey will receive an extra $600 million in Medicaid funds over the next seven years under a compromise reached by a House-Senate panel.
The state had been anticipating about $21.56 billion after cuts in Medicaid spending, but the compromise raised it to $22.14 billion.
If the numbers hold in the final budget that ultimately passes Congress and is signed by the President, New Jersey will have "sufficient funding," said Representative Marge Roukema, a Republican of Ridgewood.


People
John King was named to head a new East Coast office of Gage In-Store Marketing,  Minneapolis, as senior vice president for account management.
He was previously  senior vice president at HMG Worldwide, New York.
The office will be in New Haven.


U.S. and Thailand Set Aviation Talks
The United States and Thailand agreed today to open negotiations on a new aviation agreement after operating without any formal pact for five years.
The commitment to negotiate was announced after a meeting between the Thai Transport and Communications Minister, Wanmuhamadnoor Matha, and the United States Transportation Secretary, Federico F. Pena.


In Essential Times, G.O.P. Looks To the Nonessential Pizza Delivery
Twenty large," announced Frank Meeks, pizza deliverer, arriving discreetly at a side door of the Senate with sustenance for the Republican majority as it hungered 12 hours deep into the semi- , demi- , partial Government shutdown crisis of 1995.
In one of the few symptoms of crisis discernible at the heart of the affair,  the workers in the Senate dinning room had been pronounced non-essential.
Mr.
Meeks was summoned from the private sector with an omnibus measure of pies -- pepperoni, mushroom, anchovy, sweet peppers -- and a reinforced faith in Republican rhetoric that less Government is better.


For a Historical Thanksgiving Meal
ANYONE putting together a New England Thanksgiving menu that is historically  accurate should include game birds, venison, cranberries and corn.
But no potatoes, either sweet or white.
These and other details are included in a new illustrated cookbook, "Around the American Table: Treasured Recipes and Food Traditions From the American Cookery Collections of the New York Public Library" by Michael Krondl (Adams Media Corporation, $24.95).


For Bad Public Policy Let's Go to the Subway
To the Editor:
The stupidity demonstrated by the lack of planning for last weekend's transit fare increase cannot be overestimated (news article, Nov. 13).


Additives In Advice On Food?
THE stated mission of the American Dietetic Association, the country's largest professional organization of dietitians, is "to improve the health of the public."
But the group, which has more than 65,000 members and influences the public through its Consumer Nutrition Hotline, its publications and its nationwide network of spokesmen who are widely quoted on nutrition matters, is being increasingly criticized for its aggressive pursuit of cash and in-kind contributions from trade groups like the Sugar Association and the National Livestock and Meat Board and from individual companies like Coca-Cola, M&amp;M Mars, McDonald's and Sara Lee.


F.D.I.C. Cuts Commercial Bank Premiums
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation decided today to virtually eliminate deposit insurance premiums for most commercial banks after concluding  that its insurance fund had enough money to cover bank failures in the coming months.
Bankers welcomed the unanimous decision by the agency's board, which will take effect on Jan. 1 and save them $946 million a year in premiums.
Industry lobbyists waged a vigorous campaign to eliminate the premiums, arguing that they were unnecessary after the Bank Insurance Fund late last spring reached its Congressionally mandated target of $1.25 in reserves for every $100 of insured deposits.


Plan to Share School Services
The autonomy of local school districts is sacrosanct in New Jersey, but a State Education Department task force that has spent a year studying consolidation of some efforts has come up with suggestions on regional sharing of costs and services.
Among them are coordinating school bus use between neighboring districts; sharing services, like financial accounting, with municipalities; cooperating in computer and teacher training; linking up with municipal libraries to exchange books, and sharing administrators where possible.
The recommendations will be formally announced on Saturday at a meeting of the New Jersey School Boards Association in Princeton.
Frank Belluscio, a spokesman for the group, said that if the board approves them, it will draft legislation to try to implement the ideas.
The state Education Commissioner, Leo Klagholz, commissioned the study.


Anxiety Over Budget Impasse Lowers Dollar vs. Yen and Mark
The dollar weakened broadly yesterday, hurt by growing investor nervousness over the budget impasse in Washington and new pessimism about the Mexican economy.
Currency traders said the lack of progress to reach a budget compromise, which forced a partial shutdown of the Federal Government, was creating increased anxiety among holders of dollar-denominated investments.


A.I.G. to Offer First Fund for U.S. Investors
Stepping into one of the few financial service arenas where it does not already operate, American International Group Inc., the global insurance holding company, is expected to introduce today its first mutual fund for United States  investors.
The fund, known as A.I.G.
Children's World Fund, is aimed at taking advantage of the insurer's global investment expertise while encouraging families to invest for college or similar long-term expenses.
And the open-end fund comes with a twist: shareholders who remain in the fund until its 10-year maturity date and who reinvest their dividends are guaranteed a return of their original  investment.


CHRONICLE
Could the PRINCESS OF WALES be turning into the quintessential talk show guest?
London newspapers were full of reports yesterday that the BBC is about to broadcast an hourlong television interview that MARTIN BASHIR, a reporter, conducted with her at Kensington Palace last month.


Like Workers, Debt Clock Is Placed On Furlough
Above Times Square yesterday at precisely 2 P.M. -- a few hours after the Government ran out of money -- the National Debt Clock froze at $4,985,567,071,200.
It was the first time since a New York businessman turned the clock on in 1989 that it simply stopped, a symbol of the Government's partial shutdown, which halted most Federal business yesterday.


Introduce Single Currency Gradually, Europeans Told
Though monetary union has become the leading topic of economic discussion across much of Europe in recent weeks, its impact on the average citizen may grow more distant, according to a study released today.
The European Monetary Institute, forerunner to an intended European central bank, recommended that the public not be subjected to the principal effects of European monetary union -- in particular, the mandatory use of a single currency -- until the middle of 2002.


Bodies Found on Bridle Path
Two partly dismembered bodies were found in two suitcases yesterday afternoon on a bridle path in the South Mountain Reservation, the Essex County Prosecutor's office said.
A woman hiking along the path made the discovery about 2:15 P.M.
The police said the bodies were those of a white female and a white male, still unidentified last night.


NEWS SUMMARY


Federal Workers Go Home as Budget Impasse Stiffens
Nearly half the civilian functions of the Federal Government ground to a sputtering halt today as President Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress remained deadlocked over spending priorities and appeared to push off any possible resolution until at least the end of the week.
It was a day of dueling televised oratory, fitful negotiations and mutual accusations of bad faith, and the price was the closing of Government offices, parks, museums and laboratories and the furloughing of some 800,000 employees, who reported for work only to be sent home, their desks eerily empty and their suites dark by midmorning.
Vital functions, from mail delivery to air traffic control, continued uninterrupted.


Joe O'Neill to Join Euro RSCG Unit
After a couple of months of being wooed by several agencies, Joe O'Neill, a former top creative executive at Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco, will join Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York in the new  position of partner, effective in January.
Ron Berger, partner and creative director at Messner Vetere, which is owned by Euro RSCG, confirmed a report of Mr.
O'Neill's appointment this week in Adweek.
He said that Mr.
O'Neill would "take on significant responsibilities for the creative product," but the agency had not yet decided on his specific duties.
One of the accounts Mr.
O'Neill is likely to work on is the MCI Communications business, Mr.
Berger added.


Returning From Decline, 42d Street Is Now a Magnet for Merchants
In the latest sign that the long-stalled revitalization of 42d Street is close to becoming reality, developers said yesterday that 18 merchants had leased space in buildings at the intersection of 42d Street and Seventh Avenue,  and that a bidding war had broken out for space in another building nearby.
On the growing list of entertainment companies that want space on the street  -- the fabled block between Broadway and Eighth Avenue -- is RKO Pictures, a major Hollywood studio.
The developers said they hope to lease space for a complex of theme restaurants, which would be called the RKO Hollywood Palace.


CHRONICLE
There will certainly be no lack of brain power when Columbia College presents its highest honor, the Alexander Hamilton Medal, to five recipients at a dinner  in the Low Memorial Library tomorrow: they are all Nobel laureates.
The medal will be given to LEON N. COOPER, class of '51, who won the prize in physics in 1972; ROALD HOFFMANN, '58, the chemistry winner in 1981; NORMAN F. RAMSEY JR., '35, the physics winner in 1989, and MELVIN SCHWARTZ, '53, the physics winner in 1988.
An award to Julian S. Schwinger, class of '36, who won the physics prize in 1965, will be accepted by Clarice Schwinger, his widow.


3 Members of Harlem Family Are Discovered Slain at Home
The first sign of something amiss inside the Cherry family's 13th-floor apartment in the Polo Grounds Houses in Harlem came at 4 A.M. yesterday when a family friend looking for help after losing her house key came to their beige metal door and found it unlocked, a police detective said.
The police were summoned an hour later and found the family's three youngest  children walking around on the apartment's tile floor in stocking feet soaked in blood, said Deputy Inspector Michael Gardner of Detective Borough Manhattan.


INSIDE


Peres Visits the West Bank to Reassure Israel on Security
Seeking to demonstrate to the Israeli public that he would not neglect their  security as he pursues peace with the Palestinians, Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres joined security chiefs today in a tour of West Bank areas from which Israeli troops have withdrawn.


Esiason's Protector Set to Do His Best
Everyone's giving Matt Willig advice this week, from his father to Boomer Esiason.
But Willig already knows what he has to do on Sunday, when the Jets return to action against the Bills after a bye week.
Willig will probably start at left tackle as Esiason's protector against the marauding Bruce Smith.


Rabin's About-Face Angered Many Israelis;Silence of Likud
To the Editor:
In "McCarthyism in Tel Aviv" (Op-Ed, Nov. 10), Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of  the Likud in Israel, asserts that he and his colleagues have repeatedly condemned the "slurs leveled at Mr. Rabin" and "the few hotheads who yelled them."


BAYER PLANS TO BUY A PLASTICS BUSINESS
Bayer A.G. said yesterday that it would pay about $580 million for a unit of  the Monsanto Company that makes a type of plastics used in car dashboards, computer housings and refrigerator linings.
Bayer, which is based in Leverkusen, Germany, already makes such plastics, called styrenics, in Europe, and the acquisition would add them to the line of plastics Bayer makes in the United States.
The Monsanto styrenics business, which employs 1,400 people, is expected to have $700 million in sales this year.
Monsanto, which is based in St.
Louis, is moving away from producing chemicals and plastics and said in June that it was considering selling the styrenics business.


Hardaway And Magic Hand Bulls First Loss
Magic 94, Bulls 88


Survival Rate in Heart Attacks Is Linked to the Type of Doctor
A study of 220,000 Medicare claims has found that heart attack victims had a  higher survival rate when treated by cardiologists rather than general practitioners.
The findings raise concern about insurance companies' growing reliance on primary care doctors.


Contemporary Art Lags at Auction
Last night's driving rain and high winds didn't keep the droves of passionate art collectors and dealers from Christie's salesroom.
Standing room was three deep as the crowd watched the contemporary-art market continue to struggle.
Gone was the crackle and excitement of last week's Impressionist and modern art sales.
Last night's auction was a tepid affair that totaled $14.5 million, far below Christie's estimate of $19.8 million to $26 million.
Of the 60 works for sale, 46 found buyers.


Simon Rifkind, Celebrated Lawyer, Dies at 94
Simon H. Rifkind, a famously versatile lawyer whose clientele included the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and needy Holocaust survivors, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 94 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
At his death, Mr.
Rifkind was the senior partner in his New York-based law firm, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, which has more than 90 partners  and about 300 other lawyers.


Reducing the Risk of Flash Fires


Lincoln Center Plans An 'Intense' Festival
Just over three years after the idea was first proposed, Lincoln Center yesterday announced the program details of its new annual summer festival, an ambitious series that will draw on its resident companies and artists from around the world.
To be called Lincoln Center Festival 96, it is to run three weeks, from July 22 to Aug. 11.
All told, the festival is to offer 206 performances of 61 programs.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, said that the festival was the largest artistic venture the center had ever undertaken at a single stroke.
John Rockwell, who as festival director is responsible for the programming, said that the events were packed into only 21 days because he wanted the festival to be "dense and intense."


Police Warned On Veto Protest
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani threatened yesterday to dismiss any officer who staged a work slowdown in protest of Gov.
George E. Pataki's veto of a police arbitration bill that would probably have led to higher pay.
Police officials said there was no sign of any major labor action, but that 100 officers may have written fewer parking tickets over the weekend.
The action was seen by precinct commanders as individual acts encouraged by a few police union delegates.


Watching Who's Watching Children
It's no casting stretch to find Alicia Silverstone playing the title role in  "The Babysitter" as a beautiful teen-ager who inspires the erotic imagination of every man she meets.
But Ms.
Silverstone, who made this film just before her comic breakthrough in "Clueless," gives a dramatic performance that goes well beyond her earlier movie work.
Used in her first films as a rock-video goddess and stereotypical nymphet, she is much more clever here, playing what effectively is a dual role.
Cool and naive on the surface, she comes alive in the other characters' furtive, overheated daydreams.
Previously released on video, "The Babysitter" has been imaginatively rescued by the Film Forum not only as a star vehicle but also as an impressive debut for Guy Ferland, its writer and director.
Mr.
Ferland has skillfully coaxed a linear narrative out of a fragmented Robert Coover story, weaving a web of sexual fantasy around the baby sitter's provocative presence.
Far from exploiting this  material, Mr.
Ferland pares away its more lurid possibilities and instead concentrates on plumbing the depths of character.
The baby sitter winds up having dark, unanticipated effects on everyone around her.


Rabin's About-Face Angered Many Israelis;Giuliani a Friend
To the Editor:
Though Joyce Purnick's Nov. 13 column accurately reflects my thoughts and feelings with regard to extremist fringe elements in the New York Jewish community, I am afraid it could be misinterpreted as an attack on Mayor Rudolph  W. Giuliani.


OLIN WEIGHING SPINOFF OF MILITARY AND AEROSPACE UNITS
The Olin Corporation said yesterday that it was considering a spinoff of its  military and aerospace operations to shareholders so that it could concentrate on its core businesses, which include chemicals, metals, electronic equipment and sporting ammunition.
The company emphasized, however, that no decision had been reached about the two divisions, which are expected to contribute about $500 million in revenue this year.
Over all, the company had revenue of $2.66 billion in 1994.
The shares of Olin, which is based in Stamford, Conn., gained $4.125, to $72.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times yesterday about birds that are forced to cooperate with members of another bird species by caring for their eggs referred incorrectly at one point to the species that extorted the cooperation.
As the article noted elsewhere, it was the cuckoo, not the magpie.


Business Travel;Some Philadelphia hotels withhold a magazine from rooms of travel agents at a convention.
EACH month free copies of Philadelphia magazine are put in the guest rooms of Center City hotels in Philadelphia, but the November issue was withheld from a number of hotels last week.
The reason?
The American Society of Travel Agents was in town for a weeklong  convention, its first in Philadelphia, and some hoteliers as well as the president of the Philadelphia Convention and Visitors Bureau, Tom Muldoon, regarded the magazine's cover article inappropriate for the 6,300 delegates.


METRO DIGEST


Japan Says Its Banks' Woes Aren't as Bad as They Seemed
Despite the Japanese banking industry's much publicized difficulties, the Ministry of Finance announced today that the industry's operating profits had soared and that total bad loans were below its previous estimate.
Today's announcements seemed aimed both at trying to reshape the ministry's image, which has been tarnished recently by the Daiwa Bank scandal, and at improving the view abroad of Japanese banks.


Court Hears Arguments Over Possible Bias in Fare Increases
With the price of a subway token at stake and with millions of New Yorkers awaiting its decision, a Federal appeals court yesterday heard arguments for the first time on whether the recent fare increase and the way the city transit system and the suburban railroads are financed could amount to illegal racial bias.
The three judges of a panel of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan, sparred avidly with lawyers on both sides, probing issues of civil rights law that have rarely been applied to transit fares.
But they appeared to  press harder on those trying to reverse the fare increase.


Storm Foils Airline Travelers and Widens Power Failures
The second big storm in four days lashed the New York region with high winds  and heavy rain yesterday, spoiling the plans of many air travelers, forcing the  evacuation of some families in New Jersey and causing new trouble for hard-pressed utility crews.
But the northeaster, with steady winds of more than 20 miles an hour and frequent, prolonged gusts of up to 45 m.p.h, was accompanied by a lucky confluence of low tides during periods of the highest winds, reducing damage to  some shore areas.
And while rainfall had reached 1.16 inch by midnight at Central Park, it was less than the two to three inches that had been expected.


Nextel's Loss Soars in Quarter
Nextel Communications Inc. said today that its loss more than doubled in the  third quarter because of reorganization and accounting charges and because of higher costs to build its wireless network.
The wireless communications company reported an unexpectedly large loss of $102.1 million, or 61 cents a share, compared with a loss of $41.3 million, or 41 cents, in the year-ago quarter.
The consensus of five analysts surveyed by Zacks Investment Research had been for a loss equal to 44 cents a share.


Market Place;Disappointment in the Lab and on Wall St.
Few companies have ever issued more expansive claims for a new technology than did the Engelhard Corporation last April when it announced a system that would "allow automobiles to reduce smog" and drastically cut the amount of ozone in the air.
The announcement caused a flurry of excitement and sent the company's stock price soaring.
It rose 31 percent that day and rose a total of 66 percent by the time the price peaked in July.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Sunday about a casino proposed for Bridgeport, Conn., omitted a reference in some copies to a casino proponent  who said other Fairfield County communities have not supported Bridgeport.
He is Jack E. McGregor, president of the Aquarion Company.
The article also omitted a  comment by State Transportation Commissioner William Burns.
He said traffic problems relating to the casino could be overcome.
In addition, the article misstated the duration limit for welfare payments under a new Connecticut law.
It is 21 months, not 29.


Cornell Charges 4 Students in E-Mail Prank
A computer E-mail message listing "75 reasons why women should not have freedom of speech," which was sent as a prank by four freshmen at Cornell University to 20 friends, has ricocheted through the Internet, provoking thousands of angry messages to Cornell from campuses around the country.
Cornell has charged the students -- Evan Camps of Bethesda, Md., Rikus Linschoten of Newport Beach, Calif., Pat Sicher of San Juan, P.R., and Brian Waldman of Massapequa, L.I. -- with sexual harassment and misuse of computer resources, said the university's judicial administrator, Barbara Krause.


N.A.A.C.P. Officials Split Over Desegregation Issue
The head of the Bergen County chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. was threatened with suspension today by a high-ranking member of the organization for questioning the civil-rights group's long-standing emphasis on racial integration as the chief means of improving the public schools.
In a recent letter to the State Board of Education, the branch president, Robert H. Robinson, spoke out against state proposals to desegregate Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood through the creation of a racially balanced regional district that would include predominantly white communities in eastern  Bergen County.


The Congressional Land Grab
If there is any connective theme in the yearlong assault on the nation's environmental laws, it is Congress's clear desire to enrich state, local and commercial interests at the expense of the long-term health of America's national resources.
The notion of stewardship is foreign to this Congress, a fact made clear when it tried to cripple the Clean Water Act and strip Federal agencies of much of their regulatory authority over the environment.
But nowhere is the urge to trifle with public resources more nakedly expressed than in a web of bills that would transfer huge tracts of Federal land to state and private control.
Congress has already spoken on one of these measures.
A provision in the pending budget reconciliation bill would open up the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration.
Although President Clinton has promised to veto the bill, environmentalists are worried that the drilling provision will survive in later negotiations between Mr.
Clinton and Congress.


Jaspers Welcome a Big Early Challenge
Their feet were still on the ground, but their spirits were already soaring.
The Manhattan Jaspers, waiting for a plane at Newark Airport yesterday, were  anxiously looking ahead to their nationally televised season opener at the Georgia Dome tonight against Georgia Tech and Stephon Marbury, the celebrated point guard out of Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.


Murder One' to Move To 10 P.M. Mondays
ABC announced yesterday that it would take its widely praised drama, "Murder  One," off the air after tomorrow's program and would move it to 10 P.M. on Mondays when it resumes broadcasting on Jan. 8.
"Murder One" saw its ratings plummet when it was moved from Tuesdays at 10 to Thursdays at 10, where it faced NBC's top-rated "E.R." Movies will replace it.


Big Winner in Shutdown: Some Big Corporations
Even in a partial shutdown of the Federal Government, there are winners and losers.
This year, the winners include big corporations that are planning to issue billions of dollars worth of stocks and bonds, while the big loser is the  Treasury.
Millions of dollars in securities registration fees at the Securities and Exchange Commission automatically dropped by nearly half today as the budget authority expired for part of the fees.
With companies poised to save money on the lower fees, the S.E.C. was flooded with registrations for at least $65 billion worth of securities, 20 times the volume on an average day.


In This Fight, Polls Guide All the Moves
In 1992, tired of business as usual, the electorate ousted George Bush and replaced him with Bill Clinton in the White House.
In 1994, even more tired of business as usual, the electorate ousted the Democrats and replaced them with Republicans on Capitol Hill.
Now, with those Republicans pressing for a seven-year plan to balance the budget, a plan that would require a basic reshaping of the nation's social welfare system, and President Clinton defending the existing safety net, Washington is deadlocked.
A goodly portion of the Federal Government closed down today, with limited prospects that it will open again this week.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Adventurous Baritone And a Dark-Timbred Mezzo 'Discoveries and Debuts' 92d Street Y


Rabin's About-Face Angered Many Israelis
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman (column, Nov. 12) is somewhat disingenuous when he claims  that the assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, unlike President Clinton, did not vacillate in his beliefs.


Testimony Reheard by Jury
In its second day of deliberations, the jury in Don King's Federal wire-fraud trial was read back testimony yesterday from Gladys Rosa, Julio Cesar Chavez's interpreter, and Richard Hummers, King's former accountant.
Rosa said King told  Chavez in August 1992 that he paid part of the boxer's $400,000 legal bill out of proceeds from an insurance claim King is charged with falsifying.
That would tend to support King's testimony that he did not want to credit the insurance recovery against Chavez's debts to the promoter, so the legal bill Chavez incurred to get out of a contract he signed with Bob Arum could be paid.
Although Rosa testified that King said he paid the bill, King did not pay  it until May 1994, two months before his nine-count indictment.
Her testimony contradicted Chavez, who said he was unaware of the insurance recovery.


Making Speedy, Bratty Punk Popular
The Nassau Coliseum must have been expecting a rough crowd for Green Day's concert on Sunday night.
Ticket holders were frisked not just for weapons, recording devices and bottles; neck chains and binoculars were also turned away.
But the audience that showed up was short on hard-core delinquents and longer on junior-high students and youngsters with parents in tow.
For every spike-haired punk, there were 20 young girls prepared to sing along and squeal.
Green Day plays speedy, bratty, self-mocking, tuneful punk-rock for pop fans  in the millions.
Unlike Nirvana, who smashed the pop-punk barrier a few years earlier, Green Day doesn't write enigmatic or especially innovative songs, just  straightforward, revved-up three-chord rockers harking back to the Ramones and the Beatles.
Nor is Green Day uneasy that mass audiences enjoy music that once prided itself on its rejection of (and by) mass success.
Its 1994 commercial breakthrough, "Dookie" (Reprise), sold 10 million copies by zeroing in on the feelings of bored, stoned high-schoolers with parent troubles: "Are you locked up in a world that's been planned out for you?" Green Day's current album, "Insomniac" (Reprise), vents more typical punk frustrations with the same momentum.


A Convent's Christmas Gift to the City


Opera at Juilliard School
The Juilliard Opera Center is to open its season tonight with Prokofiev's "Love for Three Oranges," in the original French.
Performances, with English supertitles, are at 8 o'clock tonight and Friday and 2 P.M.
Sunday at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street.
The production has been staged by Frank Corsaro, artistic director, and will be conducted by Randall Behr of the Los Angeles Music Center Opera.
Information: (212) 769-7406.


3 Slain in Queens Robbery
Three people were killed and two were critically wounded early this morning during a robbery in a bodega in Corona, Queens, the police said.
The five were shot at Compadre Grocery, at 41-17 108th Street, shortly after  midnight, the police said.
It was not clear whether they were the only ones in the store at the time.


Personal Health
IF cancer is the big C, diabetes is the big D. Type 2 diabetes, the kind that many people think of as mild because it does not usually require treatment with  insulin, is an increasingly common killer and crippler that takes a bite out of  the health care dollar five times as great as its incidence would suggest.
Despite such serious complications of untreated or undertreated diabetes as blindness, heart disease, kidney disease, nerve damage and the need to amputate legs because of poor blood flow, patients and many doctors fail to take it seriously.
Dr.
Frank Vinicor, president of the American Diabetes Association, calls it the "Rodney Dangerfield of chronic diseases."


Buenos Aires Journal;Don't Cry, This Land Is Rich in Kims and Lees
Thirty years ago, the future seemed bleak for Sang Hyun Kim, a poor farm boy  from South Korea, so he packed his bags and headed for Argentina, in search of the great American dream.
Today, it seems that Mr.
Kim, who once worked on an Argentine peanut farm, has found that dream.
Now 52 and an insurance entrepreneur, he is one of 35,000  South Korean immigrants who make up a prosperous and closely knit population here that is often the envy of other Argentines.


Bratton Announces Plan To Train Officers to Testify
Acknowledging that police perjury remains a persistent problem, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton announced yesterday that every officer on the 38,000-member force will be ordered to attend annual refresher courses on how to give accurate testimony in court.
Mr.
Bratton's announcement came in the wake of a series of scandals in which  the practice of testifying falsely was shown to be widespread in certain precincts.
More than 15 officers have been indicted for or have pleaded guilty to falsifying evidence or lying about how or where they found evidence in the last two years.
Nine more were arrested on perjury charges in the first half of  1995.


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;A Mother's Joys: Pigskin, Leftovers
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
WHEN I was growing up in Detroit, my relatives would move Thanksgiving dinner from house to house each year.
To save the host, who provided the turkey, the trouble of all the trimmings, aunts and cousins would each volunteer to make a dish or two of her own (even today, the women still do all the cooking, and the men are still served first).
At dinner time, we would gather around the table, beholding a feast that every woman had prepared with pride.
Well, almost every woman.


Nets Count the Days Until Anderson Returns
The Nets were hoping to tread water during the first month of the season while Derrick Coleman was out because of an irregular heartbeat.
But with Kenny  Anderson likely to be sidelined for the next three games, somebody might want to get a life preserver ready.
Coleman, who was supposed to miss just five games, has not even been cleared  to resume full-scale practice.
Now, the Nets will be without Anderson, a former  All-Star like Coleman, because the point guard continues to be bothered by a strained groin muscle.


Wine Talk
FOR years, the only reason to stop in Arsac, a village in the Bordeaux wine country, was for an omelet at the Lion d'Or, a pretty good restaurant and the only one in town.
No longer.
Thanks to a feisty wine maker named Philippe Raoux, Arsac is now in the center of a legal and political brouhaha that strikes at the very heart of the arcane system controlling the quality of French wine.


School Money Is Serving Social Needs
Much of the increased school spending in the last 25 years has gone not to regular classrooms but for educating disabled children, counseling and other social welfare functions, an economists' group said today.
Researchers said the study by the Economic Policy Institute helped show that  schools handled many tasks beyond academics.
Their arguments dispute claims by conservatives that regular school spending has jumped dramatically while learning has plummeted.
And the study drew immediate criticism.


F.B.I. Agents Join Search In Saudi Blast
More than 20 American investigators and hundreds of Saudi security officials  searched the rubble of an American-run military training center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia today, looking for clues to the bombing that killed six people, including five Americans.
The explosion on Monday, which ripped the facade off the building, wounded 37 other Americans, 17 of whom remain hospitalized, six in critical condition.
A memorial service for those killed is scheduled to be held in Riyadh on Friday.


Fortifying an Italian Side Dish as Dinner
Dozens of Italian cookbooks have recipes for peas and prosciutto, a delicious and traditional side dish.
Marvelous as it is, can you imagine it in the spring  with fresh peas?
With the addition of potatoes, the side dish becomes hearty enough for an entree, one with very little meat.
Prosciutto is so flavorful you  don't need much to infuse the entire dish.
Serve it with garlic-scented fennel in a tomato sauce.


NETSCAPE ANNOUNCES PLAN TO SPLIT STOCK 2-FOR-1
The Netscape Communications Corporation said yesterday that it planned a 2-for-1 stock split that would raise the number of shares to 81 million.
The shares have more than tripled in price since the company, which makes software for using the Internet, went public in August.
Netscape said it would ask shareholders to approve the split at a meeting on Jan. 23, open to those who hold stock as of Dec. 19.
The stock of Netscape, which is based in Mountain View, Calif., was down 25 cents yesterday, at $96.50, in Nasdaq trading.


U.N. Assesses Balkan Refugee Task
The United Nations refugee agency said today that it expected to spend two years and up to $500 million overseeing the return home of some three million people displaced by the war in the former Yugoslavia.
But a spokesman for the agency, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said it was clear that many of those forced from their homes by ethnic cleansing would never go back, especially to areas controlled by Bosnian Serbs.


Honors for Top Player
MARK KOTSAY, an outfielder and relief pitcher for Cal State-Fullerton, yesterday won the Golden Spikes Award, given to the nation's top college player.
Kotsay won the Big West Conference triple crown with a .422 average, 21 homers and 90 runs batted in.
AP


BAXTER INTERNATIONAL PLANS $500 MILLION BUYBACK
Baxter International Inc., the provider of medical supplies, said yesterday that it planned to buy back up to $500 million worth of common shares in the next several years.
The company, which is based in Deefield, Ill., has about 272 million shares outstanding.
The stock closed yesterday at $38.625, up 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company also said William B. Graham had retired as senior chairman and had resigned from the board, effective on Nov. 25.
Mr.
Graham, who is 84, joined Baxter in 1945 and was chief executive from 1953 to 1980.
He had been senior chairman since 1985.


Algeria Bombing Kills One
A car bomb exploded today in eastern Algeria, killing at least one person and wounding five children.
The blast was the latest in a series of attacks in advance of Thursday's presidential elections, which Muslim militants have vowed to sabotage.


Owners Seeing No Set Pattern in Market
During a discussion of the free-agent market last week, a club executive brought up Dante Bichette and the new contract he recently accepted that kept him out of the market.
"He might be the m.v.p. and he got $11 million," the executive said, suggesting the money seemed low for a player in Bichette's position.
"Is that going to be the going rate for top players?"


Catholic Bishops Urge Congress to Reject Social Cutbacks
The National Conference of Catholic Bishops today urged Congress and the President to reject the limits on welfare and the cuts in the earned income tax  credit that emerged this week from the Congressional reconciliation process.
The bishops also affirmed the major themes in the pastoral letter on economic justice passed 10 years ago, and they elected as president and vice president of their conference two bishops known for their commitments to fighting social and  economic inequities.


Calvin Murphy's Legacy
CALVIN MURPHY JR., son of the basketball Hall of Famer CALVIN MURPHY, has signed a letter of intent to attend Niagara University, where his father averaged 33.1 points a game from 1967-70.
The No. 23 jersey Murphy wore had been retired by Niagara, but he has given the school permission for his son to wear it.
AP


Deal by Harley-Davidson
Harley-Davidson Inc. said today that it had acquired the remaining stock in Eaglemark Financial Services Inc. for about $45 million.
Eaglemark provides private-label financial services programs, including Harley-Davidson Credit and  Holiday Rambler Credit.
Harley-Davidson said it had held a 49 percent stake in Eaglemark since the company was formed in January 1993.


Republicans in Accord on Welfare Bill
House and Senate Republicans announced agreement today on a comprehensive welfare bill that would let states replace the food stamp program and the national school lunch program with other forms of nutrition assistance, run by the states.
The agreement would also allow states to deny cash assistance to children born to poor unmarried women under the age of 18, many of whom are now entitled  to welfare benefits.


Putting the Squeeze on Small Discounters
Leaning against her shopping cart, surrounded by bright orange going-out-of-business signs, Maryann Dickman gave her eulogy for the Jamesway discount store here in northern Westchester County.
"I liked it here once," said Mrs.
Dickman, an office manager from nearby Putnam Valley.
"But everything's changed. There's no selection, they haven't kept it up at all, and the quality isn't good. Wal-Mart is a half-hour away and  Jamesway is five minutes, but I would rather go to Wal-Mart. I just like it. Even my husband finds it better."


U.S. and Malaysia Plan Transit Projects
United States and Malaysian transportation officials said yesterday in Kuala  Lumpur that they had reached an understanding that could lead to many joint ventures, the first of which would be a multimillion-dollar rail project for Kuala Lumpur.
Zainuddin Parsons Brinckerhoff (Malaysia), a Malaysian-United States company, is scheduled to sign a contract today to build a futuristic railway station, United States Transport Secretary Federico F. Pena said while on a two-day visit to Kuala Lumpur.
(Reuters)


Foreign Affairs;Keep It Simple
At an American base in Hohenfels, Germany, the U.S.
Army has set up a remarkable training facility -- a mini-Bosnia.
The Hollywood-like set consists of villages with burned-out cars, shot-up houses and NATO soldiers in costumes playing different roles, including the mayor, refugees, black-marketeers, snipers, a CNN reporter and warring factions.
Units of the U.S.
Army's First Armored Division, which will be the backbone of the U.S. peacekeeping force in Bosnia, have to spend time practicing in the villages and are scored on how few  of their men get hit by pretend snipers using laser guns.
Secretary of Defense William Perry told me that the motto of the U.S. commanders running mini-Bosnia  is that "the scrimmage should be harder than the game."
A month ago President Clinton implied that if the Bosnian factions negotiating in Dayton, Ohio, reach an agreement, U.S. peacekeeping troops in Bosnia would be like the U.S. peacekeepers separating Egypt and Israel in the Sinai Desert, who spend their days counting camels.
That no longer seems to be the Administration's approach.
The argument now, which Mr.
Perry laid out in an  interview, is that this mission is going to be dangerous, and that even with a peace accord there will be some local pockets of opposition -- but it is worth doing because to not go in will lead to more killing in Bosnia, a spreading of the war and a debasing of American leadership.


Coffee Drops Despite Report That Shows Supplies Are Tight
Coffee prices fell sharply on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York yesterday after a report confirmed traders' expectations of a continued decline in inventories.
Those expectations had driven prices to a two-month high in recent days.
Prices were mostly lower on other commodity markets, including another steep  loss in corn futures.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities fell 0.8 point, to 242.02.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


The Guggenheim Funds
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 12 implies there is only one Guggenheim Foundation.
There are four: the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation (presumably your subject, although never so identified); the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation; the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation, and the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation.


Where Johnny Can Come In To Play
FOR parents who grew up somersaulting on grass and climbing trees, it can be  distressing to raise children in places where exercise is becoming a privilege and where parents think hard before letting their offspring pedal around the block.
Childhood is increasingly lived on a leash, a fact that epidemiologists cite  in explaining American children's expanding bulk.
One child in 10 now appears to be seriously overweight, according to statistics released last month by the National Center for Health Statistics.


The Day All the Meter Maids Stopped Handing Out Parking Tickets
Sekayi Basir stood shivering in a downpour outside a municipal building here  this morning, angered by the Government forces that conspired to lock her out.
She needed a police clearance for a new job.
But like so many other local and Federal buildings across the city today, it was closed after Congress and President Clinton failed to reach agreement on budget legislation.


Baldness and Heart Attack
IT may not be how much hair a man has lost from his head but how fast he lost it that predicts his chances of suffering a heart attack, according to new findings from the landmark Framingham Heart Study.
An earlier finding in men under 55 had linked bald spots on top of their heads with a slight increase in coronary risk, with the risk rising as the size  of the bald pate grew.
But this study did not trace hair loss over time.
The new study, published in the current issue of The American Journal of Epidemiology, recorded the rate at which baldness progressed and followed the men for up to 30 years to determine their risk of coronary heart disease.


5% of New York City Cabbies Drive With Invalid Licenses
Apparently confirming the fears of many cab riders in New York City, the Taxi and Limousine Commissioner said yesterday that 1,582 taxi drivers, 5 percent of  the yellow cab drivers, do not have valid driver's licenses.
Until yesterday, the drivers held valid hack licenses, even though their driver's licenses had expired or had been revoked or suspended, some for such a  string of violations that New York State considers them a menace on the roads.


Trigger-Pulling, Finger-Pointing, Soul-Searching
THE candles of mourning for Yitzhak Rabin have been cleared from the curbside on Second Avenue opposite the Israeli Consulate.
Gone, too, for now, are the rightist diehards who stood on the same spot every day denouncing the murdered Prime Minister's peace policies.
Maybe they're too busy scrawling new protest signs, now that they have to find someone else to call a traitor.


POP


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Traditional Improvisation With a Suggestion of Messiaen Justin Bischof, organist Cathedral of St.
John the Divine


Choose a New NATO Leader
The job of Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is not something Americans spend much time thinking about.
But it is an important post, particularly as NATO prepares for a possible peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and  considers expansion of the alliance into Central Europe.
Washington and its allies have spent enough time quarreling over a successor to Willy Claes of Belgium, who was forced to resign because of a financial scandal.
It is time to  settle on a new leader.
Traditionally, NATO's military leader, the supreme commander, is an American, while its civilian leader, the Secretary General, is a European.
Both posts require consensus backing from all 16 alliance members.
An early European consensus formed behind Ruud Lubbers, a former Prime Minister of the Netherlands, as the next Secretary General.
But after Washington expressed reservations, he withdrew.
Now France seems ready to reject the remaining contender, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, a former Danish Foreign Minister.
A new candidate will probably have to be found, the sooner the better.


Patriots Pick Up Steam in the 2d Half
Those long-suffering Patriots fans who began the season with such high expectations can take heart.
Winter is coming.
And that seems to be Coach Bill Parcells's favorite time of the football season.
In the last three seasons under Parcells, the Patriots are 6-18 in the first  half of the season and 13-5 in the second.
In the first eight games of this season, New England went 2-6.
Kicking off the second half, the Patriots are 2-0, having beaten two American Football Conference East opponents, the Jets and Miami.
They will play Indianapolis, another division foe, on Sunday.


Never Mind the Dolphin, Check Out the Bald Guy
Steven Spielberg's television record, including "Amazing Stories," has been uneven at best, and in the case of "Seaquest," downright soggy.
The show, produced by Mr.
Spielberg's Amblin Productions and by Universal Television, had its 1993 premiere as "Seaquest DSV," about a Nautilus-class submarine setting off, Sundays at 8 P.M., on adventurous undersea explorations 25 years in the future.
Obviously, the producers were thinking of a submerged "Star Trek." Despite (or perhaps because of) a talking dolphin named Darwin, the project kept sinking in the ratings.


Endless Recess
While educators are calling for higher standards and more demanding classes,  tens of thousands of New York City teen-agers are being shut out of class altogether, given short schedules for only a few hours of instruction a day.
The system not only allows these students to fail, it practically begs them to drop  out.
The city has long allowed high school students to take a light schedule for a handful of good reasons, such as needing only a few credits to graduate, or participating in a vocational school work-study program.
But this year 77,000 students, 28 percent of all high school students, are in school for less than the 5 1/2 hours the state requires.
Surely there are not 77,000 youngsters with  plausible reasons to leave early.


Tarkanian on Ballot for Hall
Jerry Tarkanian, who came out of retirement this season to coach Fresno State after many disputes with the National Collegiate Athletic Association, was nominated today to the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Tarkanian is one of 5 coaches, 14 players and 1 contributor whose names were  put into nomination by the Hall of Fame's Honors Committee.
Election requires 18 votes from the 24-member committee.
The voting will take place Feb. 5, and induction is May 6.
Also on the list were the Texas-El Paso coach, Don Haskins,  the former Houston coach Guy Lewis, the longtime college and professional coach  Tex Winter, and Antonio Dias-Miguel, who coached Spain's National Team for 27 years.


An Impulsive Imperial Soldier Who Turned Guru
YOUNGHUSBAND The Last Great Imperial Adventurer By Patrick French 440 pages.
HarperCollins. $30.


Approaches Vary From State to State and Court to Court
Now that the Pennsylvania statute has been invalidated, lawyers say, there are only a few states -- among them Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Oregon and Washington -- with laws that explicitly permit courts to order separated or divorced parents to pay the college bills of children 18 or older.
In most other states, including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, there are no statutes that deal directly with the obligations of divorced parents to pay college expenses.
But, according to lawyers familiar with practices in the three states, many divorcing couples choose to decide at the time of the divorce what each will contribute to college costs.
Those support agreements are almost  always enforceable in the state courts.


China Battles a Spreading Scourge of Illicit Drugs
The tourists who come to southwestern China to see some of the most dramatic  landscapes in the world do not come to this bucolic town surrounded by lush, humpback mountains mirrored in a pristine lake.
This is China's war zone.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 2, about the cancellation of $100 million  in insurance for an Indonesian gold-mining project operated by Freeport-McMoran  Cooper and Gold Inc. referred incompletely to killings and disappearances in the region of the mine.
In addition to Freeport-McMoran's repeated denials of involvement in the incidents, the National Human Rights Commission of Indonesia  found the Indonesian military responsible for killing 16 people in the area and  for the disappearance of four others.


Wall St. Tries To Handicap Budget Fight
As politicians on both sides dug in their heels, analysts and economists on Wall Street began yesterday to gauge the likely impact on financial markets of a protracted impasse in passing a Federal budget.
While a long delay would be a serious disappointment, Wall Street economists  and analysts said yesterday that it would not necessarily be all bad news for financial markets.


Saying Driver Faked Log Entries, U.S. Faults Trucking Firm in FatalCrash
The driver of the propane truck that crashed into a bridge column in White Plains in July 1994, burning 23 people in their homes, probably fell asleep at the wheel after working two days straight with no more than five-and-a-half hours of sleep, the National Transportation Safety Board said today.
In addition, the driver, who died in the crash, had falsified his records so  he could work more hours.


County Budget Includes Layoffs and Service Cuts
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today proposed a budget for 1996 that cuts spending by 3.8 percent compared with this year, through a combination of layoffs, service cuts and a pay freeze.
But because the assessed value of property in the county has fallen in the last year, homeowners' property taxes will rise an average of 3.4 percent.
The increases will vary depending on the town where a homeowner lives, how it assesses property and the arcane method of apportioning county taxes to localities.


Germany Approves Leeson's Extradition
Germany has approved the extradition of the former Barings bank trader Nicholas W. Leeson to Singapore, and one official said today that he expected the transfer to take place next week.
Singapore has tried for nine months to have Mr.
Leeson, a 28-year-old Briton, extradited.
Officials in Singapore want him to face charges in connection with the collapse of Barings last February under the weight of his $1.4 billion of trading losses.


Investors Sour on British Airways
When the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said last month that it was seriously considering acquiring the ailing USAir Group, many investors saw it as a graceful way for British Airways, which spent $400 million to acquire 24.6 percent of USAir nearly three years ago, to get out of a disastrous investment.
It was not surprising, then, that investors in British Airways responded negatively to the announcement late Monday by UAL that it would not bid for USAir.
Today, on the London Stock Exchange, British Airways shares fell sharply  in early trading before bouncing back somewhat to close at L4.63, or $7.18, down 3 pence.
On the New York Stock Exchange, American depository receipts of British Airways fell 25 cents, to $72.75.
Each A.D.R. represents 10 shares.


Time Stands Still in Some School Boiler Rooms;Oil vs. Gas Heat? About a Quarter of Schools Across the City Are Still Burning Coal
Brunel Toussaint opened the two big doors at the front of the great steel furnace, feeling a sudden blast of heat on his face, and turned to dip his shovel into the pile of coal nearby.
Scooping up about 15 pounds' worth, he swung his 60-year-old body around and  emptied the contents onto the orange-red embers, making them momentarily sizzle.
He then repeated the process 24 times before stepping over to the adjoining boiler to feed it, too.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 6 about reaction among New York Jews to the assassination  of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel misstated the sponsorship of a gathering to mark the fifth anniversary of the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
The sponsor was Friends of Kahane Chai. (Young Israel of Ocean Parkway, a Brooklyn synagogue, rented space to the group for a religious memorial service.)


Mexico Vows Restraint and Markets Yawn
Finance Minister Guillermo Ortiz responded today to the volatility of the peso markets by insisting that Mexico will stick to the tight fiscal policies it has outlined, but his remarks failed to hearten nervous investors.
The Mexican central bank intervened in the currency markets, buying pesos after Mr.
Ortiz made his annual budget address to the lower house of Congress, and the purchases gave some lift to the currency, which had been down earlier in the day.
It was its second intervention this month.
The peso had weakened to more than 8 to the dollar, a little more than 12 cents.
With the purchases, it rebounded to settle here at 7.7 to the dollar.
The peso has lost a little more than 17 percent of its value since early October.


Seeking Ninth District Seat
Kathleen A. Donovan, a Republican who calls herself a fiscal conservative and social progressive, announced her candidacy yesterday for the Congressional seat in the Ninth District now occupied by Robert Torricelli, a Democrat who is running for the Senate.
Ms.
Donovan, 43, the Bergen County Clerk, is the first to announce for the seat.
JOE SHARKEY


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 10
Nov. 3
Nov. 11
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.4
7.6 Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1 Gasoline stocks
192.1
197.0
203.3 Distillate stocks
132.5
131.4
142.4 Crude imports, daily
7.6
7.0
7.3 Product imports, daily
1.9
1.3
1.9 Crude stocks
304.6
309.4
340.8 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.4
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
88.8
89.5
90.6


Teachers Made No Deal in Settling Contract
To the Editor:
You distort the relationship between the United Federation of Teachers and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
"A Disappointing Teachers' Contract" (editorial, Nov. 7) refers to an "alliance" brought out into the open.
Just what does that mean?


Real Estate;A retail battle comes to the Bryant Park area as Computer City plans a superstore near a rival.
THE mingling of megabytes and megastores that characterizes today's computer  retail wars is expanding to midtown Manhattan.
Computer City, the Tandy Corporation's superstore counterpart of CompUSA, has leased about 40,000 square feet at 1065 Avenue of the Americas, on the northwest corner of 40th Street, a former Chemical Bank branch across from Bryant Park.


Journal;Fear and Favor
After decades of watching Mike Wallace dish it out, you'd think it might be fun to watch him finally get nailed to the wall.
But in the end it was only sad  on Sunday night, as a visibly whipped Mr.
Wallace fronted for a "60 Minutes" piece on the tobacco industry that had been censored by his own network.
The show -- which began with Mr.
Wallace's emasculated story and concluded with the  newsman's expression of dismay that CBS had "seen fit to give in to perceived threats of legal action against it" -- had a somber, end-of-an-era tone.
That era was one in which Americans took it for granted that their free press would fight to the bitter end -- from jail or before the Supreme Court if necessary -- to tell the truth about those in power.
On Sunday, "60 Minutes," once the least easily intimidated of all TV news magazines, said it wouldn't even report for battle.
An interview with a former tobacco industry executive had been spiked not because it was erroneous or libelous but because CBS's lawyers feared a costly lawsuit.
In reality, there was no threat of a lawsuit, and even if there had been, the network still might have prevailed in court.


Treasury Prices Are Mixed In Partial Federal Closing
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as the Government partly  shut down its operations.
The impasse in Washington over budget proposals and extending the debt ceiling kept downward pressure on the long bond, while intermediate and shorter maturities were mostly higher.
Traders noted that the stalemate between the Administration and Congress has  dominated trading in Government securities in recent days and disrupted the sale of new Treasury securities.
Sales resumed yesterday after Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin announced a revised schedule of auctions and the use of two Government employees' funds to remain under the current debt ceiling.


James Roswell Gallagher, 92, Leader in Adolescent Medicine
Dr.
James Roswell Gallagher, a specialist on teen-age health who is credited  with shaping adolescent medicine into a recognized discipline, died on Friday at his home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 92.
Called upon in 1951 by Children's Hospital Medical Center in Boston, he organized the country's first comprehensive medical section caring for patients  12 to 21 years of age.
He retired in 1967 as clinical professor of pediatrics and chief of the center's adolescent unit, and, in 1972, as clinical professor of pediatrics at Yale University School of Medicine.


BOC Says Pretax Profit Rose 58.8% in Year
BOC Group P.L.C. said yesterday that its pretax profit for the year ended Sept. 30 jumped 58.8 percent, to L402 million ($625.5 million) from L253.1 million a year earlier.
BOC, a British producer of gases, said the profit was powered by the industrial gas and vacuum pumps divisions, its two biggest.
It predicted that new orders would fuel further growth.
Excluding the impact of an L85 million restructuring charge and a L16.6 million loss on a disposal last year, operating profit rose 14 percent, to L496.4 million this year from L435.4 million.
Sales increased 7.7 percent, to L3.75 million.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Disability Line Ends At Lincoln National
The Lincoln National Corporation, an insurance company based in Fort Wayne, Ind., said yesterday that it would stop issuing new individual disability policies and would take an after-tax charge of $121.6 million in the fourth quarter to pay for accumulated losses from the policies.
Many of the largest issuers of disability insurance policies to individuals -- including such industry leaders as the UNUM Corporation of Portland, Me. and  the Paul Revere Corporation of Worcester, Mass. -- announced losses last year in their disability business.
They blamed large claims by doctors and claims arising from ailments that were little known when the policies were issued, like injuries arising from repetitive motions.


Kenneth S. Goldstein Dies at 68; Folklore Teacher and Collector
Kenneth S. Goldstein, a folklorist, record producer and collector who was a prime mover in the 1960's folk revival, died on Saturday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Rochelle.


$20 MILLION CHARGE TO BE TAKEN FOR EARLY RETIREMENTS
The Norfolk Southern Corporation said yesterday that it would take a charge of $20 million, or 16 cents a share, against earnings in the fourth quarter to pay for early retirement packages.
The company earlier had said that 272 salaried employees had accepted the retirement packages.
That represented 57 percent of the 475 employees 55 and older who were eligible.
Norfolk Southern, which is based in Norfolk, Va., operates rail service over about 14,500 miles in the Southeast and the Midwest.
It has about 25,000 employees.


Japan's Leader Apologizes to Korea
Japan's Prime Minister sought today to end a bitter dispute with South Korea  by making an unequivocable apology for Japan's colonial rule.
In a surprise letter to the South Korean President, Kim Young Sam, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan described Japan's annexation of the Korean peninsula in 1910 as the result of "unequal" treaties.


A Reward for Turning Heat Into Art
Randy Johnson, the 6-foot-10-inch left-hander who was once noted for being the most formidable thrower in the game, rode his conversion to a finely tuned pitcher to the season of his career in 1995.


Americans And Russians Meet in Orbit
Displaying a newly installed docking tunnel, the space shuttle Atlantis raced today to catch the Russian space station Mir for a linkup that will serve as a prelude to building large structures in orbit.
The Atlantis and its crew of five astronauts, moving in a lower orbit but at  a slightly higher speed than the Mir since beginning the journey on Sunday, were to catch and rendezvous with the Russian station early Wednesday for a three-day visit.


Rizzotti Is Top Choice In All-America Voting
JENNIFER RIZZOTTI and KARA WOLTERS, two key players when Connecticut won the  National Collegiate Athletic Association women's basketball title in April, were chosen yesterday for the Associated Press preseason all-America team.
Rizzotti was named on 36 of the 40 ballots.
Wolters was named on 26.
The others on the first team were WENDY PALMER of Virginia (34), VICKIE JOHNSON of Louisiana Tech  (26) and LATASHA BYEARS of DePaul (20).


Conservative Has a Big Lead in Guatemala, but Faces a Runoff
With the last ballots being counted today, Alvaro Arzu of the conservative Party for National Advancement has taken a commanding lead in the presidential election here Sunday, but has apparently fallen short of the clear majority he needs to avoid a runoff.
Projections indicate that Mr.
Arzu, 49, a former Foreign Minister and Mayor of the Guatemalan capital, will finish with about 37 percent of the votes in the third election held since civilian rule was restored here a decade ago.
That is  almost twice as many votes as his nearest rival, Alfonso Portillo of the right-wing Guatemalan Republican Front, is expected to win.


After a Protest by Parents, Crayola Changes Its Recipes
Say goodbye to crayons that smelled good enough to eat.
Children loved Crayola's food-scented crayons, but some parents didn't.
The parents won.
The crayons, which have been on sale since July 1994, had scents like coconut, licorice, chocolate, cherry and blueberry.
Some parents complained that children might be tempted to eat the Crayons rather than to color with them.


DISNEY AWARDS OPTIONS ON 5 MILLION SHARES TO OVITZ
The Walt Disney Company has awarded Michael Ovitz options to buy five million Disney common shares, according to a filing that gives the company's first disclosures about the pay of Mr.
Ovitz, its new president.
Mr.
Ovitz, the 48-year-old co-founder of the Creative Artists Agency, received the options on Oct. 16, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission this  week by Disney and Capital Cities/ABC Inc., which has agreed to be acquired by Disney.
The filing was disclosed yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
The stock options entitle Mr.
Ovitz to buy the Disney shares for $57 each, beginning in 1998.
The shares closed yesterday at $56.75, down $1.375, on the New York Stock  Exchange.


2 Westerners In Kashmir Ill, Captors Say
Separatist guerrillas who have held four Westerners, including one American,  captive since early July said today that two of their hostages were ill, one seriously.
The statement from the group, Al Faran, did not identify the sick hostages, but the Indian Government said last week after talks with the rebels that Don Hutchings of Spokane, Wash., and one of the two Britons, Paul Wells and Keith Mangan, were sick.


McNeeley Enters Plea
The heavyweight PETER McNEELEY pleaded not guilty yesterday in Boston Municipal Court to a charge of assault and battery with a dangerous weapon.
AP


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;One Thing's Clear: Turkey Beats Fish
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
SO, I asked my son, Michael, and my daughter, Ann, "what Thanksgiving memory stands out in your mind?"
Silence. Nothing? Nothing at all?


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Penn State


Thanksgiving Fish and Other Tales;A Pumpkin Plan: Is It Soup Yet?
IT is inconceivable that anyone would care a whit about what writers and editors for The Living Section eat on Thanksgiving -- family recipes for candied sweet potatoes and special turkey cooking methods abound.
But in an attempt to show that food people are people, too, they offer their own tragedies and triumphs, in the traditional spirit of sharing that their forefathers and mothers began.
I AM a long-range planner but a last-minute doer.
That goes for Thanksgiving, too.
The menu is decided long beforehand, but dinner is a family effort on Thanksgiving.


Chang Tops Muster For the First Time
Michael Chang finally got around to beating Thomas Muster, and it could not have come at a worse time for the loser.
Chang, beaten by Muster in straight sets in the final of the French Open and  having never defeated the Austrian in four previous encounters, rallied for a 4-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory today in his opening match at the IBM/ATP Tour World Championship.


Dreams of Glamour and Hopes for a Life on a Larger Stage End in Death at Age 19
From her mother's home on Staten Island, on a ridge overlooking New York Harbor, Leigh Ryan Zurmuhlen dreamed of living one of those bright, glamorous lives she had seen in the movies.
Miss Zurmuhlen, 19, studied acting and writing at several schools and had dyed her hair that flashy shade of blond worn by the uncounted aspiring ingenues of her age.
She considered the late actor River Phoenix her soul mate and, against her mother's wishes, Miss Zurmuhlen had begun to troll New York's downtown club scene, hoping for an agent or director to "discover" her.


TREASURY TAKES RETIREMENT FUNDS TO AVERT DEFAULT
The Treasury Department averted a national default on Wednesday by tapping two civil service retirement funds to cover interest payments on the Federal debt.
But Congress and the Clinton Administration made no progress in resolving their basic disputes over spending levels and priorities that kept the Government partly shut for a second day.


Republicans Reveal Details Of Agreements on Tax Cuts
Republicans in Congress today disclosed details of tax cuts that would primarily benefit large middle-income families and investors, even as they prepared to take final action on a huge bill to balance the Federal budget in seven years.
The tax cuts, totaling $245 billion over seven years, are part of the budget  bill, and they significantly increase the difficulty of balancing the budget.
But the Republicans say they are irrevocably committed to both goals, cutting taxes and eliminating the deficit.


Japan Torn Between U.S. And Asians
As the most advanced nation in East Asia, Japan has long seen itself as a bridge between the industrialized world of the West and the developing economies of Asia.
Now, as the host of this year's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting, Japan is playing such a role and is finding itself caught in the crossfire of competing camps.
As trade and foreign ministers of the 18 member countries began meeting here  tonight, one focus was whether Japan would be able to exercise the leadership needed to move the economic forum toward its goal of achieving free trade among  its members by 2010 for developed nations and 2020 for developing ones.
There are doubts about whether Japan is up to the task.


Story of Tap as the Story of Blacks
The most crucial body mikes used by the performers in "Bring in da Noise, Bring in da Funk," the breathtaking revue that opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, aren't placed where they usually are -- close to the mouth  -- but somewhere around the lower ankles.
And with very good reason.
Shoes talk  in this revelatory show, and with a vocabulary of Shakespearean richness.


Skiing;Best Skiers Following Street's Lead
The freckles don't seem so prominent now, and Picabo Street's rough edges of  immaturity are beginning to take a rounded shape.
After her sweep of downhill medals last season came the world of high fashion and high-priced athletic shoes -- a photo shoot in Vogue magazine and a sweet contract with Nike.
The cockiness and confidence are still there, but her outlook now includes a  measure of circumspection when she considers this winter's World Cup circuit and whether she can duplicate her success of last season, when she captured an unprecedented six downhill victories.


Bomb in Saudi Arabia Felt Round the Persian Gulf
The bomb that exploded on Monday in Saudi Arabia has set off wide reverberations among its Persian Gulf neighbors, whose sheikdoms and emirates depend on the West for protection against regional enemies.
While no one yet knows who was responsible for the bombing, which killed five Americans and at least one other foreigner, the apprehension here is based on the fear that it was the work of Saudi militants who deeply resent the presence  of Western forces.


Benefit to Healthy Men Is Seen From Cholesterol-Cutting Drug
Researchers have shown for the first time that one of the potent new cholesterol-lowering drugs can prevent heart attacks and coronary deaths in apparently healthy men with elevated cholesterol levels.
The finding is applicable to at least one-quarter of American men.
Most previous studies of cholesterol-lowering drugs have involved people with established heart disease, and those that involved healthy people did not show a mortality benefit.
It has also not been shown that women with elevated cholesterol levels and no previous heart disease would benefit from the drug as  men did, but earlier studies suggest they would.


Russians Vie for Votes, and Anything Goes
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin cherishes his stodgy, button-down reputation.
He is not young, he is not funky, and he most definitely does not "rock the house."
And that is why it was a bit surprising that Mr.
Chernomyrdin's campaign hired the American rapper Hammer to enliven the image of Our Home Is Russia, the centrist political party.


Currents;Bicycle Parts As Talismans
IN addition to a sturdy and properly fitted helmet, many mountain bikers these days wear good-luck talismans when they career down the trails.
Chay Peterson, above, is a hard-core mountain biker from Silverado, Calif., who makes jewelry that is attracting a cult following among her fellow "gear heads."
Ms.
Peterson recycles "blems" -- bicycle parts, like spoke nipples and chain  links, that are marred in manufacture and that would be discarded -- to make bracelets, earrings and necklaces.
They cost from $9.95 to $24.95.


We Can Fix Shelters But Not the Homeless
To the Editor:
As a sociological field worker who has spent considerable time with New York's homeless in and outside the public shelter system, I feel compelled to correct an assumption by the State Department of Social Services in enacting new rules governing the residents of city shelters (news article, Nov. 9).


AT&amp;T Schedules Agency Reviews
The AT&amp;T Corporation said that it has asked four of its core agencies to present marketing and positioning strategies for its $20 billion equipment operation division.
The billings for the as-yet-unnamed division have not been determined.


Csaba Elthes, Fencing Coach, 83
Csaba Elthes, who served five times as coach of the United States Olympic fencing team, died of a stroke on last Wednesday.
He was 83.
His death was announced on Monday by Jeno Kamuti, an Olympic silver medalist  in 1968.


People
*
Andy Fletcher was named to the new position of president at Tausche Martin Lonsdorf, Atlanta.
He previously held a similar position at Barkley &amp; Evergreen  Advertising, Kansas City, Mo. *
Ted Nelson was named to the new position of senior vice president and account  planning director at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass.
He previously held a similar position at Anderson &amp; Lembke, New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.


Astronauts Hail Flawless Linkup in Space
Astronauts aboard the giant spacecraft formed by linking the shuttle Atlantis and the space station Mir began hauling supplies between the vessels today as they settled in for a three-day visit.
The five astronauts aboard the Atlantis and the three aboard the Mir began the routine part of their mission shortly after the shuttle attached itself to the space station early today 248 miles above Earth.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a multibillion-dollar settlement of breast implant litigation misstated the timing in some editions.
The agreement was announced on Monday, not Tuesday.


Currents;Only Light From Under This Toadstool
THE French interior designer Andree Putman has made a career of resurrecting  classic 20th-century furnishings, especially those of Eileen Gray and Robert Mallet-Stevens.
Her furnishings re-editions are manufactured and sold through her Paris-based company, Ecart International, which is represented in New York by Pucci International, a showroom at 44 West 18th Street; (212) 633-0452.


Jacob R. Marcus, 99, Professor Who Was Oldest Reform Rabbi
Jacob Rader Marcus, a longtime member of the faculty of the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in Cincinnati and a founding director of the American Jewish Archives there, died on Tuesday at his home in Cincinnati.
Rabbi Marcus, who was the country's oldest Reform rabbi, was 99.
A member of the college's faculty from the time of his ordination in 1920, Rabbi Marcus specialized in Jewish history.
In the course of a career in which he wrote and edited about 300 books and articles, he also taught and advised about 2,000 rabbinical students.


Low-Risk Auction Ends Fall Sales
If one wanted to describe a 1990's-style auction, it would be last night's sale of contemporary art at Sotheby's.
By all accounts the evening was a success, but the mood was restrained, with few excesses and absolutely no excitement.
The sale totaled $19.8 million, just over Sotheby's low estimate of $18.4 million.
Of the 57 works offered, 47 sold.
Sotheby's results were better than Christie's; the contemporary-art sale there on Tuesday night brought only $14.5  million.


Bishops Endorse Plea to Preserve a Safety Net
For the third consecutive day, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops underscored its opposition to the Republican revisions in welfare, health care and taxes now under debate in Congress.
Today, William Cardinal Keeler of Baltimore, president of the conference, contrasted Pope John Paul II's message, delivered during his visit to the United States last month, with the budget proposals being debated in Washington.
His statement, which was an unusual departure from the conference's normal procedure, was overwhelmingly endorsed by the more than 250 Roman Catholic bishops who are meeting here.


Japonica in New Jersey
Japonica Magnifica," a collection of 85 botanical paintings and drawings by  Raymond Booth, the English artist and horticulturist, is on view at the Morris Museum in Morristown, N.J., through Sunday.
Mr.
Booth, whose work is regularly exhibited at the Fine Arts Society in London, is renowned for portraits he meticulously paints of specimens -- true to scale, form and color -- grown in his own small garden in Leeds, England.
Though he has never been to Japan, his 12-year correspondence with the American  plant collector Don Elick, who has lived in Japan for more than 40 years, enabled him to paint landscapes true to that country's spirit and topography.
A  dense patch of lilies, for example, almost leaps out of the wooded hills north of Tokyo, and masses of white anemones cover the rocky slopes of Japan's alpine  regions.


J. Ross Gamble, 83; Started Gas Concern
J.
Ross Gamble, a corporate lawyer and banker who helped found the Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation and had a long association with Dartmouth College, died on Monday at his home in Hanover, N.H.
He was 83.
Born in Springfield, Mass., Mr.
Gamble received his law degree at George Washington University.
In the late 1930's he became a partner in the firm Leighton &amp; Gamble, with offices in Washington and New York.


Bridge
There is one circumstance in which an expert will feel compelled to take a few chances.
If he or she is well behind in a match, it makes sense to depart slightly from the beaten track in bidding, make some slightly low-percentage plays and hope for exciting deals.
Most of the time the result is an increase in the deficit, but occasionally the gods of the game smile.
They did in the final stage of the New Jersey Double Knockout Team Championship played last month.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Japanese stocks were driven higher today by what traders said was technical buying.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 256.78 points, or 1  1/2 percent, at 17,939.52.
On Wednesday, the index fell 119.77.


Homage by Limon Troupe
The American modern-dance pioneer Doris Humphrey occupies a special place in  the history of the Limon Dance Company, which opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night.
Although the troupe was established in 1946 as a creative outlet for Jose Limon as both choreographer and dancer, its founding artistic director was Humphrey (1895-1958).
Limon openly acknowledged her as his mentor, and after she gave up her own company in 1944, she choreographed for the Limon troupe and served as its guide.


Snub on Clinton Plane Had Consequences, Gingrich Says
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that he sent the White House a "tougher" spending bill than he might otherwise have because President Clinton slighted him and Senator Bob Dole last week on the plane carrying the American delegation to and from Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's funeral in Israel.
Mr.
Gingrich, a Georgia Republican, said he and Mr.
Dole, the majority leader, had hoped the President would use the plane trip to open negotiations on the spending bill, which Mr.
Clinton vetoed, leading to the partial Government shutdown.
But, Mr.
Gingrich said, it was evident from the President's behavior that he did not want to negotiate.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the impact of the Government's partial shutdown on the Securities and Exchange Commission misstated the size of a securities registration fee.
It had been one twenty-ninth of 1 percent of the value of the  registered securities -- not one twenty-ninth of the securities' value; yesterday it dropped to one-fiftieth of 1 percent, not one-fiftieth of the value.


Hockey;Devils' Terreri Is On the Way to San Jose
Chris Terreri will never forget his 31st birthday.
After nearly a decade of success -- both as a starting goaltender and a backup -- he was traded yesterday by the Devils to the San Jose Sharks for a second-round choice in next year's draft.
"I've had a lot of fun times here, it's just tough to leave," an emotional Terreri said from his home in northern New Jersey.


Boxing;Cauthen of U.S. Surprises Top Cuban Fighter
The surest bet tonight at Foxwoods Resort Casino was the Cuban national boxing team, which has not lost a dual match to the United States since the series began 19 years ago.
Cuba, 18-0-1 against the Americans, brought its four reigning world champions -- the light-welterweight Hector Vinent, the welterweight Juan Hernandez, the middleweight Ariel Hernandez and the famed heavyweight Felix Savon -- all of whom won handily.


The 10 Worst Taxi Drivers
To the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, they are the worst of the worst.
Yesterday, a day after disclosing that 5 percent of the city's cabbies did not even have licenses to drive, Commissioner Christopher Lynn released his  personal list of the yellow cab drivers he would most love to see try another line of work.
The hack licenses of the men on the commission's "10 Most Wanted" list have all been suspended or revoked, but the terms require explanation.
Mr.
Lynn said  that a driver in the "suspended" category is so listed only because he never appeared at commission headquarters so his license could be revoked.


INSIDE
Territory Snags Balkan Talks


Pro Football;Count on Coach Levy To Do His Homework
Marv Levy, at age 67 the oldest head coach in the National Football League, will be bundled against the cold in a windbreaker when the Buffalo Bills face the Jets on Sunday.
He always looks as if he would be more comfortable in an overcoat and muffler, as befits a man with a master's degree in English history from Harvard.
This will be his second game back on the Bills' sideline after having cancer  surgery that was supposed to have kept him out until Christmas.


MORE THAN 1,300 ACCEPT ELECTRIC BOAT BUYOUTS
The Electric Boat unit of the General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that job cuts would continue even though nearly 10 percent of its work force had accepted a buyout plan to accommodate steep cuts in the Navy's submarine production.
More than 1,300 workers opted for the buyout: 740 hourly workers will leave by the end of the year, and 578 salaried workers will leave by the end of March.
Most of the workers leaving are employed at the shipyard in Groton, Conn.


O'Rourke Waits, Quietly, for Judgeship
These days, Westchester County's political stage has the uncertain, suspended quality of a Beckett play, one that might be called "Waiting for O'Rourke."
Andrew P. O'Rourke, a witty, affable Republican, has been the County Executive for 13 years, but for the last four, he has had his eyes on another job, first a Federal judgeship and more recently a state judgeship.
With a State Supreme Court seat in White Plains becoming vacant in 13 months or possibly sooner, everyone seems to be waiting for Mr.
O'Rourke to resign in midterm, though they are not sure exactly when and under what circumstances.


Fed Maintains Rates, Though More Signs of Sluggishness Emerge
Despite mounting evidence of some economic slowing, the Federal Reserve decided today against lowering interest rates, which would have made borrowing less costly at the start of the holiday shopping season.
Analysts generally attributed the decision to the Federal Government's stalemated budget negotiations and to the absence of compelling evidence that the economy needs to be spurred, though it is less robust than during the summer.


Gasoline Prices Rise on Signs Of Strong Sales and Low Stocks
Gasoline prices jumped on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, helped  by signs that unusually strong demand pushed stockpiles to their lowest level in at least 24 years.
On other markets, cotton prices rose while wheat fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities gained 0.45 point, to 242.47.


NORTHWEST AIRLINES TO HIRE 840 FLIGHT ATTENDANTS
Northwest Airlines plans to hire 840 flight attendants in 1996.
The carrier,  based in Minneapolis, said it needed the new attendants because of expected attrition, additional flights and a desire for scheduling flexibility.
It said it had hired 461 attendants this year.
The increased hiring comes amid improved  results at the airline, which had its best quarter ever in the third quarter.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Student Held After 2 Die in Shooting at School
A teen-ager who was reported to be angry at a classmate about a traffic accident opened fire with a rifle in a crowded school hallway before class started today, killing a fellow student and a teacher, the police said.
Another teacher was wounded.


Japan's Trade Surplus With U.S. Shrinks
Japan's trade surplus with the United States fell 44.2 percent in October, the biggest decline in more than five years, as Japan's auto exports dropped and its imports of automobiles, office equipment and meat rose, the Japanese Finance Ministry said today.
It also said Japan's global trade surplus fell 42.4 percent in October, the biggest decline since January.


Simpson Loses Bid to Keep Secret the Transcript of a Deposition
O.
J.
Simpson suffered several court setbacks today in his defense against civil lawsuits filed by the families of the two people he was accused of murdering.
In the first hearing in the civil case, Judge Alan B. Haber of Santa Monica Superior Court ruled that transcripts of Mr.
Simpson's coming depositions in the lawsuits would not be kept secret, as Mr.
Simpson's lawyers had requested.
The ruling means the public will finally get to hear Mr.
Simpson's account of what he was doing the night that his former wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend  Ronald L. Goldman were slashed to death outside her home in June 1994.


Baseball;Baseball Talks Are Back With an Offer by Owners
On the 227th day since the 234-day baseball strike ended, negotiators for the players and owners met today in their first formal post-strike bargaining session.
They didn't do any bargaining at the unadvertised session in New York, but Randy Levine, the owners' new chief labor executive, presented a new collective  bargaining proposal to the players' representatives.
The meeting and the proposal marked the first time since March 30 that the two sides held a formal negotiating session and one gave the other a proposal.


Not So Far, Not at All Madding
THE 1894 brick factory building sits in a bucolic New Jersey landscape, offering what seems to be the ideal living space of the 90's: a loft in the country.
Surrounded by tall trees and overlooking the limpid Delaware and Raritan Canal, where mule-drawn barges once carried goods between New York and Philadelphia, the 3,200-square-foot building in Somerset County, which once housed the Atlantic Terra Cotta Company, has been transformed into a striking yet serene living and working environment for a couple whose lives center on design in its multiple guises.


Tennis;Ailing Martinez Struggles In Triumph Over Majoli
Her posture was hangdog, her outlook bleak.
Bothered by a stiff neck, a familiar infirmity that kept creeping downward into her serving shoulder, Conchita Martinez found herself on the brink of a first-round elimination last night at the WTA Tour Championships.
With the tennis year about to end, it was a doubly painful step in the wrong  direction.


Debut for a Young Argentine Company
Julio Bocca, wunderkind of the ballet world, has decided it is time to take on the responsibilities of a family man.
At 28, he has acquired a ready-made family of 15 dancers, most of them teen-agers and all from Buenos Aires, his own home town.
And tonight Mr.
Bocca and his Ballet Argentino will begin a four-performance engagement at City Center that is their New York debut.
"The dancers have experience on the stage," Mr.
Bocca said in an interview, adding with a smile, "though maybe not what I have." Mr.
Bocca has been dancing  professionally since he was 13 and is as much a star in Buenos Aires as any soccer hero.
He cannot leave his home during the day for fear of being mobbed.
Cab drivers do not allow him to pay for rides.
Restaurants sometimes offer him free meals.
In New York, his international ballet star status entitles him to free haircuts at the Argentine barber shop he frequents.


Euro Disney Reports Profit for '95, but the Future Remains Cloudy
Euro Disney S.C.A. reported its first yearly profit today since the theme park opened outside Paris in April 1992.
But the shares of Euro Disney fell 14 percent here.
A number of analysts said the results showed that earnings would grow too slowly to justify its current stock price.


Rules Changed for Interview, '60 Minutes' Producer Asserts
The producer of an interview with a former tobacco industry executive that was planned for the CBS News program "60 Minutes" last weekend but was blocked by the network's management, said yesterday that he stood by his work and that the program's lawyers told him he had done nothing wrong.
The lawyers who work for the program "said they had no problem with anything  I did in the news-gathering process," the producer, Lowell Bergman, said.


House Republican Freshmen Heed a Call to 'Shut It Down'
The public opinion polls have turned against them, the constant assaults on their party's Medicare proposals have raised alarms back home, much of the Government is shut down and the Democrats, suddenly, no longer look so humbled.
But within the fervent core of the Republican revolution, among the 73 freshmen sent to the House of Representatives just a year ago, this is no time for faint hearts.
"Forget popularity," declared Representative Zach Wamp of Tennessee.
"This is a gut check for what we're doing here."


Washington Mayor Reveals Cancer Diagnosis
Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that doctors had found cancer in his prostate and that he was undergoing tests to determine whether he would be treated with surgery or radiology.
Appearing with two of his doctors at a news conference, Mr.
Barry, 59, said a blood test taken last month as part of his annual physical examination indicated the possibility that he had prostate cancer, a common ailment in older men.
Biopsies later confirmed it.


State Issues Scathing Report On Error at Sloan-Kettering
The State Health Department said yesterday that "systemic deficiencies" at one of the nation's leading cancer centers, Memorial Sloan-Kettering in Manhattan, led a surgeon to operate on the wrong side of a patient's brain last  May.
In a scathing report, state health officials said that the hospital had missed a number of opportunities to prevent the error, and that its staff failed to follow the most basic medical procedures, like reviewing the patient's medical history and diagnostic reports before surgery.


For Marines, Dining Room Has Priority
Marines take great pride in living in the harshest elements while other troops retreat to heated or air-conditioned tents and mess halls.
But in the bureaucratic wars of Washington, no military service chief worth his four stars  would be caught without his own dining room.
So at a time when the military is complaining about declining budgets for new weapons, the Marine Corps is spending $45,000 to build a new private dining room in the Pentagon for its commandant -- even though the Navy's top admiral has offered to share his.


Valentine Back for AAA Mets
BOBBY VALENTINE, whose decision to leave baseball in the United States for a  managerial position in Japan ended in his dismissal after only one season, returned stateside yesterday as manager of the Mets' Class AAA team in Norfolk,  Va.
Valentine, who was given a two-year contact, once served as third-base coach with the Mets.


Amherst Is Pledged Record Gift: $25 Million
A graduate who wanted to remain anonymous will donate $25 million to Amherst  College, the largest gift to the college ever, if the college trustees, alumni and other donors match it.
Under the unusually complicated terms of the gift, which was pledged last spring but not announced until yesterday, the first $5 million, which has already been matched mostly by alumni, will go to establish a professorship in the name of Peter R. Pouncey, a former president at Amherst, and will pay for recruitment and financial support of minority students, college officials said.
The next $10 million of the gift requires the college trustees to contribute personally.
But in order to receive even $1 of this portion of the gift, the trustees must first raise $5 million.
The donor will match anything they raise above the $5 million, up to $10 million.


Calendar: Architecture Film, Design Lecture, Crafts Talk
Documentary on an Architect Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street; (212) 621-6600.


World News Briefs;Ex-Lawmaker Arrested In Attack on Georgian
A former legislator was arrested today in connection with a car bomb attack on Aug. 29 against President Eduard Shevardnadze.
The legislator, Dzhaba Ioseliani, also faces narcotics and weapons charges because of evidence found in a raid on his office at Parliament after the car bombing, the Deputy General Prosecutor, Revaz Kitiani, said.


Restaurant Chain To Resist on Hiring Men
The Hooters restaurant chain said today that it would refuse a Federal commission's recommendation that the company hire men to work alongside its waitresses, known as Hooters Girls.
Hooters of America, based in Atlanta, called a news conference to protest a recent decision by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission that the 170-restaurant chain's policy of hiring only female waitresses amounts to sex discrimination.


National Book Award For Fiction Goes to Roth
Sabbath's Theater," Philip Roth's novel about an aging, libidinous ex-puppeteer whose mistress's death triggers a turbulent journey into his past,  beat out four other finalists last night to win this year's National Book Award  for fiction.
The awards, publishing's equivalent of the Oscars, were presented at a dinner at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.


No Headline
Except for the Communist Party, there is such weak party identity in Russia  that candidates have to sell personalities, not political platforms.
It becomes  Hollywood glitzy -- what personality can make us famous?"
MICHAEL MCFAUL, a Stanford expert on Russian politics. [A1:4.]


CHRONICLE
Fifty years after the publication of "Black Boy," Richard Wright's searing autobiography, his daughtter JULIA WRIGHT came to New York from her home in Paris for a series of events marking the anniversary.
This afternoon there will  be a lecture at Baruch College.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Ms.
Wright said that her father could not have written the book had he not first written "Native Son," the novel about Bigger Thomas, a young black man whose fear and fury drive him to murder a white woman.
"He had to write out all the sound and fury in 'Native Son,' " she said,  "so that five years later in 'Black Boy,' he could use the first-person singular and become father to himself and describe the childhood he had had, which was no childhood to speak of."


South Korean Prosecutors Seek Arrest Warrant for Ex-President


When You Wish Upon A House
The sun shines brightly, children bicycle past white picket fences, and in the town square, the American flag snaps smartly in the breeze.
It is warm, it is inviting.
It is America the Perfect, the land idealized by Norman Rockwell and Walt Disney.
In this case, however, the feel-good fantasy is not on a magazine cover or in a movie.
Welcome to Celebration, the Walt Disney Company's first attempt at real-life town planning.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Peter B. Flint, a reporter for The New York Times, referred incorrectly to the first film role of Lana Turner, whose obituary he wrote.
She did speak a few lines in the film "They Won't Forget."


Windfall to Library, No Name Attached
The New York Public Library has received its largest gift ever, $15 million,  to be used to renovate its Main Reading Room, a hallowed center of learning that is about the size of a football field.
The gift, by an unidentified donor, was revealed at a meeting in which Elizabeth F. Rohatyn was named the library's new chairwoman.
Article, page C15.


Bundesbank Cuts a Rate
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, cut its main money market rate below  4 percent yesterday for the first time in seven years.
As expected, the Bundesbank cut its 14-day securities repurchase rate, known as the repo rate, by 2 basis points, to 3.98 percent from 4 percent.
It was the first time the rate has fallen below 4 percent since August 1988.
The central bank also took 1.1 billion marks ($775 million) of reserves from the German banking system, which could leave banks in greater need of cash and less likely to bid rates lower next week.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Baseball;Stottlemyre in Pinstripes Again
The telephone call resembled the Stevie Wonder song: "I just called to say I  love you. I just called to say I care."
George Steinbrenner made the call last week to Mel Stottlemyre, and in a few  minutes, 20 years' worth of ill feeling was dissipated.


In Hearings On Jet Crash, Certification Is New Issue
Investigators seeking the cause of the crash of a USAir Boeing 737 near Pittsburgh 14 months ago still have no answer, but they laid the groundwork today to question whether the plane, the world's most popular commercial aircraft, had been properly certified by the Federal Aviation Administration.
The issue, in a rare second round of hearings conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board that began today, is whether a 737 can be brought down by the sudden, uncommanded movement of the rudder all the way to one side,  which appears to have been the case in the Pittsburgh crash, which killed 132 people, and the crash of a United Airlines 737 near Colorado Springs in 1991 that killed 25.
Those two are the only major crashes that the safety board has not solved.


Gulfstream in Venture for Time Sharing of Its Corporate Aircraft
In a move intended to spur the growth of so-called time sharing in corporate  aircraft, the Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation said yesterday that it had formed a new company with Executive Jet International.
Executive Jet, which is based in Montvale, N.J., is the largest company in the rapidly growing industry of selling shares in corporate aircraft to companies that could otherwise not afford one on their own.


Imitator Loses Suit
In the world of furniture designers, knockoffs, or unauthorized imitations, are rampant.
Some say imitations are flattering.
But not the Donghia Furniture Company in Manhattan, which is fighting back.
Last week, Donghia won a Federal lawsuit against Furniture Masters Company, a manufacturer in Brooklyn that admitted copying a patented Donghia design, the "Ghost" chair with a curved back tufted with three buttons.
In the lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Donghia, which has frequently had its designs copied, charged Furniture Masters with design-patent and copyright infringement, and counterfeiting.


Baseball;Reds' Larkin Is a Surprise M.V.P. Winner
The debate as to whether a power hitter in the rarefied air of Colorado or a  pitcher in the rarefied company of Sandy Koufax should be named the most valuable player of the National League ended yesterday.
The voting members of the Baseball Writers Association of America decided it  should be neither, selecting instead Barry Larkin, the artistic shortstop and spiritual leader of the Cincinnati Reds.


Sacrilege' to Close
Sacrilege," a drama by Diane Shaffer, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan. The matinee of the play, directed by Don Scardino and starring Ellen Burstyn, will be its 21st  regular performance; it had eight previews.


How Congress Gets Around Constitution
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton Wields the Veto" (editorial, Nov. 14) does not discuss the constitutional implication of Congress's piggy-backing other items on bills whose passage is essential for continued operation of the Government.


Israel Holds Student In Plot to Kill Rabin
The Israeli police detained a 20-year-old student, saying she was a "dominant part" of a group that may have plotted to kill Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
But the authorities released the head of a militant group who had been accused of knowing about the assassination in advance.
Article, page A11.


A Murky Impasse: Data vs. Principle
Sooner or later, President Clinton and the Republican Congress will find a way out of the entanglement that has caused much of the Government to close down.
What is blocking the bill giving the Government authority to spend money temporarily is a disagreement over dollar amounts and economic projections.
When differences can be boiled down to numbers, politicians can usually find ways to split the difference and save face.
But it is nearly impossible to fathom the elements of a long-term solution to the division between the President and his Republican opponents.
Here, the dispute is over principle -- over what role the American Government should play  in the lives of its citizens.
Compromising on principles is much more difficult  than compromising on numbers.


Entangled With Congress, Clinton Cancels Planned Japan Trip
Ensnared in a budget tangle with the Republican-controlled Congress, President Clinton canceled his planned trip to Japan today, announcing that Vice President Al Gore would take his place at a pan-Asian economic conference this weekend and pledging to reschedule his state visit with Japanese officials for a later date.
The President's trip had already been scaled back from six days to a long weekend in anticipation of potential trouble with the budget, but with much of the Government shut down and no apparent resolution in sight, senior White House officials said, Mr.
Clinton had decided this afternoon that he simply could not  afford to be out of the country at such a delicate moment.


BATTLE OVER THE BUDGET: THE VOTERSThe Sharp Fault Line That Separates Clinton's and the G.O.P.'s Supporters; In Michigan, Some G.O.P. Allies Are Soured by Tactics
His friends had predicted that their fourth for coffee and cigarettes this morning would show his stripes as a "liberal pinko commie," and when Neil Dempsey slid into the booth at Mount Clemens Coney Island restaurant, he did not disappoint them.
"I support the President," Mr.
Dempsey said, ignoring their smoky guffaws to  take his stand on the impasse in Washington.
But as he detailed his objections to the Republicans' tactics and his fears of higher Medicare and other health care costs, his friends just kept grinning.


Plan for Pershing Square Would Yield New Park
The shabby, walled-in space beneath Park Avenue where the roadway rises to veer around Grand Central Terminal has been notable mainly for the flocks of pigeons making it home.
But if the area's business improvement district has its  way, this underside of the viaduct will be the centerpiece of the next Bryant Park.
Yesterday, the city and the Grand Central Partnership announced revitalization plans for Pershing Square, including a restaurant and what ultimately the business district hopes will be a tree-shaded park on each side.


Howe to Manage the Athletics
The Oakland Athletics are expected to announce today that ART HOWE is their new manager.
Howe, the former manager of the Houston Astros and bench coach this past season for the Colorado Rockies, was flying to Oakland, Calif., for a scheduled morning news conference.
Howe, 48, who has been seeking a chance to manage again since the Astros dismissed him in 1993, will replace TONY LA RUSSA, who quit after the World Series to manage the St.
Louis Cardinals. (AP)


Sony and Visa Team Up to Offer Entertainment Service on Internet
The Sony Corporation of America said yesterday that it had formed a strategic alliance with Visa U.S.A. to create a global information and entertainment center on the Internet's World Wide Web.
Computer users who connect to the Sony Station site next spring will be able  to preview and discuss music CD's, television programs and films, shop for Sony  products and play interactive games with other Internet users, said Matt Rothman, a vice president at Sony of America, a unit of the Sony Corporation of  Japan.


GIULIANI PROPOSES RAISE FOR HIMSELF AND TOP OFFICIALS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday moved to give himself and other city elected officials raises of up to 28 percent, instantly infuriating union leaders whose members -- making an average salary one-third that of the Mayor -- are being asked this month to accept a two-year wage freeze.
The Mayor, whose salary would increase to $165,000 from $130,000, said the increases were necessary because elected officials have not had a raise in eight years.
He also said he would soon propose another broad package of raises  for city commissioners and managers, bringing the total cost of the package to $14 million.


U.S. Seizes Another U.P.I. Pension Fund
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation took over the pension fund of United Press International today because the news agency was $5 million short of the money needed to provide promised pensions.
The U.P.I.
Guild Employees Retirement Income Plan covers 1,300 former U.P.I.  journalists, including 350 retirees.
The Federal pension watchdog group said that if it had not taken over the plan, it would not have been possible to pay retirees their promised benefits.
In June 1992, when U.P.I. was sold and the plan was terminated, it had assets of $18 million and liabilities of $23 million.


An Ethics Test in the House
The House is expected to vote today on legislation that would impose a strict ban on the free meals, vacations and other corrupting perks that members now receive from lobbyists.
The outcome will say much about the integrity of individual lawmakers.
It will also tell us whether the new Republican majority,  elected partly in the hope that it would change the capital's self-dealing culture, has any intention of doing so.
In July the Senate approved a strict gift ban for itself, despite strong opposition from the Senate Republican leadership and resistance on both sides of the aisle.
The House was even less enthusiastic about reform, but two Republicans, Christopher Shays of Connecticut and Linda Smith of Washington, kept the issue alive.
To their credit, Speaker Newt Gingrich, the House majority leader, Dick Armey, and the Rules Committee chairman, Gerald Solomon of New York, honored their commitment to let the issue be fairly decided before the Thanksgiving break, despite complaints from their gift-addicted colleagues.


Gorging on Wackiness, Sophisticated, Naturally
As Hollywood heads into the holiday season with Ace Ventura as its standard-bearer for movie comedy, Film Forum 2 has a better idea.
Tomorrow brings the opening of "Strictly Screwball," a heavenly six-week tribute to the madcap brilliance of American comedies of the 1930's and 40's, the golden age of screwball wit.


77,800 Managers At AT&amp;T Getting Job Buyout Offers
In the latest sign that corporate layoffs are becoming a permanent fixture in the business landscape, the AT&amp;T Corporation announced yesterday that it was offering 77,800 managers -- half its supervisory work force -- financial incentives to leave by Jan. 13.
The buyout offer comes as AT&amp;T braces for intensified competition in its main long-distance telephone business and less than two months after the company announced that it would break into three pieces.
Early next year, the company plans public stock offerings for the two new companies it is spawning, one in telecommunications equipment and the other in computers.


High School Class Exposes Toxic Dump;Students Use TV Course for an Investigative Environmental Project
The camera was in tight on Dutch Smith, a retired landfill worker with skin as wrinkled as a dried apricot.
He sucked on a corncob pipe and unreeled stories of truckloads of old car-battery cases, medical waste and PCB-laden transformers being buried at a town dump in Orange County.
"I'll tell you this," he said in the 1991 interview.
"Anything you can name,  from radioactive waste to hospital waste, you name it and it's in that landfill. And I know it's in there because I buried lots of it."


Lloyd's Chief Is Leaving Unexpectedly For Salomon
Peter J. Middleton, the chief executive of Lloyd's of London for the last three years, said today that he was leaving the troubled insurance cooperative to head the European operations of Salomon Brothers, another giant financial institution trying to rebuild its image.
Mr.
Middleton, a 55-year-old former monk, has played a key role alongside David Rowland, the chairman of Lloyd's, in hauling the insurer back from the brink of financial disaster and proposing a recovery plan to its battered investors.


Warrant Issued in Federal Inquiry Into Finances of Congresswoman'sMissing Husband
Federal prosecutors issued a warrant today for the arrest of Joe Waldholtz, the missing husband of Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz, the Utah Republican whose campaign and personal accounts are the subject of Federal investigations.
The warrant said Mr.
Waldholtz was wanted in connection with check-kiting schemes in Washington and Utah that are the subject of a grand jury investigation in Washington.
It also said that the authorities had tracked Mr.
Waldholtz, who was last seen at Washington National Airport on Saturday, as far  north as Springfield, Mass., and that they had determined that he had used automatic teller machines at the Amtrak station at Baltimore-Washington International Airport on Saturday and later in Springfield.


A Bad Budget Bill Gets Worse
The face-off between President Clinton and the Republicans over the debt-ceiling and temporary spending bills is a sideshow compared with the negotiations over the permanent budget going on among Republican leaders of the  House and Senate.
They are hammering out a reconciliation measure -- a mammoth package of cuts in entitlements, like Medicare and Medicaid, and skewed tax cuts that would bring the budget into balance over seven years.
Judging from news leaks, they have seized some of the worst parts of the separate bills passed by  the two houses.
Whatever bill the G.O.P. sends to the White House for the President's signature this week or next will be vetoed.
Both sides want to look tough before their constituents.
But the provisions of the initial bill will set the boundaries for further negotiations with the Administration.
That is why decisions that the Republican leaders have made this week on taxes, Medicare, Medicaid, welfare and agriculture are disheartening.


Revisiting the Gothic Passion of Pugin
ON any list of England's high achievers in the early Victorian era, Augustus  Welby Northmore Pugin (1812-1852) would have a place of honor.
He was architect, all-purpose designer, polemicist, evangelist, impresario and entrepreneur.
When he wrote, it was as if he had a sharpened cutlass in his hand.
When he sat down to the drawing board, designs poured from his hand as if from a spigot.
He was admired throughout Europe for his championship of what became known as the Gothic Revival.
Catholic and Protestant alike were to find in the Gothic esthetic of the pointed arch a soaring inspiration.
In medieval ornament, they would find truth mated with beauty.


Market Place;Duramed Pharmaceuticals faces some harsh terms to raise cash.
WHEN a company has significant financial problems, but great hopes for the future, it can find itself facing harsh terms to raise cash.
That is what has happened to Duramed Pharmaceuticals, which disclosed yesterday that despite making big concessions on terms, it had not raised all the money it needed.
Duramed said it had raised $10 million by selling convertible preferred stock.
The amount was far less than the $25 million that the company was trying  to sell, and it was forced to make already generous terms even more generous.
The company added that it hoped to sell $15 million more within 90 days.


Basketball;Nelson Returns To Say Goodbye
It was not just his former players or his old friends.
One of the Oakland Coliseum's longtime security guards, a hard-featured man of maybe 65, also walked over to say hello today.
"How ya doin', Nellie?" he said, holding out his weathered hand.
Don Nelson nodded, shook his hand and walked onto the hardwood.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Jewish militants in the United States referred incorrectly to the Yeshiva of Los Angeles High School.
The school did not give classes about when a Jew may kill another Jew. (A former Los Angeles rabbi, whose teachings on religion and self-defense had provoked debate in his synagogue, also taught at the high school; his subject, Jewish self-defense, was part of the standard curriculum there.)


Bruce B. Decker, 45, Outspoken Advocate For AIDS Patients
Bruce B. Decker, a Republican political consultant who devoted himself to advocacy for people with AIDS after learning that he was infected with H.I.V., died on Saturday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 45.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said a friend, Rick Reidy.


SEQUA SHARES JUMP ON BUYOUT OFFER FROM ITS CHAIRMAN
The shares of the Sequa Corporation rose sharply yesterday after the company  said late on Tuesday that it had received a buyout offer from its chairman, Norman E. Alexander.
The aerospace and chemicals company said Mr.
Alexander had  offered to buy the company's remaining class A shares for $30 each and its class B shares for $36 each.
Mr.
Alexander already holds about 37 percent of the company's total shares and about 52 percent of its voting interest.
Both classes of shares traded higher yesterday than Mr.
Alexander's offer price, indicating that investors may be looking for a still higher bid.
The class A shares were up $5.875, at $30.875, while the class B shares were up $5.75, at $37.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Hockey;Beukeboom Measures Season in Hard Hits
In good seasons and in bad, Ranger fans knew what to expect from the defensive partners Brian Leetch and Jeff Beukeboom.
Leetch would take risks on the attack and create many goals and assists.
Beukeboom would stay back, deliver the big hits and guard the back door.
Most seasons, Beukeboom could be counted on to score maybe three or four goals.
Entering the season, he had 24 in 534 National Hockey League games.
He may never equal his career high of eight during the Stanley Cup season of 1993-94, but he is ahead of that pace and it is only mid-November.


Six Weeks of Autumn Rains Bring an End to the Drought
Weeks of heavy rain, topped off by the northeaster that swept in off the Atlantic on Tuesday, have brought a quick end to the drought that parched New York and New Jersey for almost a year, officials in both states said yesterday.


Dollar Moves Lower as Traders Await Outcome of Budget Fight
The dollar slipped yesterday on increasing concerns over United States budget negotiations, but it was also hurt by the renewed ascent of the German mark against other European currencies.
The dollar received some support in the afternoon, however, after the Federal Reserve, as expected, left short-term interest rates unchanged.


Krone Wins 3 to Pass 3,000
Julie Krone, who was fined $500 earlier in the day for not riding out her mount in a race on Sunday, rode three winners at Aqueduct yesterday and passed a milestone in her career: 3,000 winners.
The 32-year-old jockey, the leading female rider in racing history, won the first race aboard the 3-year-old colt Pleasant Court (returning $3.70 for a $2 bet to win) for victory No. 2,999, then won the fourth aboard the 2-year-old colt Dustin's Dream ($6.20) for No. 3,000, both horses trained by Scotty Schulhofer.
Then she won the sixth with Robert Reid's 3-year-old filly Book of Fortune ($6.30) for No. 3,001.


Liberties;Dialing For Liars
Russell Baker once described a Washington reporter as someone "content to wear out his hams sitting in marble corridors waiting for important people to lie to him."
The Federal Government has shut down, but the fibs live on.
With all the posturing and vaporizing over the budget, it seemed like a good time to search for an honest man.


This Car Needs a Homing Device
Car 1570, where were you?
A joyrider stole police cruiser No. 1570, taunted dispatchers by whistling over the police radio and thanking them for the use of  the vehicle.
A few hours later, he told them where to find the car, whose odometer showed that it had traveled 60 miles.
The thief escaped, the A.P. reported.
JOE SHARKEY


93 Years Go Up in Flames


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Hawaiian Troupe Shows The Hula's Serious Side Halau O Kekuhi Kaye Playhouse


A Coalition of One, Ever Unconventional
THERE he goes again.
Michael Meyers took another unpopular position this week, this time charging  that New York City's new high school for immigrants violates its students' civil rights by segregating them.
A few weeks before, Mr.
Meyers was denouncing  the Million Man March and Louis Farrakhan.
And before that he spoke out about the selection of a new schools chancellor.
And before that. . . .


Corrections
An article yesterday about an E-mail prank at Cornell University referred incorrectly to the status of the four freshmen who sent the message "75 reasons  why women should not have freedom of speech." The university is investigating complaints of sexual harassment and misuse of computer resources; it has not brought charges against the four.
Because of an editing error, the article referred imprecisely to comments by  the university's judicial administrator, Barbara Krause.
She spoke in general about the campus code of conduct, not specifically about the E-mail case.


CHRYSLER TO ADD INCENTIVES TO SOME RAM TRUCKS
The Chrysler Corporation said yesterday that it would add sales incentives to some of its popular 1995 and 1996 model Dodge Ram pickup trucks.
Chrysler said the offer was a $400 cash rebate on Ram trucks with 5.2 liter V-8 engines.
Rams  with 5.9 liter V-8 engines have a $400 cash incentive and an additional discount of $270.
Ram trucks with 5.9 liter Cummins turbo diesel engines will be offered  with a $500 incentive.
The incentives are effective through Dec. 31.


Son of Cancer Patient Says Family Sought the Best Care
Rajeswari Ayyappan has been in a listless and disconnected state since returning to India, sleeping long hours and unable to read or conduct meaningful conversations, her son said today.
Mrs.
Ayyappan is the cancer patient who underwent a botched operation in May for a brain tumor at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
"We thought it was the best hospital, and we thought they would take good care of our mother," Satish Ayyappan, 27, a computer engineer, said when he was  reached by telephone at the family home in Madras.
"It was a great blunder done  by such a big hospital."


Stern Joins Talks With Referees
Representatives of the National Basketball Association and its locked-out referees will continue to negotiate on a new contract today after a four-hour session yesterday at the league's office in Manhattan.
Commissioner DAVID STERN  participated directly in negotiations for the first time, and the referees hoped his presence would help lead to a settlement.


U.S. Panel Gives Penn Station Renovation Plans a Lift
The plan to renovate Pennsylvania Station, which seemed in grave danger earlier this year, took its biggest step forward today, when a joint committee of Congress gave its official blessing to the project and pitched in another $26 million in Federal money.
Several members of Congress from New York said today's action virtually assured the full Federal commitment to the $315 million project.
Congress has now pledged more than three-quarters of the $100 million Federal share toward the renovation of the existing station under Madison Square Garden and its extension to the grand James A. Farley Post Office building, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Torretta Is Signed by the 49ers
GINO TORRETTA, the 1992 Heisman Trophy winner from the University of Miami who has never thrown a pass in an N.F.L. game, has been signed by the San Francisco 49ers.
The 25-year-old quarterback was waived by the Detroit Lions in  September. (AP)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Bones in China Put New Light on Old Humans
Discoveries of bones and stone tools in a cave in central China have provided compelling evidence that human ancestors began their global migrations out of Africa much earlier than once thought -- at least 1.9 million years ago.
Digging in clay and gravel deposits in the cave, Chinese paleontologists came upon a fragment of lower jaw with a molar and adjacent premolar and also an isolated incisor.
The teeth resembled those of extremely early human ancestors not previously known to have reached Asia.
The same sediments yielded a spherical cobble hammerstone and a large battered flake that appeared to be the  type of tools associated with especially primitive human forerunners.


Essay;His Third Left Turn
Congress and the President are locked in a genuine ideological struggle.
Let's try to puzzle out the reason the impasse came to pass.
On taking office in 1993, the previously centrist Clinton made a surprise "lurch to the left," raising taxes and proposing new spending.
When his popularity plunged and Presidency teetered, he hastily moved back toward the middle.


Currents;Job for Vermeer: Interior Decorator
A NEW exhibition of paintings by Vermeer that opened Sunday at the National Gallery of Art in Washington is one for the "Where Design Ideas Come From" file.
Many contemporary designers, stylists and photographers turn for inspiration  to the sunlight-raked rooms of Vermeer's oil paintings.
The artist's freeze-frame portraits of homes in 17th-century Holland are painstakingly accessorized with an insouciantly tossed blanket here, a sloppy pile of books there.
They are prescient of images that permeate modern media, from home-interest magazines to Saturn automobile advertisements to "N.Y.P.D. Blue" episodes.


Basketball;Stifling Defense Sets Up Rally
If the Nets ever played a perfect quarter in the history of their often troubled franchise, the third quarter of tonight's game with the Charlotte Hornets was it.
Trailing by 14 points after a lethargic first half, the Nets put together a marvelous 12 minutes, outscoring the Hornets by a whopping 31-9 and cruising to  a 90-79 victory that kept them unbeaten in three games at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KILLEARN PROPERTIES INC., a real estate concern, said its directors had rejected an unsolicited bid from Digital Communications Technology Corp., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to acquire up to an 80 percent stake of the company for about  $9.2 million.


Nixon-Kennedy Move Over! The TV Debate Finds Poland
American-style presidential debates are a new phenomenon in Poland, and at the end of the second and last one tonight, it was clear who won on the screen.
The incumbent, Lech Walesa, 52, the brave and flamboyant union leader of the  1980's who appeared such a pillar of strength in the West, looked like an injured fighter, scrapping for points.


UMAX DATA OF TAIWAN IN APPLE CLONE DEAL
Apple Computer Inc. said yesterday that it would permit UMAX Data Systems, a  maker of computer equipment that is based in Taiwan, to make clones of Apple's Macintosh computers in Asia and later in the United States.
The deal, announced  at the Comdex computer trade show in Las Vegas, Nev., is the second major licensing agreement reached by Apple, which is based in Cupertino, Calif.
Earlier this year the company signed licensing agreements with two small companies based in Silicon Valley, the Power Computing Corporation and Radius Inc.
Apple, I.B.M. and Motorola Inc. also announced a common hardware standard that will enable a computer to use a variety of operating systems, including the Macintosh OS, Microsoft NT and I.B.M.
OS/2.
Volume shipments of computers with the new standard, known as the common hardware reference platform, are not expected for another year.


Pro Football;Nashville Expecting Oilers
A three-hour meeting today helped clear the final roadblocks to relocate the  Houston Oilers to Tennessee, Nashville Mayor Phil Bredesen said.
"We have cleared up everything; we have a deal," Bredesen said after returning from Houston.
Bredesen met with the Oilers' owner, Bud Adams, in Houston and said they would sign the deal Thursday morning.


A Little Snow Must Fall


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-15


Killers Executed in Missouri and Virginia
A 33-year-old Missouri man was executed by injection early Wednesday for beating his grandmother and leaving her to die in her burning home in 1985.


Uncapping New Ideas For U.S. Oil;Teamwork in the Fields Helps Industry Rebound
For most of his 30 years as a field worker in the huge Kern River oilfield of Texaco Inc., Charley Johnson had to go through a chain of managers before beginning repairs on any one of the 4,700 wells.
Often, it would take him days to bring a malfunctioning well back to peak production.
Today, those delays are a thing of the past.
"Now I determine that a pump is  going bad and start the work on my own," said Mr.
Johnson, who maintains production of 36 wells.
If he needs backup or advice, he decides for himself which of the 349 workers and managers at the oilfield, the nation's fifth largest, to call on his two-way radio.


Postal Service to Test Phone Card Business
The United States Postal Service has decided to try its hand at selling prepaid telephone cards.
In a joint effort with American Express, the card will  be tested in eight cities over the next 18 months, the Postal Service said on Monday.
Originating in Europe, where most postal services also operate telecommunications service, phone cards have become increasingly popular in the  United States, where they are sold by private companies.


Baseball;Showalter Officially Takes Office In Arizona
PHOENIX, Nov. 15 -- Quickly putting 19 years in the Yankees' organization behind him, Buck Showalter put on the brand-new purple pinstripe uniform shirt of the Arizona Diamondbacks today and began an unprecedented seven-year contract as their manager.
Jerry Colangelo, the team's chairman and chief executive officer, introduced  Showalter in a news conference at the America West Arena, two hours before Colangelo's National Basketball Association team played Denver and two and a half years before his baseball team would play anyone.


TIME MAGAZINE WILL SWITCH TO COMPUSERVE
Compuserve Inc. said today that Time magazine had signed an exclusive agreement to leave America Online Inc. and join Compuserve, the No. 2 on-line service behind America Online.
Time said it would create a news service on Compuserve early next year.
The service will be continually updated during the day with breaking news and will include photos and graphics.
Terms of the agreement were not available.
The agreement is a coup for Compuserve, a unit of H &amp; R Block Inc. that has 3.6 million customers.
The switch marks the second  time in six months that America Online has lost a news source to a rival on-line service.
NBC left America Online earlier this year for the Microsoft Corporation's new on-line service.


T.V.A. to Restart Reactor
The Tennessee Valley Authority received approval today to restart a second reactor at the Browns Ferry nuclear plant in northern Alabama, more than a decade after it was shut down for safety.
The decision came after a two-hour meeting last week in which the agency's staff and T.V.A. officials assured the commission that the reactor, which has not been used since 1985, could be restarted and run safely.


Treasuries Little Changed As the Fed Lets Rates Stand
Treasury prices were little changed yesterday as the Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged.
While the outcome of the Fed's policy-committee meeting was expected, it did  hold down prices by turning the market's attention back to the impasse on the Federal budget and debt limit, as well as to the next Federal Open Market Committee policy meeting.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Dancing Bears, Santa And Rock-and-Roll "The 1995 Christmas Spectacular" Radio City Music Hall


Treasury Secretary Takes a Risk to Sidestep an Even Bigger One: U.S. Default
When Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin started plotting the Administration strategy for sidestepping the national debt limit, one priority was uppermost in his mind: extracting President Clinton from the pincer created by Republicans in Congress, who were trying to force a choice between adopting the Republican agenda and risking national default.
Today Mr.
Rubin found a way.
He reached deep into two Government trust funds  -- far deeper and probably for far longer than any of his predecessors ever did  -- to create room under the nation's $4.9 billion debt ceiling for more borrowing.
To do so, he drew on a law written by the Reagan Administration, which in 1986 was trying to make sure that Democrats then in control of Congress did not do to the White House what Republicans have been trying to do to Mr.
Clinton.
Mr.
Rubin chose that route to avoid a political land mine: the 1986 law guarantees that Congress will restore any interest lost in the financial manipulations.


Mixing Punch Lines and Politics
Joey Novick, a professional standup comedian who was elected to the Flemington Town Council 18 months ago, gave a seminar on political humor yesterday at the state League of Municipalities convention.
A sample one-liner, according to the A.P.: "When Will Rogers said he never met a man he didn't like, he wasn't in politics." Mr.
Novick did note the relationship between humor and political success.
Presidents Kennedy and Reagan were funny, he said, but President Ford and Vice President Quayle were not.


Shell to Go Ahead With Gas Plant in Nigeria Despite Protests
Royal Dutch/Shell confirmed today that it intends to participate in a $3.8 billion natural gas plant in Nigeria despite the political repression that has raised an outcry against the Government.
Officials of the petroleum conglomerate said it was not clear when negotiations on the project would conclude but that a formal pact could be signed soon, perhaps before the end of the year.
They disputed criticism that such a deal amounted to a passive endorsement of the crackdown on political dissent.


Inquiry Into Calvin Klein Ads Is Dropped
The Justice Department has decided not to prosecute the fashion designer Calvin Klein for a series of jeans ads showing young models striking suggestive  poses.


World News Briefs;Britain Jails Designer Of Computer Viruses
The first person in Britain to be convicted of creating and planting computer viruses was jailed today for 18 months after being prosecuted under the 1990 Computer Misuse Act.
The defendant, Christopher Pile, a 26-year-old computer expert, dubbed himself the Black Baron and copied computer programs and games before infecting  them with a virus and putting them back into computer networks.
They were picked up by users of the Internet, who infected their own systems.


Czech Republic Signs Refinery Sale Accord
Three foreign oil companies agreed today to pay $173 million for a 49 percent stake in the Czech Republic's oil refineries and to invest $480 million over five years.
ENI's AGIP S.p.A. of Italy; Conoco Inc. of Houston, which is owned by Du Pont, and the Royal Dutch/Shell Group signed an agreement with the Czech Government after more than three years of negotiations and the sudden departure  in June of a fourth partner, Total S.A. of France.
The agreement is particularly timely in view of the expected opening early next year of the Ingolstadt pipeline connecting the Czech Republic with Germany, which will allow the Czech refineries to diversify their oil sources.
Currently, the country is dependent entirely on Russian oil.


State Drops Towing Regulation
Language that allowed the towing of unregistered vehicles from private property is being eliminated from the state's new vehicles emissions inspection  standards, said Robert C. Shinn Jr., Commissioner for the Department of Environmental Protection.
Mr.
Shinn issued the clarification of the regulations  in response to a letter from Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian.
Mr.
Haytaian had expressed concern about the legal technicality allowing vehicles with expired registrations to be towed.
The Conservative Party had complained that older vehicles were most likely to fail the state's new tough emission standards that  go into effect January 1997.


Dow Climbs Past 4,900 for First Time With a 50.94 Surge
The Dow Jones industrial average soared past 4,900 for the first time yesterday, and the broader-based Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index also set a record.
Benign news on inflation put traders in a buying mood, even though the Federal Reserve took no action on cutting interest rates at yesterday's meeting  of its Federal Open Market Committee and the debt squabble in Washington was unresolved.
In addition, four rounds of computer-guided "buy" orders in advance  of tomorrow's double-witching options expiration helped push the stock market upward late in the day.


More Police Officers Sought
State Senator Wayne R. Bryant, a Camden Democrat, is asking the Legislature to appropriate $28 million a year to hire 500 additional state police officers to help patrol cities like Camden.
This week, Camden's homicide rate surpassed its earlier record of 50, and another slaying yesterday pushed the toll to 52.
The city earlier had asked for the state police patrols, but was turned down by  the Whitman administration.
Under legislation introduced by Senator Bryant, the  state police would supplement local police and could remain in a municipality for up to two years.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI ACTS TO RAISE OFFICIALS' SALARIES Mayor Giuliani moved to give himself and other city elected officials raises of  up to 28 percent, instantly infuriating union leaders whose members -- making an average salary one-third that of the Mayor -- are being asked to accept a two-year wage freeze.
The Mayor, whose salary would increase to $165,000 from $130,000, said the increases were necessary because elected officials had not had a raise in eight years.
He also said he would soon propose another broad package of raises for city commissioners and managers. [Page A1.] 'SYSTEMIC' PROBLEMS AT SLOAN-KETTERING The state Health Department said "systemic deficiencies" at one of the nation's  leading cancer centers, Memorial Sloan-Kettering in Manhattan, led a surgeon to  operate on the wrong side of a patient's brain last May.
In a scathing report, state health officials said that the hospital had missed a number of opportunities to prevent the error, and that its staff had failed to follow the  most basic medical procedures, like reviewing the patient's medical history and  diagnostic reports. [A1.]


Rene Wellek, 92, a Professor Of Comparative Literature, Dies
Rene Wellek, the Yale professor who schooled, scolded, impressed and inspired a generation of literary scholars, died on Friday at a nursing home in Hamden, Conn.
He was 92 and widely regarded as a founder of the study of comparative literature in the United States.
Known as a walking encyclopedia, Mr.
Wellek simply read so many more books and scholarly papers in so many more languages than anyone else -- and remembered so much of it -- that to engage him in scholarly discourse was to risk not only being outflanked by his vast scholarship but also being skewered by his precise mind.


British Home Builders To Swap Some Assets
Tarmac P.L.C. agreed yesterday to swap its housing business for the minerals  and construction businesses of a rival, George Wimpey P.L.C., in a reshuffling of the British construction and home building industries.
The transaction involves about L640 million ($992 million) in assets.
After the swap, Wimpey will be the leading British home builder, with about 10 percent of the market.
Tarmac, meanwhile, will have the largest share of the British minerals market, with about 25 percent.


Baseball;Yanks Accused of Tampering
The Hiroshima Toyo Carp of the Japanese Central League complained to Major League Baseball yesterday that the Yankees have tampered with a pitcher from the Dominican Republic who the Carp say is under contract with them.
The Carp asked the commissioner's office to investigate the circumstances in  which contact was made between the Yankees and Don Nomura, the agent for Robinson Checo, a rookie who was 15-8 with a 2.74 earned run average this season.


Slovaks Further Curb Use of Hungarian Language
Parliament today passed new curbs on the use of the Hungarian language despite fierce opposition from leaders of the 600,000 citizens of Hungarian descent and a warning from Prime Minister Gyula Horn of Hungary.
The law stipulates that all public employees must speak Slovak and that public ceremonies, except weddings, will be allowed only in Slovak.


CHRONICLE
MANDY PATINKIN was preparing to perform his one-man show, "Mandy Patinkin in  Concert," at the McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J., on Tuesday when he noticed DAVID GRAND, a Princeton University senior, sitting near his dressing room.
Student and star started talking, and as Mr.
Grand related it yesterday: "I told him I was auditioning for the Triangle Club's Christmas tour and asked if he might sing in my audition in my place. Instead, he had me sing my song for him standing there in the hallway and then asked if I and my friends knew any Triangle song that we could all go on stage with and sing."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about the New York lawyer  Simon H. Rifkind misspelled the surname of a surviving son.
He is Robert S. Rifkind, not Rifkin.


Lost in Land of Welfare: Some Travelers' Tales
In his 33 years, Chris Jordan has been a high school football star and a soldier.
He has earned good money as a machinist and nickels and dimes washing windshields in the winter wind.
He has been homeless and barely able to survive  on food stamps and faded hope.
Up or down, he always hung onto his pride, and for the last few months, he has traveled from his $85-a-week hotel room in Chicago to wealthy suburbs like Glencoe as a goodwill ambassador from the America of want and worry.


Currents;Whimsical Designs From Ancient Symbols
LAST year, when Vanessa Murphy visited a friend in Bali, she fell in love with the indigenous designs for carved furniture, Buddha heads, temple lamps and altar boxes.
Ms.
Murphy is a freelance interior stylist who has worked for the fashion designer Issey Miyake and directed the New York art-furniture gallery Neotu.
In Bali, she hired artists and furniture makers to create a line of indoor/outdoor home furnishings for her new showroom in TriBeCa.


First Amendment Covers Farrakhan Aide
To the Editor:
York College officials violated First Amendment principles at Black Solidarity Day when they attempted to block Khalid Abdul Muhammad from speaking  (news article, Nov. 7).


Serbs in Eastern Slavonia Feel Betrayed by Belgrade
There are no shortages of victims in this war, and some of the newest ones wandered through this gutted city today with dazed expressions.
This region, Eastern Slavonia, is the last sliver of Croatia still held by Serbs.
The Serbian residents, while not wounded from battle, see themselves as the victims of negotiations that will return the area to the Croats.


2 Towns, Symbols of Serbian Killings, Snag Balkan Talks
The towns of Srebrenica and Zepa are symbols of the Serbian slaughter of Muslim civilians during the Bosnian war.
Now, with the negotiations to end the conflict at a critical phase, the towns have become symbols of the price of peace.
Officials involved in the talks said today that the recovery of Srebrenica and Zepa, eastern Bosnian towns overrun by the Serbs this summer, was among the  territorial demands on which the Muslim-led Bosnian Government has refused to compromise.
The Serbs will not relinquish the towns because they are determined  that their territory adjoining Serbia be as cohesive as possible.


AT HOME WITH: Oleg Cassini;Ducking the Hunters
WOULD you like more coffee?" Oleg Cassini asks me. He looks around his living room, as if one of his servants might magically appear.
"Yes, but I'll get it. There's the pot." On a large silver tray on a nearby table.


Refugee Afghan Women Need Help of Women
To the Editor:
The Women's Commission for Refugee Women and Children is concerned about events in Afghanistan that have led the United Nations and other organizations to keep women employees at home (news article, Nov. 8).


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;On-line services are venturing into unexplored territory as they try to establish their brand names.
LIKE branding a steer, a branding campaign in advertising seeks to separate the advertised product or service from the herd.
But are America Online's new television commercials outstanding or simply egregious?
Consider this ad: As the spooky and majestic theme music from the film "2001: A Space Odyssey" grows louder in the background, a monkey's paw is seen pushing  a computer mouse.
The paw double-clicks on icons and the computer screen sputters and shifts.
Does this mean the killer ape from "2001" has traded in his bone for a killer application?


King Jury Focuses on Chavez
The jury in Don King's wire fraud trial yesterday heard readbacks of testimony from Julio Cesar Chavez that said the promoter never told the boxer of an insurance recovery after a Chavez bout was canceled in 1991.
In testimony read aloud by a court reporter at United States District Court in Manhattan, Chavez said King promised to pay a $400,000 legal bill to extricate the boxer from a promotional deal he signed with Bob Arum.
Had King not agreed to pay the bill, Chavez testified, "I wouldn't have gone back to Don  King."


Collisions Of East And West
Several years ago, recalls Ping Chong in an anecdote he tells at the beginning of his performance collage, "Chinoiserie," he was taken out for dinner at a Chinese Restaurant called the Peking Palace.
In the middle of the meal, his hostess, oblivious that her guest was of Chinese descent, remarked, "Why don't they use knives and forks?"
Although Mr.
Chong was deeply offended, out of politeness he said nothing.
But the memory still rankles.
"I wonder who she thought 'they' are," he muses drily.


BATTLE OVER THE BUDGET: THE VOTERS  The Sharp Fault Line That Separates Clinton's and the G.O.P.'s Supporters; In Georgia, Some Dislike Help U.S. Gives to the Poor
Larry Petro hunched over the 105-year-old clock a customer had brought into his shop, Old Times.
"This is a good, old piece of Americana, but this clock has been abused," he  said, shaking his head at the timepiece's gunk-caked, brass and steel innards.
"People have just been pouring oil on it to keep it going rather than repairing
it and you can't do that any more."


Two Sentenced in Carjacking
Two teen-agers from Montclair received stiff prison terms yesterday for the shooting and carjacking of a 65-year-old woman last March.
Hassan Cousins, 18, was sentenced to 34 years in prison and Earl Bethel, 19, to 30 years.
The two pleaded guilty to shooting Sheila Gillespie in a carjacking in her driveway in West Caldwell.
She lost sight in one eye.


Lawsuit Claims Bias by Housing Authority
Three groups representing black and Hispanic residents of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, filed suit against the New York City Housing Authority yesterday, seeking information about the ethnicity of tenants who receive Federal rent subsidies in nine privately owned buildings.
The Housing Authority administers the Federal rent-subsidy program in the city, known as Section 8, in which people who cannot afford the market rate for  private apartments receive 70 percent of their rent.


Economic Scene;Do tax cuts raise revenue? The supply-side war continues.
FISCAL conservatism is in: Polls show that most Americans are willing to forgo tax cuts to balance the budget.
But supply-side economics, the good-news gospel that equated low tax rates with high tax revenues and rapid growth, is still alive and kicking.
And the economists delivering the latest variation on the theme are hardly wild-eyed evangelicals.
One is Martin S. Feldstein, a Harvard professor and former adviser to President Ronald Reagan who ironically was hounded from the White House by supply-side zealots.
The other is Daniel R. Feenberg, a widely respected expert  on tax data.
Their study, released by the nonpartisan National Bureau of Economic Research, calculates that raising the taxes of the rich in 1993 collected just one-third of the revenues expected if taxpayers had not changed their economic behavior.


Daniel McLain, 40, A Country Musician
Daniel McLain, who called himself Country Dick Montana as the drummer and singer for the Beat Farmers, a country-rock band, died on Nov. 8 after collapsing onstage at the Longhorn Saloon in Whistler, B. C. He was 40 and lived in San Diego.
The cause was an aneurysm, said a spokeswoman for Bar None Records.


Conferees Drop Plan to Tax Indian Casinos
Congressional negotiators have agreed to kill a proposed tax on Indian casinos that would have raised $345 million to help balance the Federal budget.
The House-Senate conference committee working on the final details of a balanced-budget measure dropped the casino tax over the weekend at the insistence of Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, said a Congressional aide who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Ivax and Hafslund Nycomed Call Off Merger Agreement
With at least three large Norwegian institutional shareholders standing in opposition, the Ivax Corporation and Hafslund Nycomed of Norway announced yesterday the termination of a merger agreement that would have created a generic drug company with $2.5 billion in combined annual sales.
Even as they laid aside plans to merge, the two companies said they had agreed to enter into a number of licensing and collaboration agreements.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


SFX PLANS TO ACQUIRE LIBERTY BROADCASTING
SFX Broadcasting Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Liberty Broadcasting Inc., an operator of 19 radio stations, for $223 million as part of a plan to expand in big radio markets.
In a related, tax-free transaction, SFX will spin off 11 of the stations to Multi-Market Radio Inc. for $100 million.
SFX will keep WXTR-FM, WXVR-FM and WQSI-AM, serving Washington; WHFS-FM, serving Baltimore and Washington, and WBAB-FM, WHFM-FM, WBLI-FM and WGBB-AM, serving Long Island.
Multi-Market will acquire WMXB-FM in Richmond; WHCN-FM, WMRQ-FM and WPOP-AM in Hartford; WSNE-FM, WHJY-FM and WHJJ-AM in Providence, R.I., and WGNA-FM, WPYX-FM, WGNA-AM and WTRY-AM in Albany.


Pro Football;Giants' Simple Plan For the Eagles: Hit Hard
The Giants usually work out in shoulder pads and shorts.
Today they practiced in full pads for the first time since training camp.
The new attitude is part of Dan Reeves's desire for the Giants to be more aggressive and get back to basics.
Execute a simpler game plan.
Play with an attitude.
Those are the themes of the week.


Hate Crimes Declined in 1994, F.B.I. Says
The Federal Bureau of Investigation says hate crimes reported to the police in 1994 had declined, with the number of murders dropping to 13 from 20.
The bureau said on Monday that 5,852 hate crime incidents were reported last  year, compared with 7,684 in 1993.
But officials cautioned against precise year-to-year comparisons because not all the police departments that reported in 1993 did so again in 1994.
Moreover, although slightly more police departments reported last year, they still covered only 58 percent of the nation's population.


Olympic Sites For U.S. Soccer
The United States men's soccer team will play its first-round matches of the  1996 Atlanta Olympic Games in Birmingham, Ala., and Washington, and the women's  team will play its first-round matches in Florida, two in Orlando and one in Miami.
The Olympic field is composed of 16 men's teams and 8 women's teams.
The Americans have qualified automatically as the host nation, and the other countries will be determined by May.
Women will compete in soccer in the Olympics for the first time.


SHARES OF FORMER I.B.M. UNIT RISE 8% ON FIRST DAY
Shares of Lexmark International Inc., formerly a unit of the International Business Machines Corporation, rose yesterday as they traded for the first time.
The stock closed at $21.625, in trading of 5.85 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, after being offered at $20 a share.
Lexmark's offering totaled 17 million shares.
The company makes laser and inkjet computer printers and related products.
In addition to its own line of printers, Lexmark makes supplies for I.B.M.'s line of printers, as well as typewriters and typewriter supplies sold under the I.B.M. name.


Bomb Disabled in Boston
Police officers used a water cannon today to disable a small bomb at the world headquarters of the Christian Science Church in downtown Boston.
The authorities were called to the church's headquarters after the discovery of a package containing a bottle of liquid attached to wires leading to the back of a metal box.


Prudential Sets Big Revamping To Reduce Costs
The Prudential Insurance Company of America, laboring under weak and erratic  profits in recent years, announced a big reorganization yesterday that it expected would reduce costs by $800 million annually, within 18 months.
The restructuring, effective immediately, will place more centralized control over businesses that in the past had operated more independently, with costly layers of managers and duplicated expenses.


Man Finds Family Dead
A Warren man discovered the bodies of his wife and their two small children in a car in the family garage this afternoon, the state police said.
The police had not ruled whether the deaths were accidents or homicides, pending autopsies  Thursday.
The bodies of Penny Thompson, 33, a school bus driver, Shelby Lynn Thompson, 4, and Morgan Thompson, 2, were found after 5 P.M. by William Thompson as he returned home.


Editorial Notebook;Hong Kong's Future
Hong Kong residents like to talk about their insurance policies, but not the  types that cover cars, homes or health.
In Hong Kong, insurance means protection against China.
The most popular policy is a foreign passport.
The transfer of Hong Kong from Britain to China on July 1, 1997, promises to  be a great test of China's maturity as a world power.
If China takes possession  of Hong Kong while letting the city retain its entrepreneurial spirit, fair judiciary, free press and incipient democracy, Beijing will reassure a world wary of its Communist leaders.
If China erases the rule of law in Hong Kong and  strangles civil liberties, the city's commercial energy may not survive and China's place among nations will be compromised.


COLUMBIA GAS REORGANIZATION PLAN APPROVED
A Federal Bankruptcy Court approved reorganization plans yesterday under which Columbia Gas System Inc. and its pipeline subsidiary will emerge from more than four years of bankruptcy protection.
Columbia Gas's chief financial officer, Michael W. O'Donnell, said a combined payout to creditors of $7.5 billion could begin as early as Nov. 27.
Columbia Gas, based in Wilmington, Del., and its pipeline subsidiary, Columbia Gas Transmission, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in July 1991 to escape gas-purchase contracts that were signed when gas prices were much higher.
As part of the reorganization, the pipeline subsidiary worked out a $1.2 billion settlement with most of the gas suppliers, who had contended that their rejected contracts  were worth as much as $25 billion.


Terror Poses Threat to Turnout As Algerians Go to Polls Today
Against a backdrop of bombing attacks and the deployment of 200,000 troops across Algeria, the main suspense in the presidential election on Thursday is how many voters will go to the polls despite threats by armed militants to "turn ballot boxes into coffins."
President Liamine Zeroual is almost certain to win a five-year term, in large part because two major political parties representing Islamic groups and secular groups have called for a boycott of what they consider a farce staged by the military-dominated Government to remain in power.


Aristide Critics See Intimidation As Pre-Election Violence Flares
Mob violence against suspected opponents of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide  has flared in the last week, and some of the Haitian leader's critics say the violence is intended to intimidate them as the Dec. 17 presidential elections approach.
Seven people have been killed and 10 wounded by mobs since gunmen killed a pro-Aristide congressman last week.
At least six victims were believed to have collaborated with the military Government that killed 4,000 people during President Aristide's three-year exile.


Powell and the Press
How quickly Gen.
Colin L. Powell has disappeared from television and the news pages.
The elite political observers who so confidently predicted he would run for President are now confidently making predictions about other things.
What's  surprising is not that he chose not to run but how close he came to running.
He had never sought office, had not said he would run and had not asked anyone to drum up support for a candidacy.
I am certainly familiar with the issues surrounding a candidacy: finding the  much-touted "fire in the belly," which demands total emotional commitment every  waking moment; throwing your privacy and your family's out the window, and establishing an effective political operation to raise enough money and attract  thousands of committed volunteers.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Recognition Of Today's Music Frederica von Stade Carnegie Hall


State Cancels Lease for 'Extreme Fighting'
The "extreme fighting" match scheduled to take place in the Brooklyn Armory on Saturday took a drop kick to the head yesterday when state military officials canceled its lease for the facility, saying the bare-knuckled contest "is not in the best interest of the state."
The decision by the Division of Military and Naval Affairs, which oversees the state's armories, cast doubt on whether New York City would see its first extreme fighting tournament, a series of matches in which two men pummel each other until one is knocked unconscious or beaten into submission, all to the delight of live and pay-per-view audiences.


Rams' Slater Calling It a Career
JACKIE SLATER, the St.
Louis Rams' offensive tackle, was placed on injured reserve yesterday with a left-elbow problem, effectively ending his 20-year career.
At age 41, Slater was the oldest player in the N.F.L.
Sunday's game was No. 259, fourth on the career list.
Slater is the only player in league history to play 20 years for the same team. (AP)


New York's Top Lawyer Has the Right Idea;The People Will Lose
To the Editor:
As a former New York State assistant attorney general, I give you my special  thanks for your Nov. 10 news article.
This is not to defend Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco's massacre of the able staff he inherited from his predecessor,  but the Democratic Attorney General Robert Abrams can and should be given credit for introducing patronage, albeit not of the political sort, into what should and must be a nonpartisan office based on nothing but merit.


ILLINOIS CENTRAL SEEKS TO ACQUIRE 3 RAIL LINES
The Illinois Central Corporation said yesterday that it wanted to acquire three lines of the Southern Pacific Rail Corporation near the Gulf of Mexico because of the Union Pacific Corporation's proposed $4 billion acquisition of Southern Pacific.
Illinois Central said it had filed with the Interstate Commerce Commission to buy Southern Pacific lines between Memphis and Dallas; Houston and Brownsville, Texas; and New Orleans and Houston.
Illinois Central said it would seek to buy the lines if the Interstate Commerce Commission determined that the merger agreement between Union Pacific and Southern Pacific  was anti-competitive.


Daily News Folds Spanish Paper, Citing Cost and Circulation Woes
El Daily News, the Spanish newspaper begun by The Daily News in June, published for the last time yesterday.
Plagued by distribution difficulties, rising newsprint costs and anemic circulation, El Daily News was portrayed by Fred Drasner, the co-publisher of The Daily News, as one more problem for the company, which is building a new printing plant in Jersey City.


Banning Box -Cutters
The New York City Council's move to regulate the commercial sale of box cutters should dramatically improve school security.
Box cutters, which generally have small, retractable blades encased in metal or plastic coverings,  have increasingly become the weapon of choice among students.
During the 1994-95 school year, some 2,200 box cutters were seized by the Board of Education's division of school safety.
But this did not stop the rise in violent incidents involving box cutters.
This increase persuaded Ramon Cortines, then Schools Chancellor, to urge the Council to step in and regulate them.


Reflections on Luck and Lucking Out
LUCK: The Brilliant Randomness of Everyday Life By Nicholas Rescher 237 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.


CBS TV Station Resumes Showing Anti-Smoking Ad
A television station here owned by CBS Inc. has reversed its position and resumed broadcasting a commercial against smoking that is sponsored by the State of California.
KCBS-TV decided last week to discontinue the commercial, which depicts a tobacco executive as a fisherman trying to hook smokers.
The commercial had been running for five weeks before the station pulled it, citing implicit questions the ad may have raised as to whether tobacco companies spike cigarettes with additional nicotine.
Tobacco companies deny that contention.


Accounts
*
Mercury Marine, Fond du Lac, Wis., a division of the Brunswick Corp., to Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee, to handle its consolidated Mercury and Mariner outboard-motor brand accounts, previously divided between Campbell Mithun Esty,  Minneapolis, which handled the Mercury brand, and Martin/Williams, Minneapolis,  which handled the Mariner brand.
Combined billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Wilke Lexus Inc., Philadelphia, to Altus Group, Philadelphia, to handle its account, previously handled by Reimel Carter Inc., Philadelphia.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, to Publicis/Bloom, Dallas,  a unit of Publicis S.A., as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Lear Seating Corp., Southfield, Mich., to Straightline International, New York, as the first agency of record to handle marketing and corporate communications for the automotive interior supplier.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Heinz USA, Pittsburgh, a unit of the H. J. Heinz Company, to Gaskell Associates, Westport, Conn., to handle promotions for Heinz ketchup, group events and trade marketing, previously handled by the Langworth Pantel Group, White Plains.
The billings were not disclosed.


Remember Who Built Those German Plants
To the Editor:
"Dow Chemical Gets Go-Ahead in East Germany" (Business Day, Nov. 9) reports that a petrochemical complex called Buna is to be rejuvenated by Dow with a gift of $6.7 billion from the German Government.


At AT&amp;T, Nerves on Edge but Few Signs of Gloom
With the adroitness of the world's largest communications company, AT&amp;T reached around the world today to deliver "voluntary termination" notices to 77,800 managers.
Thick envelopes containing the buyout offer went by overnight mail to reach managers on vacation in Europe or on sun-splashed beaches.
It went to the homes  of those who were out sick and followed women on maternity leave.


Mystery Donor Gives $15 Million To Public Library
The New York Public Library has received $15 million, the largest one-time gift in its history, from an unidentified donor to renovate the Main Reading Room at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
The grand, imposing space has been used by  several generations of writers and scholars -- Alfred Kazin, Marianne Moore and  Leon Trotsky among them -- who have read and worked at the carved wooden tables  designed by Carrere &amp; Hastings, under light from antique Tiffany lamps.
Marshall Rose, the real estate developer who has served as the library's board chairman since 1990, said the gift was announced at a board meeting yesterday.
At that meeting, Elizabeth F. Rohatyn was named Mr.
Rose's successor  as chairman.
Mrs.
Rohatyn, who has worked as a volunteer for several educational organizations, is the wife of Felix G. Rohatyn, senior partner at Lazard Freres  and a former chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation.


On Welfare, a Worse Sky Is Falling
To the Editor:
As a thought experiment, let me undertake to agree with Charles Murray's "Welfare Hysteria" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14), with its subheading "Liberals say the sky is falling. But they didn't see it fall the first time."


The Pop Life
City Hall proclaimed Monday to be Sonny Rollins Day.
No one in the jazz world is really sure why: maybe it is because Sonny Rollins is one of the most influential tenor saxophonists born in Manhattan, or maybe it's because he has become legendary for spending most of his days in 1959 and 1960 on the Williamsburg Bridge regaling the island with his playing.
Mr.
Rollins, who is to play at the Beacon Theater on Saturday night, accepted the honor at City Hall with a mixture of pride and reservation.
"I made a few jokes about using the proclamation they gave me to get on the subway for half price," he said, speaking by telephone on Tuesday.
"At one point in my life, recognition was very important because it was essential to being able to get gigs and so forth. I'm not going to look a gift horse in the mouth and I appreciate the recognition of the music, but if I didn't know that Monday was Sonny Rollins Day, I wouldn't have done anything differently."


Les Horvath, 74, Heisman Winner
Les Horvath, a multipurpose back at Ohio State who won the Heisman Trophy in  1944 as college football's best player, died at his home in Glendale, Calif., on Tuesday.
He was 74.
Horvath, who was graduated in 1945 with a degree in dentistry, was the first  of four Ohio State players to win the Heisman, leading the Buckeyes to a 9-0 record in 1944.
He played quarterback, halfback and defensive back, accounting for 1,248 yards.


Israeli Police Hold Student As a Plotter Against Rabin
The Israeli police today detained another person suspected of complicity in the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin but released the head of a militant organization who had been accused of knowing about the assassination in advance.
The police said the new suspect, Margalit Har-Sheffey, a resident of a West Bank settlement called Beit El, was a "dominant part" of a group that may have plotted to kill Mr.
Rabin.
Miss Har-Sheffey, 20, is a student at Bar-Ilan University, where the confessed assassin, Yigal Amir, was also a student.


Democrats to Get Bill for Gore's Halloween
The Democratic National Committee has agreed to reimburse the Walt Disney Company for costumes that Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, wore for  Halloween.
Mr.
Gore's spokeswoman, Lorraine Voles, said today that Mr.
Gore had made the arrangements after the party when he realized that Disney had provided the costumes from "Beauty and the Beast" and a makeup artist from Los Angeles.


New York's Top Lawyer Has the Right Idea
To the Editor:


Boycott by Blacks At Holy Cross
Black students at Holy Cross are boycotting athletic and other extracurricular activities after the college's Student Government Association voted to change the Black Student Union's charter.
The Student Government Association voted, 31-21, on Monday to eliminate a clause in the black student group's charter that limited its executive board to  people of African descent, The Telegram &amp; Gazette of Worcester reported today.


Frito-Lay Signs Up Tracy-Locke Again
Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency in Dallas, rejoined Frito-Lay's advertising agency roster yesterday after a three-year absence.
It will handle creative for  undisclosed newly branded products.
The billings were not disclosed.
Lynn Markley, a spokeswoman for Frito-Lay Inc., the domestic snack-food division of Pepsico Inc., in Plano, Tex., said Tracy-Locke had been awarded the assignment without a review.
Though Ms.
Markley declined to provide details, the Daily Fax edition of Advertising Age said the agency's duties could include  work for Frito-Lay's growing line of dips or reduced-fat snacks.


Mayor Said to Back Payroll Tax
An aide to Mayor Bret Schundler said yesterday that the Mayor would not veto  a payroll tax, if the City Council approves an ordinance for the tax that it introduced Monday night in an 8-to-1 vote.
Final approval by the Council could come as early as Nov. 27.
Mayor Schundler, a Republican, first proposed the tax  of 1 percent on quarterly payrolls exceeding $1,999 last winter, but backed away when local businesses strongly objected.
The City Council President, Tom DeGise, a Democrat, continued to support the proposal.
Mayor Schundler has estimated the tax could raise about $20 million annually as an alternative to increasing property taxes or firing city workers.
"At this point, we just can't afford to raise the property tax any more," said Councilwoman Nancy Gaynor.
"You can see the 'for sale' signs up already."


2 Agencies Merge Offices in Florida
Earle Palmer Brown and Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine said yesterday that they had merged their Florida offices to form Yesawich, Pepperdine &amp; Brown.
The  terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Earle Palmer Brown in St.
Petersburg, Fla., with 35 employees, brings in billings estimated at $35 million from clients like the Florida Lottery.
Those billings will be added to those of Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine in Orlando, Fla., with 100 employees and billings estimated at $90 million from clients like Universal Studios and the Doubletree Hotels Corporation.
No client conflicts are expected.


Sports of The Times;Showalter's New Boss Understands
By Jerry Colangelo's watch in Phoeniz, it was one minute after midnight in Pensacola, Fla., which meant Nov. 1 had arrived where Buck Showalter lived.
His  contract as the Yankees' manager had expired and Colangelo, the chairman of baseball's expansion Arizona Diamondbacks who is also the president of basketball's Phoenix Suns, could talk to him about a job.
But when Colangelo phoned, all he heard was an answering machine. He left his number.


Matsushita Reports Loss In Six-Month Period
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, the Japanese electronics conglomerate, reported a huge loss yesterday for the first half of its business  year because of its sale of a majority stake in the American film studio MCA Inc.
Matsushita reported a net loss of 132.9 billion yen ($1.32 billion) for the six months that ended Sept. 30.
The loss from the sale of its 80 percent stake in MCA to the Seagram Company was 164.2 billion yen ($1.63 billion).


Transit Plan Details Ride Of the Future
Three days after it added a quarter to the price of a subway or bus ride, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday gave riders an idea of what a slice of that 25 cents could help pay for: 840 new subway cars, reconstruction of 17 subway stations and computerized signals on the Canarsie line.
The agency released the details of a proposed new capital program, and while  every such proposal is something of a wish list, this one is in more trouble at the outset than its predecessors.
Some of the M.T.A. board members and state  lawmakers who must approve it have charged that it relies too heavily on borrowing and other mechanisms for raising the $7.3 billion it would spend from  1997 to 1999.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Soars Past 4,900; S.&amp; P. 500 Sets Record The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 4,900 for the first time, and the  Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index also set a record.
Benign news on last month's inflation rate put traders in a buying mood.


World News Briefs;Militants Say They Killed Egypt's Envoy in Geneva
A previously unknown militant Islamic group claimed responsibility today for  killing an Egyptian diplomat on Monday in Geneva.
The group, which calls itself the International Justice Group, said it killed the envoy, Ahmed Alaa Nazmi, because he was involved in tracking down Muslim activists.
Mr.
Nazmi, 42, was the commercial counselor in Egypt's diplomatic mission in Switzerland and spent much of his time in negotiations with the World Trade Organization.


In Neighborhood Haven, a Blaze of Fatal Gunfire
For more than 10 years, the bustling Queens bodega run by Marvin Caraballo and his brother Eric was more than just a place where neighbors in Corona could  buy vegetables, cigarettes and fresh meat.
The Caraballos let customers who did not have money simply take the food they needed.
They let a 64-year-old employee, Ramon Rodriguez, live in their small store, called Compadre Grocery.
And they welcomed the nightly visits of a 50-year-old retarded man, Joe Meluzio, who drifted in to bum cigarettes and enjoy some company.


Police Link Taxi Drivers' Deaths
A serial killer may be stalking taxi drivers in Newark.
Since Oct. 20, three  drivers have been robbed and shot to death, their bodies, without shoes and socks, dumped on the road, according to law enforcement officials and a taxi company manager.
Two other drivers have been wounded.
"The similarities are leading investigators to believe that we could have the same individual or individuals involved in these horrible crimes," said one law  enforcement official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
"We're reasonably satisfied that they could be related," Essex County Sheriff Armando B. Fontoura  told The Associated Press yesterday.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Income Tax Returns Falsified
A tax preparer with an office in Jersey City admitted in Federal Court yesterday that he helped file 7,958 fraudulent tax returns to the Internal Revenue Service that resulted in about $17 million in illegal refunds from 1989 to 1994.
Clarence Burnett, 51, of Orange, said the fraudulent refunds, averaging about $2,200 each, came from inflating clients' claims for charitable  contributions, medical expenses and other deductions.
Mr.
Burnett faces up to six years in prison and a $500,000 fine, said Carlos Ortiz, an assistant United  States Attorney.


INSIDE
Reno Has Parkinson's


Reawakened and Resplendent
NEW YORK, that eternal narcissist, never tires of having its picture taken, but insists on periodic changes of backdrop.
Parts of Manhattan go in and out of favor, just as fashions do.
The cast-iron facades of SoHo, the brownstones of the Upper West Side, the crooked alleys of Greenwich Village: different neighborhoods, at various times, have served to represent New York to itself.
They stand for some shift in the city's mood, its view of the present or its desire to escape into some fantasy of change.
This year, the city wants to pose with Chelsea.
It wants to stride along the  Avenue of the Americas, where an influx of superstores have brought to life the  decaying old department-store buildings north of 17th Street.
It wants to firm up its torso at the David Barton Gym, and drape itself in a sheet of Egyptian cotton from Bed, Bath and Beyond.
It longs to don a pair of designer eye frames  from Alain Mikli, assume a studious expression and pluck some Kierkegaard from the shelves at Barnes &amp; Noble.
Later, as the sun sinks into the Hudson River, the city will bask in the glowing fluorescent rainbow of Dan Flavin's light sculptures at the Dia Center for the Arts on West 22d Street, try Rollerblading  at the Chelsea Piers sports complex on the Hudson, and rush the stage for a curtain call at the Joyce Theater.
A late supper at Le Madri or L'Acajou may follow.
Then it will dash over to Duggal photo labs on West 20th Street and wait breathlessly to see how the pix turned out.


The Rangers Go Off Off Broadway
Their winning streak ended two nights before at four games with a 1-1 tie in  St.
Louis.
Their undefeated streak ended tonight at five games with a 3-1 loss to the Chicago Blackhawks in the United Center.
What now awaits the Rangers when they finish a grueling trip Friday night in wintry Winnipeg?
There was plenty of blame to go around during the team's first defeat in 13 days.
One finger could be pointed at Referee Mark Faucette, but his egregious moment wasn't the only reason.


Picasso Shines, Contemporary Artists Don't
The most striking thing about this fall's two weeks of fine-art auctions at Sotheby's and Christie's, which ended Wednesday night, is how far the gulf has widened between the market for Impressionist and modern art and that for contemporary art.
Works by masters like van Gogh and Picasso, Modigliani and Leger sold for multimillion-dollar prices, and enthusiasm from a growing group of serious collectors proved not only how solid this segment of the art market is, but also how much it has grown over the last 18 months.
Contemporary art, on the other hand, is still recovering from a five-year slump.
This market, too, is growing, but in baby steps.
Because its collectors are generally younger, auction houses rarely get prized estate property that includes contemporary art.


Paper Factory Burns


Joints Chiefs Tap General As Top Aide
The Defense Department has selected Gen.
Joseph W. Ralston of the Air Force to be the next Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the military's second-highest job, Pentagon officials said today.
General Ralston would succeed Adm.
William A. Owens next February, when the admiral retires to become vice chairman of the Science Applications International Corporation, a high-technology company in San Diego.


Devils' Late Recovery Only Good for a Tie
For the second time in three nights, the Devils faced a goaltender making his first appearance this season in the National Hockey League.
Against Hartford two nights ago, they scored one goal and it was enough for a victory.
Against Boston tonight, they scored two goals, and it barely got them a tie.
In their first visit to the Fleet Center, the Bruins' new home, the Devils played like a polite guest in the first two periods.
They fell behind by two goals, but they recovered well in the third period, when goals by Rickard Persson at 3 minutes 9 seconds and Valery Zelepukin with 3:04 left sent the game into overtime, where neither team scored.


Dog Pictures and Beyond In a Quirky Retrospective
It is more than a little astonishing to realize that it has been almost 50 years since Elliott Erwitt took his first funny-dog photograph.
That picture, made in New York City in 1946, shows a diminutive pug in a coat, seated alongside the feet of his owner, a woman in fashionable wedgies.
Taken from a height of only a few inches, the photograph achieves its humor simply by looking at life from the dog's point of view.
It was to be among the first of many pictures in which Mr.
Erwitt skewed the expected order of the things, creating images that are both funny and thought provoking.


Lauder Stock Price Raised
The Estee Lauder Companies increased the size and price of its initial public stock sale to $398 million, based on strong demand, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the lead underwriter, said today.
The new range is $25 to $27 a share, up from $22 to $24, Goldman said, and Lauder will sell 15.3 million shares, up from 13.9 million.
The shares are expected to start trading today on the New York Stock Exchange.


On the Internet, Most of Africa Is Getting Off to a Slow Start
In a frigid, air-conditioned office on the 21st floor of this country's ultramodern postal headquarters, Brou Yapo, a senior telecommunications ministry official, shrugged as he acknowledged he was not sure whether the Internet exists in his country.
"I know this is a priority," Mr.
Yapo said as he described efforts to improve his country's communications links.
"There are a couple of major projects to lay fiber-optic cables. With any luck, within three or four years, they will bear fruit."


MICHELIN TO EXPAND ITS OPERATIONS IN SOUTH CAROLINA
Michelin S.A., the world's largest tire maker, said it planned to spend at least $500 million to expand operations in South Carolina in the next five years, creating 1,600 new jobs.
The company said it planned to expand the plants in the counties of Greenville, Spartanburg, Lexington and Anderson.
The four counties pledged to provide special incentives, the company said.
Michelin, whose North American operations are based in Greenville, S.C., has invested $1.6 billion in the state since 1975.
Five of the French tire maker's 19 North American manufacturing plants are in the state, employing 9,000 people.


Baptist Group Calls for Boycott of Disney
A Baptist group has asked its one million members to boycott the Walt Disney  Co.'s parks and products, saying Disney showed a lack of moral leadership by extending health insurance to the partners of homosexual workers.
The resolution was unanimously approved on Wednesday at the annual meeting of the Florida Baptist State Convention, which represents most of the state's Baptists.


Restaurants
It is lunchtime at Bay Leaf Indian Brasserie.
Sunlight streams through the windows as waiters rush about, pampering their customers.
Covered metal dishes march across each table, sizzling with fragrant spices, and the air is richly perfumed with cardamom, cumin, coconut and chilies.
The aroma grows stronger as  each dish is uncovered, revealing explosive colors.
Saffron rice pulsates next to the bright green of banana leaf-wrapped fish and the scarlet of tandoori-roasted chicken.
At $13, $15 and $19.95, these generous meals may be the best midday deal in midtown Manhattan.
The Gujarati thali, a vegetarian assortment native to the western state of Gujarat, is a round tray covered with dishes in varying shades of gold anchored  by tiny poories, the balloons of bread.
Dokla, the fermented lentil cake, is scattered with black mustard seeds, coconut shreds and cilantro leaves.
Potatoes in a thin, bright orange broth with curry leaf are so hot they tickle.
Spinach and baby eggplants mingle in a dish of rich oiliness, and dal, yellow lentils, has enough freshly ground spices to make my head reel.
Dessert, served on the same round metal tray, is a little pot of shirkhand, the golden yogurt cream with its intriguing mix of cardamom and saffron and its slightly citric tang.
The bright flavors are so distinct and entrancing I begin to wonder if I have finally found the Indian restaurant of my dreams.


Defined by Diversity: An Area's Distinctive Restaurants
IN New York, restaurant names are fairly irrelevant.
The latest crop includes vegetables, colors and invented words of all sorts.
Restaurant addresses, on the other hand, are everything; you can tell a lot about a place just by knowing where it is.


Drug Appears to Prevent Infection by an AIDS-Type Virus
To the enormous surprise of researchers, an experimental drug completely prevented monkeys in one study from becoming infected with a virus that resembles the one that causes AIDS.
Never before have scientists been able to prevent the transmission of the monkey virus, called S.I.V., for simian immunodeficiency virus.
Researchers urged caution in jumping to conclusions about preventing infections with the AIDS virus itself or treating people who are already infected with the virus.
Studies in humans, tentatively planned for next year, would be necessary to establish the drug's safety and efficacy in people.


Staff Meeting at Stadium: Hail, the Gang Is All Here!
Don Zimmer had just about covered all the boroughs, but he decided to give the Bronx another visit.
That was precisely where he was yesterday as the Yankees and the veteran manager and coach were reunited during a group introduction of Manager Joe Torre's coaching staff at Yankee Stadium.
Like Zimmer, most of the staff members had a ring of familiarity about them,  not to mention a few championship rings marked with the Yankees logo.


U.S. Should Embargo Nigerian Oil for Hanging
To the Editor:
The trial, conviction and hanging of Ken Saro-Wiwa by the discredited Nigerian regime of Gen.
Sani Abacha (front page and editorial, Nov. 11) has provoked international outrage within Africa and beyond, including President Clinton's withdrawal of our Ambassador from Lagos and discussion of a condemnatory resolution by the United Nations Security Council.


PRESIDIO OIL ENTERS TALKS ON SALE OF ASSETS
The Presidio Oil Company of Englewood, Colo., has entered talks to sell most  of its assets to Tom Brown Inc. for $180 million in cash and stock, the energy companies said.
Tom Brown's proposal would be adjusted so that the cash portion  would be sufficient to repay Presidio's outstanding bank and publicly held debt.
The remaining amount would be paid in common stock.
Tom Brown, of Midland, Tex., previously acquired $56 million of Presidio's gas index notes.
The companies said they planned to sign a definitive agreement by Jan. 15.


Dole and Gingrich Are Best Buddies, For Now
By the end of the second day of the Federal budget standoff, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, was clearly relying more on his strategic sense of humor in the now frequent and always unpredictable joint appearances with the incendiary House Speaker, Newt Gingrich.
On Wednesday morning, Mr.
Gingrich complained furiously that President Clinton had slighted Mr.
Dole's "dignity" on the plane ride back from Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's funeral, leaving his Republican rivals to exit by way of the rear door and compounding the frictions of the budget standoff.
But Wednesday evening, Senator Dole showed his instincts for keeping on political track.


Cigar Won't Run in World Cup in Dubai
Cigar, king of the hill and horse of the year, is likely to forego his planned trip next March to the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai and the richest race in the world, the $4 million World Cup.
Instead, he will stay in the United States and run in three milestone California stakes worth $1 million apiece and  shoot for a new bonus of $3 million being offered for a sweep.
The change was confirmed yesterday by his trainer, BILL MOTT, at his barn at Belmont Park.


George A. Peck, Professor, 87
George A. Peck, professor emeritus of English and a former dean and acting president of Brooklyn College, died Wednesday in North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 87 and lived in Malverne, L.I.
Dr.
Peck was a scholar in 17th-century English literature and was particularly keen on the writings of Milton and Donne.
Born in Cleveland, he received his B.A., M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Western Reserve University and joined the Brooklyn faculty in 1955 as a professor and chairman of the English department.


Nuclear Tests Cutting Sales Of Beaujolais
The annual ballyhoo over Beaujolais nouveau this year was upstaged in many places by boycotts to protest French nuclear tests in the Pacific, dealers said  today.
In an annual marketing tactic that brings in about $100 million to producers  of the fruity red wine, the first bottles from this year's Beaujolais harvest went on sale around the world at 12:01 A.M.
Paris time.


The Music, and the Dissonance, at Time Warner
Gerald M. Levin described his shake-up of Time Warner yesterday as the creation of a "strategically elegant structure." But to executives in and outside the company, Mr.
Levin's action seemed just another nasty public ouster  -- this time of Warner Music's chairman, Michael J. Fuchs.
Mr.
Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, said he was reorganizing the giant media company around three main businesses: entertainment, news and information, and telecommunications.
The new structure, he said, had no place for Mr.
Fuchs,  who was also the chairman of Home Box Office.


World News Briefs;Canadian Soldier Jailed In Somali's Death Is Freed
The first Canadian peacekeeper to be convicted of torture was released from prison today after serving a third of his sentence for beating a youth to death  in Somalia.
Kyle Brown, sentenced in 1994 to a five-year term for manslaughter and torture, served in the Airborne Regiment, part of a United Nations peacekeeping  force in the troubled east African nation in 1992 and 1993.
The unit has since been disbanded.


Rabin Didn't Reject American Jewish Group
To the Editor:
Had Thomas L. Friedman (column, Nov. 8) bothered to check, he would have found that during the last visit of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, Mr.
Rabin met with Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organization leadership in New York in a cordial dialogue and addressed a large gathering we  sponsored in the United States Capitol to launch the American celebration of Jerusalem 3000.


Broad-Based Stock Rally Is Continuing
Although President Clinton and Congress are still at an impasse over the debt ceiling, the stock market nevertheless barreled ahead yesterday, extending its broad-based rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which soared 50.94 points on Wednesday, surged an additional 46.61 points yesterday to a high of 4,969.36.
When the Dow  scores its next gain -- assuming it does so this year -- it will have tied the 20th-century record of 59 new highs in one year, previously achieved only in 1925 and 1964.


Break Up the Legal-Aid Monopoly
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is rightly challenging a monopoly: not a business behemoth, but the Legal Aid Society, which is responsible for defending thousands of poor New Yorkers, most of them black and Hispanic, in the criminal  courts.
The society, a private organization, provides essentially all legal services  to the city's poor criminal defendants.
The Mayor has proposed letting other potential defenders bid on 20 percent of Legal Aid's annual caseload of 270,000  clients, for which the society now gets about $63 million from the city.


Art in Review
David Salle Gagosian 980 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street) Through Dec. 2


Nets' Childs Likes Point Guard Challenge
It was not certain that Chris Childs would be with the Nets this season.
Now  he might be their most important player.
Kenny Anderson will miss tonight's game against the Bulls in Chicago and probably Saturday's home game with Philadelphia.
That will once again leave Childs in charge of the Nets' offense from the point guard position.
If he can duplicate his performance in the Nets' 90-79 victory over the Charlotte Hornets  on Wednesday night, then the Nets (3-3) might give the favored Bulls (6-1) a battle in the United Center.


Art in Review
Nikko Sedgwick Dillon Gallery 431 West Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Nov. 21


600 Banks Agree to Reschedule Billions in Russian Debt
In a move expected to end Russia's financial isolation and enable it to borrow on world capital markets, Russian officials signed an agreement today with a group of 600 creditor banks to reschedule the payment of interest and principal on $32.5 billion in loans.
Deputy Prime Minister Oleg D. Davydov said the agreement would also pave the  way for a similar rescheduling of $40 billion of loans it owes to Western governments.


Art in Review
Lorna Simpson Sean Kelly Gallery 43 Mercer Street SoHo Through Nov. 25


Teams to Map Reorganizing Of 13 Schools
In a far-reaching attempt to reverse a decade of educational failure, Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew said yesterday he would redesign 13 of the most troubled schools by next September.
He said he would bring in new teachers and staff, and immediately assign new principals to eight of those schools.
Dr.
Crew's intervention in the schools, where a majority of children cannot read at grade level, will be led by teams of parents, students, teachers and leaders with business, arts and university backgrounds.
Each team, to be named by local district superintendents with approval of the Chancellor's staff, is to make comprehensive plans by February to revamp each of the 13 schools.


Roth's Latest Novel Wins Book Award
Sabbath's Theater," Philip Roth's novel about an aging, libidinous ex-puppeteer, published by Houghton Mifflin, has won this year's National Book Award for fiction.
The awards were presented Wednesday night at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.


Insider Trading on CBI Charged by S.E.C.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that it had filed insider trading charges against unknown investors who bought CBI Industries stock just days before Praxair Inc. announced a takeover bid for the company.
The S.E.C. announced the lawsuit just hours after CBI, a carbon dioxide and industrial gas producer, rejected the $2.1 billion takeover bid as "inadequate."


And Then There's the Lively Night Life
The same thing that draws giant chain stores to Chelsea -- available, affordable space -- has also made the neighborhood a center for clubs, from live-music rooms to multilevel dance citadels.
Some are ephemeral, others stable.
The list below includes some neighborhood landmarks and some places that won't be around next year.
Hours and admission prices vary widely; it's best to  call in advance.
CLUB VERTIGO, 27 West 20th Street, (212) 366-4181.
A dance club for fans of house music, techno and hip-hop.


Vaughn Edges Belle as A.L.'s Most Valuable
Albert Belle and the Indians showed how to win lopsided races this season by  running away with the American League Central title.
The Cleveland slugger lost  a close one yesterday, however, when Mo Vaughn, the indispensable first baseman  for the Boston Red Sox, narrowly edged Belle in the voting for the American League Most Valuable Player award.
Vaughn, who like Belle drove in a league-high 126 runs, won one of the closest elections ever conducted by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Medical Schools Are Urged To Cut Admissions by 20%
In a move that would radically change the system of training doctors in this  country, a panel of national health care experts called yesterday for slashing the number of medical school slots by 20 to 25 percent over the next 10 years, asserting that there is an oversupply of doctors that contributes to the inefficiency of medical care.
The recommendation by the Pew Health Professions Commission comes with an added sting -- the proposal that these cuts be achieved by closing entire schools and training programs, an echo of the closing of military bases.
Any such closings are sure to face opposition in communities that are economically dependent on medical schools.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Holland Tunnel Tube Closing
The New Jersey-bound tube of the Holland Tunnel will be closed from 11 o'clock tonight to 8 A.M. tomorrow and again from 11 P.M. tomorrow to 8 P.M.
Sunday, for work to improve lighting and clean ceiling tiles, the Port Authority officials said yesterday.
This tube will also be closed overnights for work during the following two weekends.


Kearny Officer Gets Jail Term In 5 Beatings
A Kearny police officer found guilty of using excessive force on the job by beating and injuring five people in 1990 and 1991 was sentenced today in Federal Court to seven years in prison.
The officer, Ronald Johnstone, 30, repeatedly struck citizens in the head with his flashlight, kicked them and arrested them without cause, said Lisa Russell-Charles, the assistant United States attorney who prosecuted the case.
In sentencing Mr.
Johnstone, Judge Maryanne Trump-Barry said he was an example of how police officers should not do their jobs, Ms.
Russell-Charles said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Man Charged in Cab Robberies
A judge set bail at $350,000 yesterday for a Hoboken man charged with carjacking 11 taxi cabs in Jersey City, Hoboken, Union City and Harrison since Oct. 23.
According to Ed DeFazio, First Assistant Prosecutor for Hudson County, Victor DeGross, 35, is accused of robbing drivers and forcing them from  their vehicles but did not harm them.
He is not a suspect in the taxi driver slayings in Newark, the Prosecutor said.


Denver Accuses S.E.C. Chairman of Being Biased
Denver officials have charged that Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, is "prejudiced and biased" and should be barred from considering a pending enforcement action over the sale of Denver International Airport bonds.
In a letter to the S.E.C., the Denver city attorney, Daniel E. Muse, said that critical remarks by Mr.
Levitt about the airport's cost overruns were an "announced prejudice" that "undermines and corrupts the administrative process." As a result, Mr.
Levitt should not be allowed to participate in S.E.C. decisions in the airport case, Mr.
Muse said.


For Cable and Wireless, Gains and Exit Date
Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British telecommunications company, posted rising first-half profit yesterday and confirmed the departure date of its chairman, Lord Young.
Excluding one-time gains, Cable and Wireless's profit for  the six months to Sept. 30 rose 9 percent, to L616 million, or $963 million.
Sales rose 7 percent, to L2.7 billion.


Ivy Title Is at Stake Amid a Family Affair
When tailback Chad Levitt steps onto Franklin Field in Philadelphia on Saturday to lead his visiting Cornell team against Penn, louder than the cheers  from his personal rooting section will be the pounding reverberations of two previous heartbreaking losses to the Quakers.
For Levitt, the junior tailback, the din can be silenced only by a Cornell victory.
"Playing there is definitely a homecoming for me," said Levitt, who grew up minutes from Franklin Field in Melrose Park, Pa.
"But more than anything, I'd just love to beat those guys."


Martin Kleiman, 67, Research Benefactor
Martin Kleiman, a founder and benefactor of the Diabetes Research Institute,  died on Tuesday at his home in Miami.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, said the institute, which is affiliated with the University of Miami School of Medicine.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14


New Bill Would End Federal Speed Limit
Congressional negotiators say they have worked out a final agreement on a highway bill that would end a national speed limit imposed two decades ago and free more than $6 billion for state road programs.
The bill would also repeal several other Federal requirements and penalties involving motorcycle helmet laws.


U.S. to Press Balkan Foes To Bend a Bit
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, and the commander of NATO forces in Europe are to come to Bosnian peace talks here on Friday as the United States conducts a final crescendo of diplomatic pressure aimed at prodding the parties toward a peace settlement this weekend.
People close to the negotiations, which are now in their third week, said the visit by Mr.
Perry, Mr.
Lake and the NATO commander, Gen.
George Joulwan, is intended to impress again upon the Serbs and the Muslim-led Bosnian Government the extent of Washington's commitment to peace and the fact that such an effort  would not be made again in the near future if the talks fail.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stock prices were higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 211.64 points, or 1.18 percent, at 18,151.16.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 256.78 points, or 1.45 percent.


Bayer Division Buying Hoechst Printing Unit
As part of a plan to focus on core businesses, the German chemical group Hoechst A.G. said yesterday that it planned to sell its printing-plate unit to Bayer A.G.'s Afga-Gevaert Group for 700 million marks, or $500 million.
Analysts said that the sale, expected to be completed by year's end, would help Hoechst reduce debt while offering Bayer a source of long-term profit and letting it strengthen its graphics division.
Hoechst's printing-plate unit had worldwide sales in 1994 of 840 million marks, the company said.
The unit makes printing products in Germany, Italy, Brazil, South Korea and the United States.
The acquisition is Agfa-Gevaert's largest, the companies said.
The maker of photography and imaging products had sales of 6.7 billion marks in 1994.
(AP)


History Needs to Repeat Itself on the Court
Someday soon, before fans become too comfortable with the Poulan/Weed Eater Independence Bowl or the Nashville Oilers, a top female tennis player may remember the name Gladys Heldman and find hope in history.
"C'mon, most women players don't know who Margaret Court is, much less me," Gladys Heldman said.
"But if the top women got together and realized that it's their game, and did something about it, they could be playing for a million dollars a week instead of sliding back into inequality with the men."


Postal Service Plans To Test Phone Cards
The United States Postal Service has decided to try its hand at selling prepaid telephone cards.
In a joint effort with American Express, the card will be tested in eight cities over the next 18 months, the Postal Service said on Monday.


French Strike Called Over Social Security Plan
France's largest confederation of labor unions called today for a general strike and national demonstrations on Nov. 24 to protest a Government plan to eliminate the deficit in the social security system, the heart and soul of the French welfare state.
The sweeping rescue plan that Prime Minister Alain Juppe announced to Parliament on Wednesday included a new tax of 0.5 percent on all salaries above  the poverty level and an increase in the number of years public employees will have to work before they may collect pensions from 37 1/2 years to 40.


World News Briefs;Shevardnadze Foe Lost Immunity, Officials Say
A powerful politician and former leader of a paramilitary group, Jaba Ioseliani, who was arrested earlier Wednesday on weapons and drug charges, lost  his right to immunity from prosecution today after final results of a parliamentary election were announced.
The Central Electoral Commission confirmed the outcome of the party list section of the Nov. 5 vote, thus removing any chance of Mr.
Ioseliani's immediate release.
The Commission had previously called on the prosecutor's office to release the former paramilitary leader and parliamentary rival of President Eduard Shevardnadze because final results had not been issued.


A.P. Is Expanding Its On-Line Service
The Associated Press said yesterday that it would offer multimedia news packages on line, and an electronic archive of its articles to its members next  year.
The new service would repackage, for use on the Internet's World Wide Web, the same text, photographs, audio and video that the A.P. currently distributes  to more than 1,500 print and broadcast subscribers.
Because the A.P. is a cooperative made up of most of the country's daily newspapers, the Web pages and archive will only be accessible through subscribers' Internet sites.


Atlantic City: Fighters on Collision Course?
If PERNELL WHITAKER and FELIX TRINIDAD win their bouts tomorrow night, their  next fight could be against each other.


Raiders Back Out Of Ticket Promise
The Oakland Raiders have acknowledged that they reneged on a promise to offer more than 1,000 extra tickets to season-ticket holders for Sunday's game against the Dallas Cowboys.
The tickets instead went to luxury box holders and employees of the city, county and Oakland Coliseum Complex, the team said.


Huge Turnout Is Reported By Algerians In Election
The authorities in Algeria reported today that the vast majority of the country's 16 million eligible voters cast ballots in their first contested presidential election since independence from France in 1962.
In doing so, Algerian voters ignored calls for a boycott from the opposition  and defied death threats from Islamic militants in providing President Liamine Zeroual with an apparent outright victory in the first round and a five-year term.


In CBS Tobacco Case, Contract Came Before First Amendment
To the Editor:
As outside First Amendment counsel to CBS, I must comment that "Self-Censorship at CBS" (editorial, Nov. 12) was, in your words, "exactly wrong." The legal issue here involves whether a tort, here interference with a contractual relationship, is trumped by the First Amendment.


Age Wins in Limon Bill Of Works From the 40's
The Limon Dance Company jumped abruptly from the 1940's to the 90's on Wednesday night, when four dances entered the repertory for the company's two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
All were engaging and all were created by prominent and experienced modern-dance choreographers.
And it may well be that in another half-century the works by Garth Fagan and Phyllis Lamhut on this program will eclipse any newer dances.
Age certainly won out on this occasion, in the form of two solos created by Daniel Nagrin in the late 1940's and danced to near perfection by Paul Dennis and Nina Watt.


Reno Discloses Diagnosis Of Parkinson's Disease
Attorney General Janet Reno disclosed today that she had developed Parkinson's disease, but said she planned to stay on the job.
Ms.
Reno said the neurological disorder had caused some shaking in her left hand but had not impaired her ability to work.


UNITED BISCUITS SELLS ITS KEEBLER FROZEN FOODS UNIT
United Biscuits Holdings P.L.C. of Edinburgh, Scotland, said yesterday that it had sold the frozen foods business of its troubled Keebler subsidiary to the  Windsor Food Company of Texas for $86 million.
The frozen foods unit consists of three companies that sell products mainly to food service operators.
The move is part of the company's plan to sell all of Keebler's United States operations.
Earlier this month, it sold Keebler's cookie and cracker business to Flowers Industries of Thomasville, Ga., for $500 million.


More U.S. Utilities Stake Out Australia
More American utilities are ready to make major investments in Australia by buying electric distribution companies in the state of Victoria.
Pacificorp, based in Portland, Ore., said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Powercor Ltd. from Victoria state for $1.6 billion.
And the Entergy Corporation, based in New Orleans, is offering to buy Citipower of Victoria for about $1.16 billion, an industry executive said, adding that some details remained to be worked out but that a sale announcement was expected today.


U.S. Should Embargo Nigerian Oil for Hanging;Industry Out of Control
To the Editor:
The execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa by the Nigerian Government casts light on oil  industry's dark side.
It was Mr.
Saro-Wiwa's activism to force transnational oil companies to be accountable for environmental damages in the Ogoni homeland that precipitated his arrest.


A Federal Panel Recommends Sale of New Drug to Fight Fat
A Federal advisory panel today narrowly recommended that the first new anti-obesity drug in more than two decades be approved for sale.
The panel of scientists for the Food and Drug Administration voted 6 to 5 to  recommend allowing Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. to market the drug, dexfenfluramine.


Diner's Journal
There are moments at Kokachin when it seems there are more waiters and waitresses than customers.
Clearly this restaurant in the recently renovated Omni Berkshire intends to offer luxurious service and innovative food.


Penalties Decided in E-Mail at Cornell
Cornell University has reached agreement with four students on punishment for a widely distributed E-mail message they wrote listing "75 reasons why women should not have freedom of speech." The university rejected harsh penalties like suspension because the students did not engage in sexual harassment, university  officials said yesterday.
The university had investigated complaints of sexual harassment and misuse of computer resources after the message made its way on the Internet last month, angering thousands of computer users who sent angry responses to the four students.
The message included the lines, "If she can't speak, she can't cry rape" and, "Of course, if she can't speak, she can't say no."


K-III COMMUNICATIONS TO BUY 14 MAGAZINES FROM CAHNERS
The K-III Communications Corporation, which owns publications ranging from New York magazine to Soap Opera Digest, agreed yesterday to buy 14 magazines from Cahners Consumer Magazines, a unit of the British-Dutch publisher Reed Elsevier P.L.C.
An executive close to the sale said the price was $180 million.
The magazines are part of Reed's United States-based Cahners Publishing unit and include Power &amp; Motoryacht, American Baby and Sail.
K-III became a publicly traded company this month when it sold 15 million shares at $10 each.
The shares closed up 62.5 cents, at $11.75, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


Besieged Over Finances, Utah Representative Secludes Herself
For months, Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz of Utah has been pushing a bill that would ban gifts from lobbyists to members of Congress.
But when that issue was being debated today on the House floor, Mrs.
Waldholtz was in seclusion in her office.


Jack Finney, 84, Sci-Fi Author Of Time-Travel Tales, Dies
Jack Finney, the author of the time-travel novel "Time and Again" and the science-fiction thriller "The Body Snatchers," died on Tuesday at Marin General  Hospital in Greenbrae, Calif.
He was 84 and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.
Mr.
Finney specialized in thrillers and works of science fiction.
Two of his  novels, "The Body Snatchers" and "Good Neighbor Sam" became the basis of popular films, but it was "Time and Again" (1970) that won him a devoted following.
The  novel, about an advertising artist who travels back to the New York of the 1880's, quickly became a cult favorite, beloved especially by New Yorkers for its rich, painstakingly researched descriptions of life in the city more than a  century ago.


King Jury at Impasse As Moves Continue
In a bizarre array of maneuvering yesterday in Don King's Federal wire-fraud  trial, the jury called itself "irretrievably deadlocked" but the trial judge was temporarily stopped from declaring a mistrial by an appellate judge.
Within a three-hour span, the flamboyant boxing promoter saw the possibility  of being retried waft into a legal limbo until a hearing today before a panel of three judges from the United States Court of Appeals.


Heading West, With Canvases
Is West Chelsea the next SoHo?
Not yet, and maybe never, in part because its  location and the subway system don't make for easy access.
And no thank you, anyway, given SoHo's growing status as the Bermuda Triangle of shopping, a crowded vortex of hyper-active consumers laden with new purchases and looking for lunch.
Still, as rents and congestion rise in SoHo, there are relocations and rumors of relocations among its original art settlers, and dealers elsewhere are turning increasingly to thoughts of Chelsea.
Over the last year, a small, fledgling gallery scene has sprouted along West  22d Street between 10th and 11th Avenues, in the shadow of the Dia Center for the Arts, the first and still the biggest kid on the block.
Dia's handsome galleries, at 548 West 22d Street, offer an especially strong lineup of shows right now.
Gerhard Richter's encyclopedic "Atlas," a coolly obsessive accounting of the themes, images and processes of his career, is offset by two forays into  undiluted retinal pleasure: Jessica Stockholder's bright and funky formalist environment and Dan Flavin's stringent yet engulfing "situations," as he calls them, made of fluorescent light tubes.


For Pequots' Point Man, No Task Is Too Small;Casino Boss Drives Hard, Whether to Expand to Bridgeport or Ease Wedding Plans
On a recent morning, G. Michael Brown, the top executive in the Mashantucket  Pequot Indians' gambling empire, barked orders to an ever-changing audience of lawyers, accountants, architects and lobbyists as he juggled a series of projects that would make rival developers' eyes bulge.
Rising outside his office at the Foxwoods Resort Casino in eastern Connecticut was a 17-story, 1,229-room hotel, supposed to be the largest in New  England under a single roof.
Next door, work on the nation's first smoke-free gaming rooms was on schedule for a New Year's Eve opening.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KRAFT FOODS INC., Northfield, Ill., a subsidiary of the Philip Morris Cos., said it would purchase the pudding business from the Del Monte Corp., San Francisco,  for an undisclosed sum.


No Headline
I blame both of them because they're acting like brats." -- PRISCILLA WILLIAMS, on the standoff in Washington. [A1:5.]


Beijing Journal;For 6~, You Too Can Be a Sichuan-Style Sardine
Hey, don't you know how to ride a train?" the woman on the Beijing subway yelled as she pushed past two peasants so overloaded with luggage that they were blocking the door. "Move over and make room for those of us who want to get off!"
It is rush hour in the Chinese capital and Beijingers, like so many surly sardines, are trying to get in and out of their frightfully overburdened subway  system.


A Flawless Graf Masters Fernandez
Steffi Graf has always made it her business to play perfect tennis, regardless of her opponent's status, regardless even of whether the court beneath her is in somebody's backyard or center stage at some Grand Slam event.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, where Graf took on eighth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez in the quarterfinals of the WTA Tour Championships, Fernandez had that lesson pounded home for the 13th time in their 13 meetings.


Les Horvath, 74, Heisman Winner
Les Horvath, a multipurpose back at Ohio State who won the Heisman Trophy in  1944 as college football's best player, died at his home in Glendale, Calif., on Tuesday.
He was 74.
Horvath, who was graduated in 1945 with a degree in dentistry, was the first  of four Ohio State players to win the Heisman, leading the Buckeyes to a 9-0 record in 1944.
He played quarterback, halfback and defensive back, accounting for 1,248 yards.


Bosnian Talks Snag on Fate Of Two Serbs
With peace talks in Dayton, Ohio, at a crucial stage, the Bosnian Government  and Serbia are wrangling over the fate of the two Bosnian Serb leaders indicted  by the international war crimes tribunal, senior officials familiar with the talks said today.
The matter took on new urgency with an announcement today from the tribunal's headquarters in The Hague of new indictments against the two, Radovan Karadzic,  the political leader, and Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the military leader, charging them  with genocide in the days after the Serbs invaded the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica in July.
The indictment details numerous instances in which Muslim captives, in small and large numbers, were summarily shot.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Officer Accused of Misconduct
A male police lieutenant who is planning to have a sex-change operation next  year has been cited by the Police Department for insubordination, conduct unbecoming an employee and more than 40 other departmental offenses, the A.P. reported.
Lieutenant Janet Aiello, a 24-year veteran who recently changed his name from John and began dressing as a woman, was notified of the departmental charges, alleging that she ignored orders to come back to work, about a month after returning from seven months of sick and vacation leave, Police Chief Carmen LaBruno said.
Linda Kenney, the lieutenant's lawyer, said, "We intend to  fight the charges and open the disciplinary hearings."
JOE SHARKEY


Ex-President of South Korea Jailed in Bribery Case


Calm in the Eye of the N.F.L. Storm
From the outside looking in, it appears that chaos reigns in the National Football League.
There are franchise shifts, lawsuits and an owner's revolt in Dallas.
From the inside looking out, Paul Tagliabue sees it differently.
The league's commissioner considers the upheaval in the league's economic and geographic landscape a natural consequence of its success.


Water Cleanup Ordered
The Environmental Protection Agency has ordered the District of Columbia to clean up its water system.
The order came on Tuesday, several days after residents of one neighborhood  west of the Capitol were told to boil drinking water because high levels of bacteria were found in a test.
It was the second such water emergency in two years.
The environmental agency said aging pipes in the city's distribution system, as well as maintenance problems at some reservoirs, contributed to the problem.


Political Symbiosis: Dole-Gingrich Show
As much as their styles differ and as much as each hungers to be President, Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich are standing together in the budget standoff.
Although their dependence is undergoing a scrutiny unusual in Washington, this political pairing is not expected to be anywhere in sight come Election Day.
Article, page B13.


Off to the Chilterns
To the Editor:
A Nov. 7 news article refers to the possible resignation of some Conservative members from the British House of Commons.
Strictly speaking, members of Parliament, for whatever reason, do not resign.


Marcos Approved to Head Hospitals Corporation
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday nominated and the board of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation unanimously approved Dr.
Luis R. Marcos, the acting president of the corporation, to take over the job permanently.
As president, Dr.
Marcos, 52, is expected to oversee the dismantling of the 11-hospital system.
A panel appointed by the Mayor has proposed selling or closing some or all of the hospitals, and the Mayor has offered to lease three city hospitals to private health care organizations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Soars to 4,969.36, Its 58th Record This Year The stock market barreled ahead, once again, extending record closings of the Dow Jones industrial average to 58 so far this year, just one shy of the 20th century record of 59 set in 1925 and 1964.


If They Gave a Straw Poll, and Very Few Came


Running From a Hit Man and Her Own Past
It is Christmas Eve in a twinkling snow-wrapped New England cottage.
Rachel (Mia Farrow), an angelically perky housewife and mother of two boys, snuggles in bed with her husband, Tom (Tony Goldwyn), to the comforting groan of Bing Crosby crooning "I'll Be Home for Christmas." She is so smitten with the holiday spirit, she chirps, that she is about to have a "euphoria attack."


New Refrigerators for Housing Projects


Health Care Merger May Be Called Off
Wellpoint Health Networks Inc. said today that its proposed merger with Health Systems International Inc. might be called off because of disputes between Blue Cross of California, which is Wellpoint's principal stockholder, and the two companies.
The $1.9 billion merger, announced in April, would create the nation's largest publicly owned managed health care organization.
It would have more than $6 billion in revenue and coverage for 4.4 million people.


Audubon Promoting Support for Everglades
Ed Asner is the point man for the National Audubon Society, other environmental groups and Ted Turner in Sunday's vigorous defense of the Florida  Everglades.
Among the threats to an area once famed for its teeming animal life, the program focuses on hurricanes, developers, tourists and, most especially, sugar-cane farms and refineries, which are charged with killing parts of the Everglades with fertilizer and polluting most of Washington with political contributions.


Three Killings Late at Night Frighten Cabbies in Newark
Afterward, Merilien Fenelus told fellow taxi drivers that he wrapped his fingers around the knife blade just as it dug into his throat.
His three middle  fingers, the flesh skinned down to the bone, took the brunt of the cut.
His throat bled in two places.
But he lived.


Youth Acquitted and Another Convicted of Lesser Charge in Immigrant's Fatal Beating
A Brooklyn teen-ager was acquitted yesterday and another convicted of only the least serious charge against him in what prosecutors said was the bias-driven beating death of a homeless Ecuadorean immigrant in a Brooklyn park.
After deliberating a day and a half in a monthlong trial, a jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn acquitted Steven Ruiz, 19, who is also known as Steven Scarpaci, of murder, manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide.
The  other defendant, Joseph Pennachio, 17, was acquitted of murder and manslaughter  but convicted of criminally negligent homicide.


LOWER ESTIMATE FOR SHIPMENTS OF WINDOWS 95
Dataquest Inc., a market research firm in San Jose, Calif., reduced by a third yesterday its forecast of Windows 95 shipments this year, saying sales of  the Microsoft Corporation's operating system were slower than expected.
Dataquest, a unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, said that Microsoft would ship fewer than 20 million copies by the end of the year, down from a projection of 30 million.
Microsoft's shares fell $4.125 yesterday, to $89.875, as about 12.2 million shares were traded on Nasdaq.
The slide was attributed primarily to a reduction in the stock's rating by Richard Sherlund, an analyst for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Mr.
Sherlund said Microsoft faced "a serious threat" from smaller, more nimble companies in Internet software.


The Jets' Mr. Accuracy Copes With Inactivity
While most around him have helped the Jets slump to the worst record in pro football, Nick Lowery is a Tiffany setting in a brass ring.
At age 39, he remains among the best at what he does: kick footballs through uprights.
Despite his remarkable accuracy, Lowery is a forgotten man on a 2-8 team that rarely moves close enough for field-goal attempts, let alone threaten to score a touchdown.
If he is lucky on Sunday, when the Jets face the Bills at Giants Stadium, he will have a grand total of two chances to kick a field goal.
In no game this season has he had more opportunities.
And a half can go by with Lowery never stepping onto the field because Don Silvestri handles kickoffs.


End Extreme Fighting
Put two combatants in a circle.
Then let them attack each other until one is  beaten so senseless he cannot continue.
Welcome to the world of extreme fighting, a "sport" that was to have been a big show at the Brooklyn Armory this weekend.
Fortunately, New York State officials canceled it.
The state should now ban this brutal exercise altogether.
In extreme fighting, bare-knuckled contestants are allowed to punch, kick, scratch, knee or elbow each other into submission.
Participants are often martial arts experts.
The only forbidden tactics are eye-gouging and biting.
A referee and a doctor are allowed to step in before things become fatal.


Pataki Will Not Open Books on Inaugural Fund
Gov.
George E. Pataki took office last January with the most lavish inaugural party in state history, a three-day pageant of feasting and music for 13,000 people.
Despite its splendor, he used no government money for the event.
The Governor paid the bill by establishing a private corporation that solicited donations to a special inaugural fund.
And as the Governor and his aides set it up a year ago, they made two promises.
They pledged to abide strictly by state campaign finance laws, and they promised to open the fund's books to the public.


For Children
Children in New York City may be entranced by the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis's solos in his Jazz for Young People series at Lincoln Center.
They heard the catlike sounds of the clarinet at programs for children at Carnegie Hall.
They may discover precision from Bach in the New York Philharmonic's programs, and pick out a piccolo after listening to a Little Orchestra Society concert.
Public concerts for children are resonating throughout the city, and a wide variety of venues and ticket prices help make music more accessible.


One More Veto
President Clinton promises to veto a second temporary spending bill passed by Congress yesterday, thereby shutting down most Government offices for at least another day.
The President should keep on vetoing these bills until the Republicans stop trying to trap him into reneging on every important promise he  has made to voters over the past three years.
The temporary spending bill would keep Government offices open while Congress and the President negotiate permanent spending bills for discretionary programs.
To gain the upper hand in these future negotiations, the G.O.P. attached an insidious rider as a condition for granting Mr.
Clinton temporary authority to spend.
He would have to agree to a budget plan that would eliminate the deficit  within seven years.


Yankees Did Not Tamper
A Japanese team that asked major league baseball to investigate whether the Yankees tampered with one of its players was told today that there was no wrongdoing.
The Hiroshima Toyo Carp complained that the Yankees had improperly contacted  pitcher Robinson Checo of the Dominican Republic.


FEUDING GOES ON AS G.O.P. PRESENTS ITS BUDGET PLAN
Republicans presented their seven-year, balanced budget plan today, a voluminous package of legislation that is the center of their political revolution and the fight with the White House that has led to a partial shutdown of the Federal Government.
But the legislation, which promises to erase the Federal deficit by 2002 while overhauling scores of social programs considered anathema by Republican conservatives, competed for attention with the continued dueling between Republican leaders and President Clinton that approached political farce.


Germany's Social Democrats Replace Leader With a Rival
Rudolf Scharping, the head of Germany's beleaguered Social Democrats, was ousted from the opposition party's leadership today in a surprise vote that reflected both Germany's political turbulence and the party's aversion to his lackluster style.
In a vote at the Social Democrats' annual congress in the southern city of Mannheim, Mr.
Scharping lost by 321 to 190 to a longstanding rival, Oskar Lafontaine, the state Premier of the Saarland, whose stirring oratory at the gathering was seen by delegates as offering the party a way out of the doldrums.


On My Mind;The Great Botch-Up
Ask me the lineup of the Yankees team when I was a boy reading baseball stories in the papers, daydreaming of actually getting money for a ticket.
I will march around with you, base to base, then the outfield and back to the mound.
Now, ask me for the lineup since the baseball strike.
Who cares?
Do the politicians responsible for the shutdown of Federal offices, for the whole disgraceful exhibition of governmental mismanagement by Congress and the White House, understand that they are paying the same price as baseball players  and owners -- the loss of public esteem, respect and loyalty?


Art in Review
'Modernism: A Century of Style and Design, 1870-1970' Seventh Regiment Armory Park Avenue at 67th Street Today, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $10.


Bank of France Cuts Key Rates
The Bank of France shaved two important lending rates today, effectively giving its seal of approval to Government plans to overhaul the welfare system.
For the first time since July 1994, the central bank said it had cut its intervention rate, which sets the floor on money-market rates, to 4.80 percent from 5 percent.
It also lowered its 5-to-10-day lending rate, which sets the money-market ceiling, to 6.10 percent from 6.35 percent.


Matchmaking 9-Year-Old Look-Alikes
Children are so much smarter than Hollywood gives them credit for being that  it seems unlikely many will be fooled into thinking that the world as pictured in "It Takes Two" has anything to do with them.
This desperately perky variation of "The Parent Trap" features the twin television stars Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen as look-alike little girls from opposite sides of the tracks who switch identities.
Under the direction of Andy Tennant, the Olsen sisters lay on the icky-poo cuteness with several trowels, often delivering their lines as though they were reciting the alphabet.
There's the germ of an amusing comedy in the notion that look-alike 9-year-olds would trade places and play matchmaker for their respective guardians.
But "It Takes Two" doesn't begin to develop it.
Amanda Lemmon (Mary-Kate Olsen), the one from the wrong side of the tracks, is a scrappy tomboy living in the cheeriest orphanage you've ever visited, right in the heart of Manhattan.
She is fortunate indeed that her supervisor, Diane Barrows (Kirstie Alley), has all the time in the world to lavish attention on her.


Passing the Torch at the Library
The New York Public Library, 100 years old last spring, blossomed from a single building on Fifth Avenue into a vibrant system that has nurtured generations of writers, served generations of students and ushered multitudes of newcomers into the American mainstream.
Founded through private philanthropy, sustained primarily with public funds, the system is a dramatic example of how private-public partnerships can work for the civic good.
The urgency of the library's mission makes this week's changing of the guard on Fifth Avenue particularly important.
Marshall Rose, the energetic chairman of the library's board of trustees since 1990, has stepped down.
He will be succeeded by Elizabeth F. Rohatyn, a philanthropic activist well known for her work as vice chairman of Thirteen/WNET and a host of educational efforts.


METRO DIGEST
MANAGED CARE PROGRAMS ARE FAULTED Posing as Medicaid patients, state health investigators called 18 large managed  care programs and asked to see doctors for such basic but essential services as  prenatal care, immunizations of babies and annual checkups.
At 13 of the 18, the investigators had so much trouble just getting an initial appointment that the state cited them for deficiencies. [Page A1.]


Updating an Icon, Carefully
Campbell Soup knows well that you change national icons at your peril.
But these days, the once-lumbering soup giant is feeling frisky enough to tinker with its own legendary image, even daring to vary the look of the soup can made  immortal by Andy Warhol.
And that is only the most visible of the transformations at a company long known for its ability to put Wall Street to sleep.
Campbell is changing the recipe of its top-selling chicken noodle soup, increasing its advertising expenditures by 50 percent, upgrading its inventory system and offering a stream of new products.


In CBS Tobacco Case, Contract Came Before First Amendment;No Innocence Lost
To the Editor:
A key fact omitted in "Self-Censorship at CBS" (editorial, Nov. 12) and in all the reporting I have seen concerning CBS's actions in dropping the "60 Minutes" tobacco story, is that Loews Corporation, 26 percent owned by Lawrence  Tisch and family, is the owner of some 18 percent of CBS, and 100 percent owner  of Lorillard Tobacco, manufacturers of Kent and Newport cigarettes.


Opposition Withdrawn To B.C.C.I. Settlement
Lawyers for employees of the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which had been part of BCCI Holdings, withdrew their appeal in a  hearing in Luxembourg's superior court against a $1.8 billion settlement for creditors yesterday, clearing the way for the first payouts.
B.C.C.I.'s main shareholder, Abu Dhabi, has offered to pay $1.8 billion to creditors of the bank, which was closed by the Governments of Britain and Luxembourg in July 1991 amid accusations of fraud.
About 250,000 creditors worldwide are awaiting settlement of their claims.
Four former employees in B.C.C.I.'s London office had appealed against the proposed settlement because they wanted better conditions than those for creditors.
The judge is scheduled to rule on Dec. 20 on whether to allow the withdrawal of the appeal.
(Reuters)


Detroit Papers Sue 6 Striking Unions
Six unions on strike against The Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News are  being accused of using violence and extortion to try to disrupt production and distribution of the papers.
Detroit Newspapers, which runs the business operations of the two papers, filed a lawsuit on Wednesday under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, which was enacted in 1970 primarily to fight organized crime.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Companies to Help Children
Three corporations with headquarters in central New Jersey will contribute a  total of $125,000 and 300 of their employees will volunteer to help students in  the New Brunswick public elementary schools, the Civic League of Greater New Brunswick said yesterday.
The money, from AT&amp;T, Johnson &amp; Johnson and Merrill Lynch, will be mainly used for teacher workshops and field trips.


Religious or Not, West Bank Settlers Feel Betrayed by Israel
The unthinkable became reality last week for the 33 Jewish families of Ganim  when armed Palestinians took charge of nearby Jenin.
What if the Palestinian police tried to stop them, as they were allowed to do under the peace agreement that brought the police to Jenin?
Something akin to a groan passed through the clutch of residents gathered outside the administration office of the small, armed Israeli settlement in the north of the West Bank.


West Bank Settlers Talking of Betrayal
When armed Palestinians took charge of the West Bank city of Jenin last week, the unthinkable became reality for many Jewish settlers.
"It's a creepy feeling," said Mihal Bronstein, a nurse in the nearby settlement of Ganim.
"They're terrorists, not police. They were trained in terror camps, and now the  Government has decided to call them police!"


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


The Excavation of Korean Corruption
South Korea's former President Roh Tae Woo now sits in a private cell in Seoul's detention house, awaiting prosecution in the biggest political corruption case in his country's history.
His arrest yesterday was a test of the Government's commitment to cleaning up Korean politics, which has long been infected with bribery and other corrupt practices.
But Mr.
Roh should not have to pay the price alone for a scandal that reached deep into the Korean political and business worlds.
Mr.
Roh acknowledges responsibility for managing a $650 million political slush fund, but claims no memory of which business tycoons contributed to it and which politicians benefited from it.
Investigators believe that during Mr.
Roh's presidency, huge public contracts were awarded on the basis of contributions to  the fund and that the money was divided among every major Korean political party, as well as corrupt individuals.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Prankster Had Remote Access
The Division of Motor Vehicles wants you to have a good day, buckle up and drive safely.
Period.
On Election Day, callers to the state motor vehicle inspection station in Eatontown were shocked when a male voice on the station's answering machine said, "Hope you have a good day. Remember to buckle  up and drive safely" -- and a two-word expletive.
Officials determined the offensive message was placed by an outside prankster, not by a department employee.
The machine was replaced, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


CBS Is Said to Fear Unusual Legal Challenge in '60 Minutes' Case
At the heart of CBS's decision to cancel a "60 Minutes" interview with a tobacco company executive last weekend was the network's fear that it would be sued under a legal theory that had never before been used against a news organization, legal experts said yesterday.
The theory is called tortious interference with contracts, and it is normally used in business disputes.
An old principle of common law, tortious interference typically occurs when a company or an individual offers another company or individual some inducement to break a contract with a third company or individual.


HOUSE APPROVES RULE TO PROHIBIT LOBBYISTS' GIFTS
After several hours of proclaiming the necessity of winning back public confidence, the House of Representatives voted tonight to prohibit members and their staffs from accepting gifts, free meals and free travel to charity sports  events.
Speaker Newt Gingrich proposed the new limits.
He said today it was time to "end accepting gifts from lobbyists and others who give you the gifts because you are a Member of Congress." If the House was going to act, he said, it should act "decisively and clearly."


Albany to Require Improvements In Service by Medicaid H.M.O.'s
Posing as patients, New York State health investigators called the 18 largest managed care programs serving Medicaid patients in New York City and asked to see doctors for such basic but essential services as prenatal care, immunizations of babies and annual checkups.
At 13 of the 18, the investigators  had so much trouble getting an initial appointment that the State Department of  Health cited them for providing substandard care.
Partly in response to these findings, the State Health Commissioner yesterday announced an aggressive plan to regulate and rein in the state's Medicaid H.M.O.'s, which have grown into thriving businesses in a marketplace that has previously had little government oversight.


STORAGE TECHNOLOGY TO ELIMINATE 1,500 JOBS NEXT YEAR
The Storage Technology Corporation, a leading maker of data storage devices for mainframe computers that has struggled in recent years, said yesterday that  it would eliminate 1,500 jobs next year and take a $150 million write-down.
The  company, based in Louisville, Colo., also said it would close its largest manufacturing plant, in nearby Longmont.
Storage Technology has seen its market  share erode in the face of strong competition, particularly from the EMC Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation.
The company said the moves would save more than $100 million a year when fully carried out.
Its shares were unchanged yesterday, at $27.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Man Is Charged With Impersonating Priest
During the summer months, he sat outside the Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in the Bronx and befriended young people in the predominantly Italian neighborhood.
In clerical garb, he spoke to them in the erudite words of the Jesuit priest he claimed to be and in the gentle tone of one capable of infinite compassion.
"He spoke about God and religion like he was a real priest," said Gina Demalijaj, a church employee.


Art in Review
Merry Alpern Bonni Benrubi Gallery 52 East 76th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 25


China Rebukes Four Other Nuclear Powers on Arms Control
Issuing a major policy statement on arms control, China tonight sharply rebuked the United States, Russia, Britain and France for continuing to develop  "nuclear weapons and outer space weapons, including guided missile defense systems," while seeking in some cases to deny the peaceful use of nuclear technology to the developing world.


In Another Round in Court, 'Extreme Fight' Sponsors Lose
Promoters of an "extreme fighting" event lost a state court appeal last night that would have allowed them to use the Park Slope Armory tomorrow for a contest in which bare-fisted fighters pound each other until only one is left standing.
"This means the event is stopped in its tracks," said Pat Clark, a spokesman  for the Brooklyn District Attorney.


Council Approves Controls on Box Cutters
Hoping to reduce violence in New York City's schools, the City Council yesterday unanimously approved a law making it illegal for students to carry box cutters and banning their sale to anyone under 18 years old.
The number of reported violent incidents at schools set a record last year, and the retractable razor blades have become the weapon of choice for students because they are cheap as well as easy to obtain and conceal.
School officials last year seized 2,247 box cutters from students.


Art in Review
Julian Lethbridge Paula Cooper 155 Wooster Street (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Nov. 25


U.S. Coach Rips Top Fighters
After a second-tier United States team absorbed yet another pummeling from Cuban boxers on Wednesday night, the American coach launched verbal jabs at the  top American fighters who skipped the dual match.
Jesse Ravelo, who will be an assistant coach on the 1996 United States Olympic team, suggested that many of the top American amateurs were intimidated  by the Cubans, who are ranked as the No. 1 Olympic-style boxing team in the world and who hold an 18-0-1 record against the Americans in dual matches.


Art in Review
Sarah Charlesworth Jay Gorney Gallery 100 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Nov. 25


Major Provisions in Bill To Balance the Budget
House and Senate negotiators completed their preparation of a vast bill to balance the Federal budget in seven years, and the measure is expected to win approval from both chambers in the next few days.
President Clinton has threatened to veto it, but Republicans say they will revive many of its features in later legislation.
These are some of the major provisions of the bill.
Medicare


STRIDE RITE TO CLOSE SEVERAL STORES AND CUT 600 JOBS
The Stride Rite Corporation said yesterday that it would eliminate about 600  jobs, or 16 percent of its work force, by closing several stores and a plant in  Fulton, Mo.
Stride Rite, a shoe company based in Cambridge, Mass., said it would report a one-time expense in the quarter ending Dec. 1, pushing its results below those of a year ago.
The company said it had faced continuing weakness in  the retail sector and would focus more on marketing its brand names.
Stride Rite also said it would cut its quarterly dividend to 5 cents a share, from 9.5  cents a share.
The company's shares fell 50 cents yesterday, to $10, on the New  York Stock Exchange.


Florida State Gives Bowden New Contract
Florida State signed the 66-year-old BOBBY BOWDEN to a five-year contract yesterday in Tallahassee, Fla., that will pay the patriarch of college football's most prominent coaching family almost $1 million annually.
The agreement, which will keep Bowden at Florida State through at least the 2000 season, will pay him $975,000, including $150,000 of state money.
AP


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Sisters Looking for Ghosts in China


Asian Nations And U.S. Plan Freer Trade
Despite some misgivings, ministers from 18 nations in the Asia-Pacific region agreed today on voluntary guidelines for a pan-Pacific free-trade zone spanning  countries with more than two billion people and over half the world's economic output.
American officials say the agenda strongly reaffirms the goal of achieving free trade by 2010 for developed nations and by 2020 for developing ones, and makes it clear that all industries should be covered.


St. Croix Journal;For One Island, Storms Bring a Tourism Windfall
About 40 students from Eulalie Rivera Elementary School came to greet two cruise ships at the pier here with gifts for the captains and songs and dances for the passengers.
The students hoped to get a chance to board the ships, the Star Princess and the Regal Princess, but they had a mission first: charm the tourists into a repeat visit.
"Welcome! -- To our island! -- St. Croix!" the students cheered, stepping and clapping as about 3,000 travelers poured from the ships.


Doctors' Incomes Fall as Managed Care Grows
For the first time in the 14 years that the American Medical Association has  been keeping track, doctors' incomes are falling as managed care organizations tighten their grip on the nation's health care system.
The median earnings of all physicians, from front-line general practitioners  to highly paid specialists like brain surgeons, dropped 3.8 percent last year to $150,000, from $156,000 in 1993, according to preliminary results from the A.M.A.'s latest annual survey.
The median income -- the point at which half of all doctors make more and half make less -- had risen 2 percent in 1993 and had  surged 7.9 percent in 1992.


CHRONICLE
Grandma Sylvia would be so happy -- if only she were alive.
On Christmas Day  last year, MARK ROGER and RANDI REESE of Indianapolis became engaged at a performance of "Grandma Sylvia's Funeral," the interactive Off-Broadway comedy that re-enacts a funeral.
Tomorrow evening they will be married at the Indianapolis Hebrew Congregation.
"Her parents told me I would never be able to surprise her," Mr.
Roger said,  explaining why he came up the idea of somehow making his marriage proposal a part of the show during a visit to New York.
She could not have anticipated "getting engaged at a Jewish funeral on Christmas Day that is really a play," he said.


Let Senate Vote on the Helms Plan
To the Editor:
Re "Jesse Helms's Hostages" (editorial, Nov. 8): After nine paragraphs of distortions and ad hominem criticisms of Senator Helms, you get one thing right: the Democrats should let Mr.
Helms's foreign policy reorganization measure come  to the floor.


Encounters, Celestial And Sexual
Eclipse" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 27. The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
Jeremy Podeswa's "Eclipse" is a daisy chain of a film depicting a string of sexual encounters in Toronto.
That city is presented as being in a libidinous lather over the imminence of a solar eclipse.
Between trysts, the film offers eclipse-related thoughts from various seers, attesting to the event's yin-yangness and to the idea that "a world without light is a reminder of just how fragile and precarious our existence really is."


Ousted White House Travel Chief Is Cleared of Embezzlement
The former head of the White House travel office, who was dismissed in an incident that became an embarrassment for the Clinton Administration, was acquitted today of criminal charges that he had embezzled $68,000 paid by news organizations for Presidential trips.
The acquittal of the former official, Billy R. Dale, after two hours of jury  deliberation revived an episode that has periodically haunted President Clinton  and his aides since May 1993, when White House officials abruptly ousted Mr.
Dale and six other travel office employees while hinting at corruption.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
REMY ZAUG, "Not Here," Brooke Alexander Gallery, 59 Wooster Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
The working drawings in the catalogue for this show reveal that Mr.


Natural Gas at One-Year High As Cold Weather Lifts Demand
The prices of natural gas soared yesterday to the highest levels in more than a year as cold weather in the northern United States increased demand for heating fuels.
On other markets, wheat prices rose while cotton fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities gained 0.31 point, to 242.78.


Ex-President of South Korea Is Arrested And Apologizes in a HugeBribery Scandal
Roh Tae Woo, a former general who presided over South Korea's transformation  into a democratic nation, was arrested tonight for accepting hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes while he was President.
Tired, downcast and humiliated, Mr.
Roh (pronounced no) was wedged into the back seat of an unmarked sedan in Seoul as hundreds of camera flashes illuminated his face as if he were under a disco strobe.
He was taken to a jail  and placed under 24-hour guard.


City Council Curbs Sale of Box Cutters
Hoping to reduce violence in New York City's schools, the City Council unanimously approved a law making it illegal for students to carry box cutters and banning their sale to anyone under 18.
The razors have become a favorite student weapon because they are cheap and easy to obtain and hide.
School officials seized 2,247 box cutters last year.
Article, page B9.


Digging for Flea-Market Treasures
London has Portobello Road and Paris the Marche aux Puces.
In New York City,  Chelsea is where many shoppers go for flea-market wares, collectibles and affordable antiques.
What began almost 20 years ago as a one-block flea market,  on the Avenue of the Americas from 24th to 25th Streets, has mushroomed into a three-block affair, from 24th to 27th Streets.
It has also spilled around the corner: on 26th Street east of Avenue of the Americas, an old Con Edison power substation now holds something called the Annex, four parking lots filled with 400 to 500 open-air booths.
And that's just the tip of the iceberg.
Over the years, a host of indoor antiques malls have opened in the neighborhood.
Now there are such haunts as the Garage, at 112 West 25th Street; the Metropolitan Art and Antiques Pavilion, at  110 West 19th Street, and the Chelsea Antiques building, at 110 West 25th Street.
As in the flea markets, the quality and selection at these indoor emporiums vary from week to week.
Some days it's possible to find good pieces at bargain prices, other days it seems as though all the junk in the world has landed in Chelsea.


Rights Group Says Nigeria Seized 9 to Thwart Protest of Hangings
A Nigerian human rights organization said today that nine of its members had  been arrested because the military Government feared they were about to protest  publicly against the executions of nine Government critics last week.
Jiti Ogunye, secretary general of the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights, said two student union leaders in the university in Benin were arrested  on Wednesday and the other members of the group were arrested here last week.
"All of them are detained in the Lagos police headquarters but we have been denied access to them," he said.


That 'Sexist, Misogynist Dinosaur' James Bond
Goldeneye" unveils Pierce Brosnan as the coffee-bar James Bond: mild, fashionable and nice in a very 90's way. Mr. Brosnan, as the best-moussed Bond ever to play baccarat in Monte Carlo, makes the character's latest personality transplant viable (not to mention smashingly photogenic), but the series still suffers the blahs.
Today's Bond does have the Internet and a credit sequence resembling a pretentious music video.
And he has a girlfriend with advanced computer skills (Izabella Scorupco, a deep-voiced model who looks as good as Mr. Brosnan, which  is saying a lot).
Still, he often seems adrift.
And this film is missing such basics as the cold war and the James Bond theme music.
The absence of the latter is sure to throw some audience members into a two-hour Pavlovian twitch.


Weighing the Merits of Raises for Officials
There is a singular political wind that begins to rise when a politician raises his or her own salary, and that wind is just now beginning to lick at City Hall in the wake of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision this week to support salary increases for himself and other top officials.
Nonetheless, behind the emotionalism that can be generated by this issue, serious cases are being made for and against the pay increases.
As the issue makes its way through a receptive City Council in the next few weeks, these are  some of the key arguments being offered by the mayor in support of the raises and some of the responses from opponents:


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Former Gov. Kean Hospitalized
Former Gov.
Thomas Kean, 60, underwent surgery to unclog an artery last night after nearly suffering a heart attack, said doctors at Morristown Memorial Hospital.
He was in satisfactory condition and expected to be hospitalized a week.
Mr.
Kean was admitted to the coronary care unit, after suffering "a sudden onset of rather severe chest pain," according to his physician, Dr.
William Tansey.
Initial tests last night showed no apparent heart damage, but he experienced more pain a few hours later and an electrocardiogram indicated "a little waffle" in Mr.
Kean's heart rhythm, Dr.
Tansey said.
A cardiac catheterization found that an artery supplying half of the blood to the heart was 95 percent blocked.
Mr.
Kean, who is president of Drew University and was Governor from 1982 to 1990, was taken to the hospital by ambulance from his office in Madison.
An aide said the former Governor had been suffering from a "nagging cold" and appeared tired.


World News Briefs;Nobel Winner's Kin Held In Guatemala Kidnapping
The Guatemalan police arrested relatives of the Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu today and charged them with faking the kidnapping of her 22-month old nephew.
The police said Ms.
Menchu's sister and brother-in-law faked the kidnapping of their son Carlos Velasquez Menchu in an attempt to extort money from Ms.
Menchu.


Time Warner Music Head Ousted in Shake-Up
The management turmoil at Time Warner Inc. continued yesterday, as Michael Fuchs, the longtime head of the company's Home Box Office cable network who only recently added the Warner Music Group to his portfolio, was forced out of the company in a shake-up that gives broad new powers to the top executives at the Warner Brothers film division.
Mr.
Fuchs was forced to resign by Time Warner's chairman, Gerald Levin, who in the last year has accepted the resignations of a number of executives who were highly regarded in the entertainment business but who ran afoul of Mr.
Levin.


Russian Official Says Police Graft Is Rife
Russia's top police official said today that some 2,000 police officers nationwide are awaiting trial for corruption or abusing office.
Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov told the Interfax news agency an operation  was under way to purge police departments of corrupt police officers and that a number of them have already been dismissed.


Fixed-Rate Mortgages Dip
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.35 percent this week, down from 7.37 percent last week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation reported today.
The 30-year rate was at the lowest level since Feb. 24, 1994, when rates  averaged 7.32 percent.
Rates have fallen steadily since a high of 9.25 percent the week of Nov. 23, 1994.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a report by the State Health Department  on a brain surgery error at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center referred incorrectly to a department action against the hospital.
It is moving to fine the hospital; the fine is not automatic.
The hospital can request a hearing to defend itself.


Teacher Union Head Faults Mayor on Pay
Less than two weeks after New York City's teachers' union reached a tentative labor settlement with the city, the union's president feuded openly with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday over the terms of the contract and the Mayor's proposal to give himself and other elected officials a pay raise.
On Wednesday, Sandra Feldman, the president of the United Federation of Teachers, denounced the proposed raises as "outrageous." Then in an op-ed article in The Daily News published yesterday, she criticized the Mayor's office for exaggerating provisions in the new, five-year contract.
Ms.
Feldman said the departing Commissioner of Labor, Randy L. Levine, had inaccurately portrayed the pact "in his zeal to defend Mayor Giuliani."


Senior French Politician Gets 3 Years in Jail
A French court today sentenced former Communications Minister Alain Carignon  to three years in jail on corruption charges, making him the most senior politician jailed under France's Fifth Republic.
Mr.
Carignon, 46, was sentenced to a total of five years in jail, two of them suspended, for accepting gifts from the utilities giant Lyonnaise des Eaux in return for a water privatization contract in the Alpine city of Grenoble when he was mayor.


A Chief Executive in Love in the White House
Once upon a time, there was a leader of the free world who was lonely.
As a widower in the White House, Andrew Shepherd (Michael Douglas) could not easily date.
So President Shepherd had to content himself with striding briskly through the corridors of power, basking in a 63 percent approval rating and looking after his cheerful adolescent daughter.
The daughter had a trombone and could play "Hail to the Chief."
Then Andrew met Sydney (Annette Bening).
She was powerful and beautiful but also an old-fashioned girl, the kind who could sit around in pajamas fretting with her sister about her love life.
Somehow, when Andrew overheard himself called "the Chief Executive of Fantasyland" by this lovely lobbyist, a Cinderella who fought boldly against global warming, he was smitten.
But it would have been difficult to take her out for a milkshake with two straws, so Andrew brought Sydney to a gala State dinner instead.


One Half Of Harper Says It All For Knicks
Forget about the matchup between Don Nelson and his old team, the Golden State Warriors.
Derek Harper versus Tim Hardaway was the headliner tonight at the Oakland Coliseum.
After bantering back and forth in the first half, Harper closed Hardaway's mouth after intermission with a dazzling array of baskets, assists and steals.
Harper, held scoreless in the first half, poured in 16 points in the third quarter, sparked a critical 11-0 run and finished with a game-high 22 as the Knicks coasted to a 120-97 victory.


Abroad at Home;Some Are Less Equal
This nation of immigrants has traditionally drawn almost no distinction, except in the right to vote, between the rights and duties of citizens and of lawful immigrants.
The constitutional guarantees of due process and equal protection of the law go not just to citizens but to "any person." When we had conscription, immigrants were drafted.
That tradition will change radically if the Republican majority in Congress has its way.
For the first time, those who come to this country to seek safety or a better life will have to become citizens -- a step that in our history has  always been voluntary -- or be denied rights that others have.


Art in Review
'Seven Painters' Nicholas-Alexander Gallery 155 Spring Street SoHo Through Nov. 25


A Washington Potboiler Steals Budget's Thunder
Forget, for the moment, the future of Medicare, tax cuts for the middle class, resizing the social safety net or balancing the Federal budget in 7, 8, 9 or 10 years.
Dialogue between Congress and the White House has boiled down to this: Who got to stretch out where, who got to talk turkey with whom and who got equal access to the front door of a Boeing 747.
On Wednesday, Speaker Newt Gingrich confessed that he had freighted a stopgap spending measure with restrictive conditions that prompted a veto and a Government shutdown in part to spite President Clinton for failing to show adequate courtesy to him and Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, on Air Force One on the way to and from Israel for the funeral of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 10 days ago.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


Advanced Micro Picks Hill, Holliday
Advanced Micro Devices Inc., the manufacturer of integrated circuits in Sunnyvale, Calif., said yesterday that it had named Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston to handle its corporate advertising account, which had been at GSD&amp; M in Austin, Tex., for the last year.
The billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Hill, Holliday was awarded the account without a review.
The product advertising portion of the account continues to be handled by Hodskins, Simone &amp; Searls in Palo Alto, Calif.


Furloughing Staff, a Congressman Goes It Alone
On Monday night, Representative Michael P. Forbes, Republican of Long Island, huddled with his nine staff members here and conferred on them the ultimate insult in this the week of the budget showdown: he said they were not essential and, thus, should not come to work.
He is one of only a handful of Congress members to send their staffs packing  along with the 800,000 other nonessential Federal employees furloughed earlier this week.
And since convictions often carry a price, Mr.
Forbes showed up at work just after 9 this morning, stepped over a stack of mail and unlocked his door to two insistent rings.
He picked up the phone.


Robert A. Jones, 57, A Dean at Seton Hall
Robert A. Jones, dean of libraries at Seton Hall University in South Orange,  N.J., died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 57 and lived in High Bridge, N.J.
The cause was cancer, said Elinor G. Walker of the Seton Hall office of public relations.


Art in Review
John Currin Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Nov. 25


New York Is Barred From Cutting Off Support to the Retarded
Accusing city and state officials of playing a cruel game of "budgetary chicken," a Federal judge ruled yesterday that New York State cannot cut off support for 50 severely retarded adults who have lived in institutions out of state since they were children.
In his ruling, Judge David G. Trager of Federal District Court in Brooklyn said it was shameful that the city and state, in a disagreement over whether to share the costs of the patients' care, had simply stopped payments to the out-of-state residences.
The ruling was a victory for the parents and guardians  of the retarded adults, 26 of whom had been named as plaintiffs in a lawsuit against the city and state.


Grace Miceli, 81, Stage Costumer
Grace Miceli, whose work as a costumer left an enduring legacy in the performing arts, died on Tuesday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan.
She was 81.
In 1961, Ms.
Miceli and her sister, Maria Brizzi, founded Grace Costumes Inc. and began providing costumes for opera, theater, ballet, film and television.


Dollar, Ignoring Budget Impasse, Gains on Stock and Bond Rallies
The dollar rose against other leading currencies yesterday, bolstered by rallies in American stock and bond markets.
The dollar was aided in its climb against the Japanese yen by a sizable cut in Japan's trade surplus.
It was helped higher against the German mark by falling interest rates in Europe.


Bonds Soar; Yields Near A 2-Year Low
Technical buying, optimism on the budget battle and another sign of economic  weakness combined yesterday to drive Treasury prices sharply higher.
The rally pushed the yield on the 30-year bond down to 6.22 percent, from 6.29 percent on Wednesday, the lowest level in nearly two years.
The price of the 30-year bond ended at 10820/32 , up 31/32 .


Oranges as Love Objects
When Lincoln Center was founded, one of the hopes was that its resident companies would support one another's work.
Just such cooperation has made possible this weekend's production of Prokofiev's wonderfully ludicrous fairy-tale opera, "The Love for Three Oranges," which opened on Wednesday night  at the Juilliard School.
The New York City Opera has lent the school the marvelous sets and costumes designed by Maurice Sendak for its 1985 production.
Frank Corsaro, who directed the work when it opened at the opera company, is at the helm again in his capacity as artistic director of the Juilliard Opera Center.


Lehman Is Fined $15,000 by the N.A.S.D.
Lehman Brothers Inc., one of Wall Street's biggest securities firms, was fined $15,000 for refusing to honor its stock price quotes on the Nasdaq stock market, regulators said this week.
The action by the National Association of Securities Dealers Inc. comes amid  intense scrutiny of how the association polices Nasdaq.


Henry Hoffman, Editor, 87
Henry Hoffman, a former editor at WQXR, the radio station of The New York Times, died on Wednesday at Saddle Back Memorial Hospital in Laguna Hills, Calif.
He was 87.
Mr.
Hoffman, who was born near Minsk in Russia and was brought to New York as an infant, worked as a teletype operator for Western Union before he joined The  Times in 1941, initially to take telephone dictation from reporters calling in their articles.


Of a Circus, Church and Lesbian Love
In the solemnly romantic world of Patricia Rozema's film "When Night Is Falling," erotic passion is as dizzying as doing cartwheels, as scary as hang gliding for the first time and as tricky to coordinate as a trapeze act.


Turning Placid and Boring Into a Plus
Hampshire this week.
The 30-second advertisement called "Dignity" emphasized Mr.
Lugar's mature bearing, seeking to draw a contrast with President Clinton.


Taking Face Lifts Literally
If you have plans to undergo cosmetic surgery in the near future, Georges Franju's elegantly creepy "Eyes Without a Face" is a must to avoid.
This 1959 French horror film, which is being revived at the Cinema Village in a new 35-millimeter print, follows the scalpel wielded by a mad plastic surgeon as he  methodically slices off the face of a beautiful woman.
Just when you hope that the camera will discreetly turn away from the procedure, it locks onto the eyes of a doomed medical captive as her skin is lifted off like a mask, soon to be grafted onto the face of another.
It doesn't  matter that the surgery looks fake by contemporary standards of film realism.
The black-and-white movie, adapted from a novel by Jean Redon, sends a chill that extends from the cheekbones through the eye sockets to the back of the skull.


Rochester University Plans More Spending Per Student
At a time when shrinking budgets are forcing most colleges and universities to cut their costs per student, the University of Rochester announced yesterday  a plan to raise its spending on each undergraduate.
It is the second time in little more than a year that the small research university has taken a bold step to compete better with lower-cost public institutions for the best students.
Last year, the university introduced a $5,000 tuition discount for in-state students.
This time, it is seeking to create a more intimate environment by increasing the professor-to-student ratio.
The plan is similar to -- but more far-reaching than -- one undertaken three years ago by Tulane University in New Orleans.


Flights Are Stalled By Computer Glitch
A computer software problem at an air traffic control center on Long Island delayed up to 25 planes flying into the New York area yesterday afternoon, officials said.
The flights, most of them from the Midwest, were delayed between 20 and 25 minutes, said John Walker, air traffic division manager of the Federal Aviation  Administration's eastern region.


McDonnell And Boeing Said to Talk
The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the country's largest manufacturers of commercial and military aircraft, have met recently and discussed possible combinations of some of their businesses in an effort to reduce costs and combat shrinking markets, people with knowledge of these talks  said today.
The people said that no deals had been concluded, and might not be, but that  the companies were seriously exploring a variety of combinations of businesses,  like their helicopter-manufacturing operations and their space-vehicle businesses.


Most Republicans Want Abortion Legal
To the Editor:
In "The Aftergloom of Colin Powell" (Op-Ed, Nov. 12), Peggy Noonan states that more than half of America's Republicans would vote to ban abortion.
She bases this conclusion on anecdotal evidence provided by "Republican activists" and "most Republicans I spoke to" in Washington.
As to public opinion polls, she dismisses them by stating that "the numbers are never agreed upon." Maybe it is  only she who doesn't agree.


London Paper to Close
News International P.L.C., the British media unit of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, said yesterday that it was closing Today, its London-based daily newspaper.
Today, a stern critic of Britain's Conservative Government, will print its last edition today.
Many of the 200 staff members will be given jobs in other areas of News International, the group said.
(Reuters)


Any Alcohol Will Suffice To Aid Heart
A study outlined today found that a can of beer can be good for the heart, just as good as a glass of red wine.


Sherrard's Knee Takes A 'Questionable' Turn
This morning, wide receiver Mike Sherrard's right knee swelled up like a grapefruit.
When Sherrard arrived at Giants Stadium, he went to see the trainer  Ronnie Barnes, who decided that Sherrard obviously needed attention.
It turned out that what was described by the team as a sprained knee on Wednesday had got slightly more serious.
Sherrard was not at practice and Coach  Dan Reeves said the receiver had ruptured a small blood vessel above the knee and the fluid needed to be drained.


25 and Under
I can't decide what Piadina reminds me of more.
It looks like the type of classic Greenwich Village restaurant that seems as rare these days as a rotary phone: a couple of steps down from the street and dimly lighted with candles stuck into wine bottles practically engulfed with wax drippings.
On the other hand, the rough wood tables and benches, the brick and stucco walls and the bunches of herbs hanging from timber beams all suggest a rustic Italian farmhouse.


N.B.A. Refs Get New Offer
The National Basketball Association made a new contract offer to its locked-out referees yesterday, but the agent who represents the officials' union is not convinced that the new offer will settle the dispute.
After an all-day meeting, the league offered a five-year contract that would  pay first-year officials $85,000 in the first year of the deal, with salaries increasing to $261,000 for the most-experienced referees.
Salaries would increase about 10 percent in each year of the deal.
In the final year of the package, starting referees would earn $90,000 and top-scale officials would earn $328,000.


Can Kmart Put Together A Comeback?
Is the game over at Kmart?
It certainly looks that way to a lot of retail industry spectators, but the company still has its fans.
They are convinced that the Kmart Corporation's new  management can pull out a come-from-behind victory before the clock runs out.


Judge Blocks a Bid to Deny Emergency Shelter
A State Supreme Court justice has temporarily barred New York City from denying emergency shelter to homeless families who fail to prove that they have  no place else to go.
The ruling by the justice, Helen E. Freedman, pertains to one of several new  regulations for homeless shelters issued by the Pataki administration last week.


Amendment On Prayers Is Introduced
House Republicans have introduced an amendment to the Constitution that sponsors say would allow organized prayer in school.
Opponents criticized the measure as too broad and vague, contending that it amounted to a radical revamping of the First Amendment.


Uncompromising Artist Covers Rough Ground
Robert Frank: Moving Out," which has just opened at the Whitney Museum of American Art, puts you in the company of a singular temperament. It is a dense and at times grueling exhibition because Mr. Frank, who is one of the great photographers of the last 50 years, is such an uncompromising figure. He has refused to stand pat, forcing himself and us along with him to explore some fairly rough emotional territory, whether it is the American psyche or his own anguished condition.
This gives his exhibition its poignancy.
The show includes about 150 photographs and two dozen films and videos that trace his restless trajectory.
Born in 1924, Mr.
Frank started to take photographs in his native Switzerland in the 1940's, moved to America in 1947, switched from photography to films beginning in the late 50's, then returned to photography in the 70's, though to  a sort of photography very different from his earlier work: it has sometimes come to resemble sculpture, considering how much Mr.
Frank has embellished and elaborated on his prints.


ResultsPlus
N.B.A.


Synagogue Debates Dismissing Rabbi Over View on Violence
The Brooklyn rabbi who declared last June that Jews were permitted to kill leaders who take action harmful to the Jewish people has been asked by his congregation to stay away from his synagogue until members decide whether he should resign.
Morris J. Franco, president of the Shaare Zion synagogue, said yesterday that Rabbi Abraham Hecht, 73, had agreed to stay in Florida until the congregation of Sephardic Jews on Ocean Parkway decides whether to continue its relationship  with him.


Big Board Firms' Profits
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that profits of its member firms surged to $1.58 billion in the third quarter, more than triple the $447 million  in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenues also increased sharply, to  $25.66 billion from $18.36 billion, the exchange said.
For the first nine months of the year, the profits of member firms rose to $3.19 billion, a record, from $894 million in the period last year.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the partial shutdown of the Federal Government  misstated the Federal debt ceiling in some editions.
It is $4.9 trillion, not $4.9 billion.


Black Student Group Is Upheld by College
Seeking to end a boycott by blacks, officials at the College of the Holy Cross today overturned a student government decision that would have barred the  Black Student Union from excluding whites from its leadership.
Student leaders voted 31 to 21 on Monday to eliminate a clause that had allowed only people of African descent to serve on the group's executive board,  saying the clause violated the college's nondiscrimination policy.


Home Video
With videophiles seeking more vintage movie titles these days, the familiar question resounds even louder: Where does one find them?
No collector has to be  told that little beyond the ordinary is to be found in the average video store,  which often lacks the space and, in many cases, the interest to stock more than  a conventional selection.
Even the bigger chains fall short.
When it comes to truly fat inventories, the answer for many collectors is mail order.
Catalogues from large suppliers like Facets Video of Chicago (800-331-6197) carry tens of thousands of tapes.
Mail order, in fact, has become so important that studios introduce some old movies to home video not in stores  but exclusively through mail-order houses.


Giving New Life to Old Piers
THEY were dark, windy, dirty and partly abandoned for years, but never let it be said that the Chelsea Piers have not had their brushes with history.
A complex of four piers jutting into the Hudson River from 17th to 23d Streets, they were completed in 1910 to accommodate a new generation of large ocean liners, and in 1912 were the destination of a brand-new ship called the Titanic.
Three years after the Titanic failed to call as expected, the piers were the place from which the Lusitania set off on its last voyage, and in the 1930's these piers were the spot from which the fabled United States Olympic team of 1936, including Jesse Owens, departed for Munich.
Sinking ships and athletic triumphs: it's a striking pair of images.
Given the fact that $100 million has been spent in turning this vast structure into a  huge new sports-and-entertainment complex, either one could be seen as an omen for the piers' future.
This huge project, which represents one of the most ambitious private investments on the waterfront in any city in the United States, could sink like the Titanic, or it could soar like Owens.


Onetime Reformer Is Caught by Reforms He Promoted
Roh Tae Woo was born to a poor family and had his big break when he entered the 11th class of the Korean Military Academy, from which he graduated in 1955.
He rose through the army ranks and was a major general at the time of the assassination of President Park Chung Hee in 1979.
One of his classmates from the same Kyonsang region of South Korea, Chun Doo Hwan, led a revolt to seize power, and Mr.
Roh sent a regiment of crack troops with tanks and artillery to support the uprising.


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHER had hip replacement surgery yesterday and is making a "good recovery," a spokesman for Buckingham Palace said.
The operation, on her right hip, was performed in London at King Edward's Hospital for Officers, The Press Association reported.
News of the operation was not disclosed until more than three hours after it ended.
But it has been no secret that the Queen Mother, 95, has been in considerable pain in recent months and has had to use a walking stick, a wheelchair or a golf cart nicknamed the "Queen Mum-Mobile" to get around.
She is expected to remain in the hospital for about two weeks.


An infomercial promoting a new James Bond movie is a clever way to sell some old films.
TO promote its newest James Bond film, "Goldeneye," MGM/United Artists has produced a 30-minute infomercial that may confound even ardent followers of 007  with its masquerade as a regular program.
The infomercial, titled simply "James Bond," is being broadcast nationwide on dozens of television stations in the format of a slick television entertainment  magazine, complete with charming co-hosts, trivia quizzes and the behind-the-scenes snippets one finds on programs like "Entertainment Tonight" and "Extra."


As Onlookers Scream, Israeli Re-enacts the Night He Shot Rabin
Wearing a white bulletproof vest, jeans and a skullcap, Yigal Amir rushed up  to a man with a paper tag that read "Yitzhak Rabin" and raised his right arm as  if to shoot him, point-blank, in the back.
The man with the tag, a police officer playing the part of the late Prime Minister during a re-enactment early today of Mr.
Rabin's assassination, fell to the ground between a limousine and the curb next to City Hall.


CHRONICLE
Nine years ago, BARRY DOUGLAS, an Irish pianist, went on stage with the Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra after rehearsing for just 45 minutes and won the gold medal at the prestigious Tchaikovsky International Piano Competition.
Mr.
Douglas didn't see the orchestra again until this month, when they set out on a two-and-a-half-week tour together.
They are to perform tonight at Carnegie Hall.


Pilots Weren't Ready for Type Of Failure Suspected in Crash
The pilots of a USAir Boeing 737 could have recovered from the mysterious swing of the rudder that appears responsible for the crash of the airliner near  Pittsburgh 14 months ago if they had increased air speed and ignored the natural inclination to hold their altitude, officials of the Federal Aviation Administration and Boeing testified today.
But nothing in the pilots' training told them what to do when such a rudder failure occurred, experts told the National Transportation Safety Board.


UTILITY REORGANIZES TO PREPARE FOR DEREGULATION
SCEcorp yesterday announced a reorganization aimed at preparing its Southern  California Edison subsidiary -- the nation's second-largest electric company --  for state deregulation.
Under the plan, the electric utility would be divided into five business units, as of Jan. 1.
The announcement came less than two weeks after the Pacific Gas and Electric Company said that it would divide its power plants and power lines into separate units.


CBS SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE SALE TO WESTINGHOUSE
CBS Inc. shareholders voted yesterday by a 2-to-1 margin to sell the broadcasting company to the Westinghouse Electric Corporation for $5.4 billion.
Under the terms of the deal, Westinghouse would acquire all outstanding shares of CBS for $81 each in cash.
The acquisition would produce a television company  that reaches 33 percent of the nation, exceeding regulatory limits.
Federal regulators must act on the transaction.
Responding to criticism at yesterday's shareholder meeting in New York, CBS's chairman, Laurence A. Tisch, said he did  not regret any deal he made while running the company for eight years.


CHRONICLE
It's been five years since TINA TURNER went on tour, but that hiatus is about to end.
The singer has announced plans for a tour next year of England, Scotland and Wales.
At a news conference in the Hyde Park Hotel in London on Wednesday, she said  she began to feel like going on stage again while she was recording her first album in five years.
"I started to get the songs for the album, and I started to work them a little bit," she said.
"I got into the spirit. I felt like, maybe it's time, and I became a bit excited."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


A KERKORIAN SPOKESMAN SAYS CHRYSLER TALKS ARE SET
The chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, Robert Eaton, will meet with the investor Kirk Kerkorian on Monday to discuss Mr.
Kerkorian's requests for board  representation and other actions, Mr.
Kerkorian's investment firm said yesterday.
A spokesman for the firm, the Tracinda Corporation, said Mr.
Eaton and Mr.
Kerkorian would discuss various proposals presented by Jerome York, Tracinda's vice chairman and a former Chrysler executive.
Mr.
York, a former Chrysler chief financial officer, is expected to attend the meeting, as are Gary Valade, Chrysler's chief financial officer, and William O'Brien, general counsel.
A Chrysler spokeswoman declined to say whether the meeting would take place, but added that Mr.
Eaton and other senior managers plan to meet with major shareholders to seek their views on the company's corporate governance policies.


Air Bags Can Kill Babies, U.S. Warns
With the holiday travel season approaching, the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned parents today that air bags could kill infants and toddlers.
Last month the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said the deaths of eight children in recent years might have been caused by air bags that had inflated during car crashes.
Air bags inflate with explosive force.


Head of MCA Music Unit Quits; Ex-Rival at Warner Takes Over
After months of careful building under its new owner, MCA Inc. said today that Al Teller, the chairman of its highly profitable music division since 1989, had quit in a dispute.
The big entertainment company said Mr.
Teller was being replaced by Doug Morris, who was dismissed just a few months ago as head of the domestic record labels at Time Warner Inc.


Sports of The Times;Prosecution Should Take Another Shot
IN his elongated and illustrious and polysyllabic career, Don King has surely promoted less captivating boxing matches than the no-decision thrilla-in-Manila  yesterday in his quite-serious wire fraud trial in Federal court.
If Don Dunphy had been calling this trial -- Don Dunphy still calls all the Friday night fights, doesn't he? -- the tumultuous round might have sounded something like this:


On Stage, and Off


Along U.S. 30, the Deadlock Spawns Irritation and Fears
Charlotte Myers put down the rag she had been using to wipe the counter, put  her hands on her hips and exhaled a small, exasperated sigh.
It was another day  of Government gridlock, and the news out of Washington, playing on the television set above the bar, called for more of the same.
"I just don't think it's right," she said.
"It's going to hurt too many people, and soon it's going to hurt us all.


60 Minutes' Case Part of a Trend of Corporate Pressure, Some AnalystsSay
For years, news media analysts have warned that aggressive news coverage was  in danger as newspapers and networks came under the control of ever-larger companies facing increasing pressure to please their investors.
Nothing has thrust that onto the national stage like the recent image of "60  Minutes" and Mike Wallace being overpowered by the fears of CBS lawyers of a theoretical lawsuit had the CBS broadcast an interview with a tobacco-industry whistle-blower.


Blue-Collar Bridgeport Loses Catalyzing Jobs
Cases of juices and platters of pastries had barely been wheeled into the State Senate chamber this morning when Gov.
John G. Rowland, in shirt sleeves, entered a caucus room to make his final argument for a casino in Bridgeport, the state's largest city.
"The issue today is jobs," Mr.
Rowland said.
And if Bridgeport did not get a  casino, he did not know where else the city would find any.


Sidney Hurwitz, 67, a Leader In Treating Child Skin Disorders
Sidney Hurwitz, a doctor who helped elevate the treatment of diaper rash, acne and the entire spectrum of childhood skin disorders into a distinct medical specialty, died on Monday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 67 and lived in Woodbridge, Conn.
The cause was viral pneumonia, said his wife, Teddy.


Speeding Up Chaos on Columbus Ave.;Job Ahead of Schedule, but Some West Siders Call Price Too Great
On the way to a friend's 35th birthday celebration recently, Roger Baumann and several other Upper West Siders spent an hourlong car ride trying to come up with an acronym that would capture the full extent of their exasperation with the construction on Columbus Avenue.
They ultimately decided on Fed-Up: Frustrated Electorate Demanding Use of Pavement.
"I've been berated by cabdrivers who, in colorful language, compare taking me home to their expectations of driving in Beirut," Mr.
Baumann said.


The Last Mile to a Bosnia Peace
Encouraging hints issue from the Bosnian peace talks in Ohio as Clinton Administration officials drop by to press for agreement this weekend.
But each passing day slows the momentum for peace and complicates the logistics of peacekeeping as a new Balkan winter gathers force.
It is time to stop haggling and make peace.
The United States invited the leaders of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia to Dayton to agree on peace terms, not to replay the issues of the 43-month-old war.
Yet Bosnian and Serbian hard-liners cling to long-held positions on Sarajevo, eastern Bosnia, land corridors and war-crimes prosecutions.


Admiral Has to Quit Over His Comments On Okinawa Rape
The commander of United States forces in the Pacific was forced to step down  today after he said the recent rape of a 12-year-old Okinawan girl could have been avoided if the American servicemen involved had simply paid for a prostitute.
The commander, Adm.
Richard C. Macke, apologized after members of Congress and Japanese officials complained, but it was too late.


CHRONICLE
The shutdown of the Federal Government, with only "essential" employees still on the job, has had a dampening effect on the Washington social scene.
But the show went on on Thursday evening in the Great Hall of the National Building Museum, a private institution, for the opening of an exhibition, "We Will Be Back: Oklahoma City Rebuilds." Among 600 guests was Attorney General Janet Reno, who that day had announced that she has Parkinson's disease.


Brooks a No-Show at Giants Practice
It was an interesting day for the Giants today in more ways than one.
First,  linebacker Michael Brooks skipped practice for what he described as personal reasons.
It has been an emotional month for Brooks, a Pro Bowl player and soon-to-be unrestricted free agent.
Brooks has told teammates that even though he once thought he was a lock to return to the Giants, he is no longer sure if he will come back.
Second, the Giants are quietly approaching potential free agents in an attempt to prevent a mass defection.
One of those players is cornerback Phillippi Sparks, who is having a Pro Bowl season with four interceptions (team  high), 10 passes knocked down (team high) and 54 tackles (third on the team).
The Giants spoke with his representative, Frank Bauer, about a contract, first in training camp and then again in October on the West Coast when the Giants played San Francisco.


Bonanza: Panama Canal Zone Up for Sale
It is a colossal windfall that stirs old dreams of instant riches for this small country: 569 square miles of land abutting one of the world's most strategic waterways and more than 7,000 buildings, every last bit of which the United States must hand over to Panama by the end of 1999.
There are airports and harbors, hospitals and warehouses, shopping malls and  hotels, apartments and schools, all originally built by American engineers and soldiers as part of what was once the Panama Canal Zone.


LOJACK SHARES TUMBLE ON LOWER EARNINGS FORECAST
Shares of the Lojack Corporation tumbled more than 30 percent yesterday after the company, which makes systems used to track stolen cars, said it expected its third-quarter earnings to be "near the low end" of Wall Street's expectations.
Lojack, which is based in Dedham, Mass., cited lower-than-expected growth in the New York-New Jersey market, saying its advertising had produced disappointing results.
Lojack said it expected third-quarter earnings between $2.2 million and $2.5 million, or 9 cents a share to 10 cents a share.
For the third quarter  a year ago, earnings were $1.8 million, or 8 cents a share.
Lojack's shares fell $5, to $11.25, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.


1.4 Million in Restitution In Parking Bureau Scandal
In a footnote to the city's Parking Violations Bureau scandal of a decade ago, $1.39 million in restitution is to be paid next week to 385 investors defrauded in the collapse of the company at the heart of the scandal, Citisource.
Lawyers said the payments -- from assets seized, surrendered and held in escrow in the case -- represented 76 cents on every dollar lost.


New Rules Sought for H.M.O.'s
In an effort to strengthen the hand of patients dealing with the state's rapidly growing health maintenance organizations, New Jersey officials proposed  requiring that H.M.O.'s disclose the financial incentives they offer participating physicians to hold down medical expenses. [Page 1]


Watershed Pact Safeguards Drinking Water
To the Editor:


INSIDE
Accused Smuggler Caught


In the Trenches, a Groan: Somebody Make a Deal!
As the Government closed a crisis-crimped work week, there was a fetid quality of statehouse politics hanging about the Capitol, a waiting for some back-room deal to deliver the lawmakers and the White House from the trench warfare they had made of their budget deliberations.
Beyond the debate, there was talk tonight of short-run compromise.
But no canny fixer was immediately in sight, no staff member with the logical deal in his vest pocket waiting for a signal from the leaders, once they had salvaged sufficient political capital in public.


Don't Pencil In Mattingly on Your '96 Lineup Card
Don Mattingly, who has been the Yankees' first baseman for the past dozen seasons, will not be the Yankees' first baseman or any team's first baseman when the 1996 season begins, two people said yesterday.
A baseball official and a close friend of the player said that Mattingly, a free agent, will not retire but will remain unsigned into next season and reconsider his status sometime during the season.


It Is in Our Nature To Be Meat Eaters
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 11 news article on Gary L. Francione, founder of Rutgers University's Animal Rights Law Center: Mr.
Francione's arguments for animal civil rights are the latest example of America's growing cynicism and anti-intellectual mood.


Trenton Seeks H.M.O. Disclosure Of Doctors' Financial Incentives
In an effort to strengthen the hand of patients dealing with the state's rapidly growing health maintenance organizations, New Jersey health officials today proposed requiring that H.M.O.'s disclose any financial incentives they offer participating physicians to hold down medical expenses.
The proposed disclosure rules were among a series of provisions made public today as the state announced its first overhaul of the rules governing H.M.O.'s  in more than two decades.
Health maintenance organizations, which provide services in exchange for a fixed fee, are the fastest growing segment of the state's health care industry.
Enrollment has increased from 100,000 in 1974, when the state first began regulating health maintenance organizations, to 1.4 million today.
The state expects membership to exceed two million by the end of  next year.


Securities Bill Helps Swindlers Prey on Elderly
To the Editor:
Both houses of Congress have passed the securities litigation reform bill, which is now in conference committee and expected to go to the President late this month.


At Bosnian Peace Talks, the Tunnel With the Light at the End Is VeryLong
Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, has a new joke: "You know what Dick is short for?" he asks, referring to Richard C. Holbrooke, the American mediator at the Bosnian peace talks here.
"Dictator!"
Over the last several days Mr.
Holbrooke, an Assistant Secretary of State, has tried every shade of bullying diplomacy to bridge the differences between Serbs, Muslims and Croats.
He has harassed his interlocutors day and night; he has cajoled; he has wined and dined.


S.E.C. Response to Denver
The Securities and Exchange Commission has told Denver officials that it will not ask its chairman, Arthur Levitt Jr., to remove himself from an investigation of $3.87 billion in bonds sold to finance the city's new airport.
The city attorney, Dan Muse, in a letter to the S.E.C. this week, accused Mr.
Levitt of being biased against the airport project, and objected to his taking part in any decisions about possible sanctions against the city.
The commission is examining whether Denver violated securities laws by providing inadequate information to investors on the financial effect of construction delays.


Beliefs
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin is 10 feet from the hotel elevator when the doors start to close.
He lunges, thrusts out an arm and blocks the closing doors.


Ambling Through Flamenco
Cambio y Remate," presented by the Fred Darsow Dance Company on Thursday night at the Danspace Project at St. Mark's Church, was hard to watch in any concentrated way.
It was not that Mr.
Darsow's suite of five dances was all that complex or uninviting.
A continuation of his experiments in blending and reformulating flamenco and modern dance, the program was amiable enough and Mr.
Darsow made an interestingly intimate use of the open stage space.
But the evening raised questions that made the dance look inconsequential.


Annie and Daddy Warbucks Go to London
In a weekend cluttered with television movies, the best turns out to be a silly lark about an ageless 12-year-old in her trademark red dress.
Little Orphan Annie is back, this time in "Annie: A Royal Adventure," a nonmusical tonight at 8 on ABC (Channel 7 in New York).
It will delight youngsters and even amuse adults who haven't gone completely sour.
Oliver Warbucks (George Hearn), the world's richest man, is to be knighted in London.
What else to do but take along his adopted daughter, Annie (Ashley Johnson); her dog, Sandy, and two of her closest friends, Hannah (Emily Ann Lloyd) and, filched from the dreaded Miss Hannigan's orphanage, little Molly (Camilla Bell).
For lodging, they take the entire sixth floor of the luxurious Savoy Hotel.
The adorable Molly desperately wants to be adopted.
That's one plot line.


Pac-10 Freshman of the Year Is Suspended
California's TREMAINE FOWLKES, has been ruled ineligible for the entire 1995-96 season for N.C.A.A. violations.
Fowlkes was the Pac-10 freshman of the year for 1994-95, when he averaged 13.4 points and a team-high 6.7 rebounds.
The ruling, released yesterday, declared the 6-foot-7-inch sophomore forward ineligible because of improprieties involving the sports agent JAMES CASEY and the use of a car.
The school plans to appeal. (AP)


Young Dancers Following in the Footsteps of Julio Bocca
Imagine a stage filled with more than a score of little Julio Boccas and Paloma Herreras.
Well, not quite.
But as demonstrated so charmingly by the teen-agers performing with Julio Bocca and Ballet Argentino, it is easy to see why Argentine prodigies like Mr.
Bocca and Ms.
Herrera shot so quickly to international stardom at American Ballet Theater.
Somebody must be doing something right in the ballet schools of Buenos Aires.
The 14 young dancers, ages 14 to 19, whom Mr.
Bocca leads through tomorrow afternoon at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) are exceptionally well trained; their stylishness, assurance and easy technique, especially in centered multiple pirouettes, recall the New York debuts of Mr.
Bocca, now 28, and Ms.
Herrera, who has reached the ripe old age of 20.


Georgia Dismisses Goff as Coach
RAY GOFF has been dismissed as football coach at Georgia after three straight mediocre seasons, a source told The Associated Press yesterday.
The source, who  spoke on condition of anonymity, said Goff was discharged after practice Wednesday by VINCE DOOLEY, the athletic director.
The Bulldogs (5-5) will finish the regular season Nov. 23 at Georgia Tech.
"Obviously, I'm pretty upset right now, mainly I'm concerned about my players," Goff told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, which said the offensive coordinator WAYNE McDUFFIE was also fired.
Georgia was 19-5 under Goff in 1991 and 1992, but 5-6 in 1993 and 6-4-1 in 1994. (AP)


Suspected Organizer of Golden Venture Operation Is Arrested
The man who masterminded the Golden Venture smuggling operation -- a man who  ordered the freighter grounded so its human cargo of illegal Chinese aliens could swim or die -- was captured on Thursday in Bangkok while washing his new Mercedes, Federal law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The elated officials said last night that the arrest of Lee Peng Fei -- a shadowy figure generally known as Charlie or Char Lee even to his immediate subordinates in the cutthroat business of alien smuggling -- was by far the biggest catch yet in the 1993 tragedy in which 10 Chinese people perished in the waters off Rockaway Beach in Queens.


Vard Sells 2 Ships
Vard A.S., which owns Kloster Cruise Ltd., said yesterday that it had sold two cruise ships and would be able to make its corporate bond interest payments.
Vard, based in Oslo, said Kloster had sold the cruise ships Star Odyssey and Royal Odyssey for a total of $150 million.
Kloster signed an option to buy back  the ships at the same price after six months.
In the meantime, Kloster will rent the ships from the new owners, whose identities were not disclosed.
Dow Jones


Shrinking Inventories in Midwest Prompt Sharp Rise in Oil Prices
Prices of crude oil surged yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange after a scarcity of supplies for delivery against the expiring futures contract  forced buyers to bid prices higher.
On other markets, prices of natural gas also climbed.
The Commodity Research  Bureau index of 21 commodities rose 1.04 point, to 243.81.


Wells Gains in Bid For First Interstate
Wells Fargo &amp; Company cleared the first regulatory hurdle today in its hostile bid for First Interstate Bancorp, winning Federal antitrust clearance to buy up to 5 percent of First Interstate's stock.


Union Members Express Dismay at Terms
As details of New York City's tentative new labor agreement with 17 of its unions began to filter down to the rank and file late yesterday, the immediate reaction of some workers was disbelief, followed by a simmering defiance that union leaders said could endanger ratification.
"There is no way I would vote for something like this," said Celeste James, an assistant in the City Clerk's Office in Brooklyn and a chairwoman of the executive board of Local 1549, which represents clerical workers.
"To us, it's a slap in the face, totally."


TIME WARNER SHARES RISE 3.5% AFTER SHAKE-UP
Shares of Time Warner Inc. jumped 3.5 percent yesterday after a management shake-up that ousted Michael Fuchs as chairman of its music and pay television divisions.
But the shake-up could face a legal challenge.
A person close to U S  West, Time Warner's partner in a venture that includes cable television systems, HBO pay television and the Warner Brothers studios, said the company's lawyers were examining whether the management reorganization announced on Thursday violated terms of their partnership.
U S West declined comment.
Still, Wall Street liked the new management plan.
Time Warner's stock jumped $1.375, to $39.75, on the Big Board.


Fed Panel's September Vote Was 11-0 for Steady Rates
Federal Reserve policy makers were unanimous in holding an important short-term interest rate steady on Sept. 26, minutes of the meeting showed today.
The Fed's policy-making group, the Federal Open Market Committee, voted 11 to 0 to leave the target for the Federal funds rate on overnight bank loans at 5.75 percent.
By changing the interest rates it controls, the Fed's actions translate into lower or higher borrowing costs on everything from home mortgages to industrial loans.


Another Day Of Records For Stocks
The Dow Jones industrial average flirted with the 5,000 level yesterday as the Standard &amp; Poor's composite index reached its own milestone, surpassing 600  for the first time.
The Dow rose as high as 4,996.81 during the afternoon but finished at 4,989.95, up 20.59 points for the day.
That close still set a new high for the 59th time in 1995, matching the record for new highs in one year -- set in 1925 and tied in 1964.
But the champagne bought to celebrate 5,000 had to be kept on ice for at least one more weekend.


ESTEE LAUDER STOCK SOARS ON STRONG INVESTOR DEMAND
The stock of the Estee Lauder Companies, the cosmetics concern, performed strongly as investors swarmed to its initial public stock offering.
The stock closed at $34.50 after 8.9 million shares were traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
The initial offering price was $26.
Strong demand drove the initial estimated price of the 14-million-share offering above its original range of $22 to $24.
The family of the company founder, Estee Lauder, including her son Leonard Lauder, who is chief executive, will retain 97.7 percent of the company  after the offering.
Family members are selling 13.5 million of the 14 million shares being sold, mostly to pay off debt to the company.


Netscape Stake Hits $1 Billion
James H. Clark became a Netscape billionaire today.
As shares of the Netscape Communications Corporation surged $9.75, to close at $110.50 on Nasdaq, Mr.
Clark, 51, the company's co-founder and chairman, saw  his 9.4 million shares in the company surpass $1 billion in value for the first time.
Netscape, the 19-month-old producer of Internet software, started with a $4.1 million investment by Mr.
Clark, and is now worth about $4 billion.


N.A.S.D. Board Approves Plan For Revamping
The board of the National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday approved a plan that tries to spruce up the governance of the association and its Nasdaq stock market, under pressure from Government agencies.
The proposed makeover would increase public representation in the N.A.S.D.'s  governance, while strengthening oversight of the fast-growing marketplace, according to people familiar with the board's decisions.


2 F.D.A. Panels Give Support to Rogaine
Two Food and Drug Administration advisory panels recommended today that the agency approve over-the-counter sales of the Upjohn Company's Rogaine, a prescription drug used to combat hair loss.
The F.D.A. is not bound by the recommendations of advisory committees but usually accepts them.


How Do I Get Off This Juror Treadmill?
To the Editor:
Nothing I have read about the imminent "streamlining" of the jury system in New York State (editorial, Nov. 8) raises even the remotest hope that a crucial  aspect of the situation will be addressed -- how long some potential jurors remain in that unenviable position.
Having served once, they are spat out by the computer every two years, whether they sat on a monthlong case or were never chosen.


G.O.P. Poll Nears on Tide of Gifts, Fliers and Gimmicks
Margie Phillips had just settled down to lunch in the ballroom of a hotel here when the others at her table suggested she go get her picture taken.
So she left her plate of barbecued chicken, baked beans and pasta to pose with former Gov.
Lamar Alexander, the Republican Presidential candidate from Tennessee.
The snapshot of the two is supposed to be made into a button that will say "Lamar and Me" and will then be sent to Ms.
Phillips.


Long Island Girl Overcomes Controversy
JESSICA FOSCHI, the national-class swimmer from Long Island on probation for  failing a steroid test was back in the water yesterday, winning the preliminary  heats of two freestyle events at the New York State public high school championships in Buffalo.
Foschi, a 15-year-old sophomore at Friends Academy in  Locust Valley, broke her own state record in the 500-yard freestyle with a time  of 4 minutes 46.97 seconds and beat her nearest competitor by the length of the  25-yard pool.
Foschi also will be the top seed in the 200-yard freestyle final.
In August, Foschi tested positive for a muscle-building steroid after finishing third in the 1,500-meter freestyle at the Nationals. (AP)


Energy Secretary Acted Appropriately
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 11 editorial imploring Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary to resign:


Nets Forget To Bring An Offense
The bulk of the Nets' scoring punch was back in New Jersey as Kenny Anderson  rested his strained groin muscle and Derrick Coleman continued to treat his irregular heartbeat.
It has been that way for most of this young season.


How Shaw Gave 'Pygmalion' to Broke Director
To the Editor:
Re "Shaw Revised Shaw" (letter, Nov. 3):


House Votes to Bar Funds For U.S. Troops in Bosnia
Ignoring warnings that it would sabotage peace talks, the House of Representatives voted 243 to 171 tonight toprevent money from being spent to send United States peacekeeping troops to Bosnia.
Approval by the Senate is far from certain.
The bill failed by a margin well  shy of the two-thirds majority needed to override a certain White House veto.


Journal;Ticket To Ride
The first concert the Beatles played in the United States was at the Washington Coliseum on Feb. 11, 1964 -- two nights after the country dropped everything to watch them on "The Ed Sullivan Show." The only kid my friends and  I knew who had a ticket was a girl whose father owned a car dealership.
The rest of us were literally out in the cold -- in front of the Shoreham Hotel, actually, where the Beatles were said to be arriving by late afternoon.
We had rushed there after school on the Connecticut Avenue bus.
It was hard to know what propelled us.
Yes, we had been listening to "Meet the Beatles" night and day during the three weeks since it first appeared in the racks at Super Music City.
Our own WWDC had been the first radio station in the country to play "I Want to Hold Your Hand." But we were not the kind of boys to scream about pop stars.
We wore narrow belts, chinos and crew cuts; we took Algebra II  seriously.
Yet here we were, screaming, any time a potential Beatlemobile pulled up to the Shoreham's curb.


G.O.P. Candidates Spar In Long-Distance Debate
In a feisty, two-hour free-for-all on national television, eight Republican Presidential contenders tonight challenged each other's conservative credentials on issues ranging from balancing the budget to overhauling the welfare system and cutting taxes.
Rather than concentrate on the front-runner, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, several candidates turned on each other in some of the sharpest attacks of the campaign season.
The budget negotiations in Washington forced a hybrid, and sometimes awkward, format on the program, CNN's "Larry King Live," with contenders split between here and Washington.


RETAILER PLANS TO SHUT 7 STORES AND CUT 649 JOBS
The Kmart Corporation, the struggling discount retailer, said yesterday that  it would close seven stores in three states early next year in a cost-cutting move that will eliminate 649 jobs.
The nation's second-largest retailer, which on Thursday reported a worse-than-expected loss for the third quarter, said the  stores did not meet its profit requirements.
Five of the stores are in California.
Kmart added, however, that it also planned to open 30 discount stores and between 20 and 30 Super K stores next year.


Rabbi Apologizes For His Remarks On Killing Leaders
A Brooklyn rabbi who said in June that Jews were permitted to kill leaders who take action harmful to the Jewish people said he regretted the statement yesterday, and acknowledged that his remarks might have contributed to the climate that led to the killing of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
The rabbi, Abraham Hecht, 73, who said he had written to Mr.
Rabin two weeks  before the assassination apologizing for his remarks, said he would mute his language.


Means Will Not Play
Chargers running back Natrone Means will miss his second straight start Sunday at Denver because of a groin strain.
He does not expect to play until the Chargers meet Oakland on Nov. 27.


Bright Facade, Dark Interior
Ann Magnuson played the starlet and the floozy, the rocker and the swinger on Wednesday night at Fez.
But under the mask of a hundred impersonations, she played her own autobiography.
And like the character of the seedy lounge singer  that she kept returning to throughout the performance, on the outside her story  was all fun and glamour but on the inside it was a dark, twisted mess.
Ms.
Magnuson has had a career as eclectic as her show.
A native of apprenticeship on the New York's spoken- word and performance-art scene in the 80's before finding a second home in Los Angeles to star in the sitcom "Anything but Love" and appear in several movies.


Theater In Review
Hip-Hop in All Forms, But Mainly the Dance 'Jam on the Groove' Minetta Lane Theater


Promoters of 'Extreme Fighting' Cry Uncle
Among the few rules governing "extreme fighting," there is one that allows a  losing fighter to signal surrender by tapping his hand three times on the bloody mat.
Yesterday, in the arena of New York City, promoters of the fledgling sport  tapped out.
Battlecade Inc., which had hoped to stage an extreme fighting contest in the  Park Slope Armory in Brooklyn tonight, succumbed to intense city opposition and announced that it would be moving the pay-per-view cable event to a site beyond the borders of New York State.


Music in Review;JAZZ
After Hip-Hop, Back Home With Theme, Exposition, Theme Greg Osby Quartet Sweet Basil


Traveling in Style
The cramped Quonset hut that served as the passenger terminal at Westchester  County Airport is being replaced by a $21 million building, a spacious, three-story structure of tan brick and glass.
Article, page 26.


Missing Prices
Prices for more than 300 mutual funds were not available yesterday because they were not reported to Nasdaq.


Apple and I.B.M. End Multimedia Joint Venture
Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M. said today that they were closing one of their three joint ventures, Kaleida Labs Inc., which makes programming tools for multimedia software.
Kaleida had never managed to dislodge the industry standard, Macromedia Inc.'s Director program, from its perch.
Kaleida had only 79 employees, some of whom will be offered positions at Apple and I.B.M., the companies said.


SECURE COMPUTING STOCK HAS MORE THAN TRIPLED
The shares of the Secure ComputingCorporation closed yesterday at three times the offering price on their first day of trading.
Secure Computing's shares, priced at $16, closed at $48.25 on trading of almost 2.4 million shares on Nasdaq.
Secure Computing, based in Roseville, Minn., makes computer network equipment designed to keep out people who try to gain access to computer networks without authorization.
Secure Computing sold two million shares to raise $36 million.


The Heart Procedure on Kean Is Said to Have Gone Well
Former New Jersey Gov.
Thomas Kean was recovering well today after a one-hour procedure last night to unclog a main artery to his heart, officials at Morristown Memorial Hospital said.
"He was up early this morning reading the papers, and he's in good spirits,"  said Jeff Cromarty, a spokesman for Drew University, where Mr.
Kean, who was governor from 1982 to 1990, has been president since leaving office.


EXIDE ELECTRONICS TO BUY DELTEC POWER SYSTEMS
Exide Electronics Group Inc. of Raleigh, N.C., said yesterday that it planned to buy Deltec Power Systems Inc. from the Finnish holding company Fiskars Oy A.B. for $195 million in cash and stock.
Deltec Power makes uninterruptible power products that protect computers and other electronic equipment from power  loss or distortions.
It has customers in Scandinavia, Eastern Europe and Russia, which is expected to help Exide expand its international sales.
Exide will pay Fiskars about $157.5 million in cash and $37.5 million in stock.
The stock portion of the purchase price consists of 1.875 million Exide common shares valued at $20 each.


Westchester Replaces Tiny Old Terminal With Tiny New One
Allen Stouse, an executive from Michigan, had been waiting nearly two hours for a storm-delayed flight out of Westchester County Airport.
He stood in one of eight rows of grumpy travelers, shuffling shoulder to shoulder across the scuffed linoleum floor of the World War II-vintage Quonset hut that had served for 50 years as the passenger terminal here.


As a Beach Erodes, So Does Faith in Sand Project
As coastal storms go, Tuesday's northeaster was not memorably ferocious.
Yet  before the wind-driven waves had subsided, they had dragged away the remaining section of a 350-foot-wide beach that is part of the nation's largest sand replenishment project.
In August, when waves from a hurricane far out at sea washed away half of the same stretch of newly rebuilt beach, engineers for the state and the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers said erosion was occurring exactly as anticipated and the sand would stabilize.


Commerzbank Shares
Commerzbank A.G. said yesterday that it was selling 3.2 million new shares at a price of 320 marks ($230) a share, raising 1.02 billion marks ($728 million).
The bank, one of Germany's leading international banks, said strong demand for the shares among private and institutional investors had yielded a price only slightly below yesterday's market price of 323 marks.
The bank said 55 percent of the new shares were being sold in Germany, with the rest going abroad, primarily to Switzerland, Britain and the United States.
Bloomberg Business News


Manager at 3M To Head Spinoff
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company named William T. Monahan today to head the computer data storage and imaging units that it will spin off next year.
Mr.
Monahan, 48, is group vice president of 3M's electro and communications systems group in Austin, Tex.
More than 20 of his 23 years at 3M have been spent in sales and marketing at the data storage unit.


Conrad J. Lynn, a Veteran Civil-Rights Lawyer, Is Dead at 87
Conrad J. Lynn, a longtime civil rights lawyer whose clients included freedom riders in the South, Vietnam War draft resisters and Puerto Rican nationalists,  died on Thursday at his home in Pomona, N.Y.
He was 87.
During a six-decade law career, Mr.
Lynn espoused scores of unpopular causes, leading the State Department to seize his passport in 1968 after he traveled to  North Vietnam.


Television Review;The Apex of the Pinnacle, Before and Since
Don't expect many revelations from "The Beatles Anthology," just refinements  of familiar pleasures.
It is, after all, the authorized version of the Beatles'  history, which has already been one of the most minutely chronicled stories of the 20th century.
The much-touted three-part, six-hour special begins tomorrow at 9 P.M. on ABC and continues on Wednesday and Thursday at 9 P.M.
"The Beatles Anthology" includes two new songs, built by the surviving Beatles on rough tapes left by John Lennon; "Free as a Bird" will be broadcast tomorrow and "Real Love" on Wednesday. (Both were withheld from advance reviewers.) George Harrison plays part of a song he never recorded, "Deradoon,"  on a ukulele.
There are also live performances from the Beatles' early years and studio outtakes from later, most of them heard in snippets or interrupted by voice-overs.
They are teasers for Capitol Records' "Beatles Anthology" collections of rarities; the first two-CD set, including "Free as a Bird," is due for release on Tuesday, with "Real Love" to follow in March.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Nov. 7 about cellular telephones misstated the reason their use is forbidden on passenger planes in the air.
It is because of the potential for interference with ground-level cellular telephone communications. (Concern about interference with communications and other equipment aboard is the reason for regulation of the phones' use while the plane is on the ground.)


Bridge
The Fall National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League began  here this afternoon with some 3,000 players from North America and a few from farther afield assembled to battle for seven major titles in the next 10 days.
Tournament news will be available on the World Wide Web at http://www.acbl.org/  acbl.
A likely winner of one of these titles is Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., a former world champion who won the 1994 Life Master Pair Championship with some help from the diagramed deal.


Padres Name Ex-Player General Manager
After a five-week search for a general manager to replace RANDY SMITH, the San Diego Padres decided that KEVIN TOWERS, their scouting director, was their man.
Towers, 34, a first-round draft pick by San Diego in 1982 whose pitching career ended in Class AAA because of an elbow injury, was promoted yesterday and given a two-year contract, with a club option for 1998. (AP)


Poland's Vote No Big Worry For Investors
In a measure of Poland's economic maturity, the outcome of Sunday's fiercely  contested presidential runoff election is likely to make little difference to investors or the country's economic outlook, business executives and analysts say.
Only two years ago, the idea of a former Communist as president would have unnerved investors.
But for the last year, a former Communist, Jozef Oleksy, has served as Prime Minister, and Poland is headed for its fourth consecutive year of robust growth.
Foreign investment is flowing in at a faster rate this year than last.


CHRONICLE
In the play "School for Scandal" that opens tomorrow at the Lyceum Theater on Broadway, TONY RANDALL stars as Sir Peter Teazle, a man in his 60's married to a much younger woman.
Yesterday, Mr.
Randall, 75, married HEATHER HARLAN, 25, The Associated Press  reported.
An actress, she is the understudy for the role of his ward in "School  for Scandal," a National Actors Theater production.


U.S. Rejects Use of Guard Troops to Run Grand Canyon Park
The Governor of Arizona sought today to use National Guard troops and state employees to reopen Grand Canyon National Park, but the Interior Department rejected the idea, citing safety issues, financial problems and possible legal tangles.
The park, a major source of tourist income in Arizona, has been shut since Thursday because of the Federal budget impasse.


Sitter Is Taped Beating Boy
A suspicious father used a hidden video camera to tape a baby sitter abusing  his 2-year-old son, the police said yesterday.
The videotape shows the sitter, Felicia Pena, 41, beating the boy, pulling his hair and dropping him on the floor of the family's home in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn, said Sgt.
Edward Orski, a police spokesman.
The police arrested Ms.
Pena after the father called them to his house and played them the  tape.


After Mistrial, King Is Headed Back to Court
The judge in Don King's Federal wire-fraud trial declared a mistrial yesterday, but the Government expects to retry the flamboyant promoter on charges that he masterminded a scheme to defraud Lloyd's of London of $350,000 after the cancellation of a Julio Cesar Chavez fight in June 1991.
King and his lawyer, Peter Fleming Jr., hugged one another in the 15th-floor  courtroom in Manhattan.
When a stern-faced King, flanked by lawyers and supporters, emerged from the courthouse he said: "I've got a lot to say, man; I  got a lot to say," but he left quickly for lunch in Brooklyn without further comment.


A BID for Reform
Business Improvement Districts have been a godsend during a time of municipal austerity.
There are 34 BID's in New York City.
Commercial property owners pool  their resources to hire extra street cleaners, security guards and graffiti removers.
The BID's can take partial credit for some of the city's most conspicuous success stories, including Bryant Park, the revitalized Times Square and the upbeat look along 14th Street.
But a survey by the City Council Finance Committee has disclosed a troubling  side to the BID phenomenon.
A few BID's are in financial chaos.
Others spend much of their income on overhead and little on actual services.
One BID in Brooklyn employed sweepers who demanded extra money from store owners for cleaning sidewalks they had already been paid to sweep.
Another in Queens was mired in conflicts of interest.


He Built Their Hopes but Little Else
He had glossy brochures depicting neat two-family houses.
He had samples of the building materials that would be used and the lighting fixtures that would be installed.
What John Erglis did not have, he admitted in court yesterday, were nearly enough sites for the number of houses he had promised to build in the East New York section of Brooklyn for more than 150 families who had paid a total of nearly $1 million in down payments.


Investor A.B.'s Profit Increases by 28%
Investor A.B., the main investment vehicle of the Wallenberg family of Sweden, said its nine-month profit rose 28 percent because of higher earnings in its truck and bus unit, Scania.
Investor's net asset value, the usual way of measuring the financial health of the family's holdings, rose 21 percent, to 52.77 billion kronor ($8.06 billion), at the end of September, up from 43.49 billion kronor at the end of 1994.


Cavaliers Halt Losing Streak
Cavaliers 114, 76ers 82


The Museum of All New Yorkers
The Museum of the City of New York, which was founded in 1923, is populist, egalitarian (its founders placed it at 103d Street and Fifth Avenue so it would  be as easy to reach from uptown as downtown) and committed to educating the people of New York about their city.
It is also something many museums never have a prayer of being, deliciously diverting.
To lay out its treasures on Central Park's Great Lawn would be to empty a truly marvelous attic.
Look, for instance, at a show that opened there a few weeks ago, "Uncommon Threads." It has, among other examples of 300 years of New York style, the little suit (very little) that Tom Thumb wore to meet Queen Victoria, the laurel wreath with which New York City crowned General Lafayette in 1824 and the very fancy court suit a man named John Gerard Coster wore to George Washington's Inaugural Ball.


Air New Zealand Moves Into Australian Market
Air New Zealand Ltd. has gained a foothold in the Australian aviation market  by buying a 25 percent stake in Ansett Australia Holdings Ltd. from the Australian transportation company TNT Ltd. for $200 million (Australian), or $148 million (United States).
Air New Zealand has also agreed to take an option  to buy TNT's remaining 25 percent stake for $225 million (Australian).
The option must be exercised by Feb. 15, 1998.
Air New Zealand has held a marathon series of talks with Ansett's two 50 percent shareholders: TNT and the News Corporation, headed by Rupert Murdoch.
The talks with the News Corporation broke down earlier this year.
Bloomberg Business News


Billiard Hall Fight Leaves a Man Dead
A fight erupted at a billiard hall in the Bronx late yesterday afternoon, leaving one man dead and injuring a brother and sister who were caught in the crossfire, the police said.
The source of the dispute is still unknown, but when it was over, the police  said, Charles Rodriguez, 18, lay dead at the scene, shot numerous times by Dang  Tran, 20.
They said Mr.
Tran then handed his revolver to Tam Bui, 22, who was later apprehended along with Mr.
Tran as they fled the pool hall, Minh Tam Billiards, at 2616 Jerome Avenue.


Honda Profits Fell 36% in Fiscal First Half
The Honda Motor Company said yesterday that its profits had declined by 36 percent in the first half of its fiscal year, but predicted it would show a slight improvement in earnings for the full year.
Honda posted profits of 24.2 billion yen ($239 million) for the six months that ended on Sept. 30.
Excluding  last year's gain of 12.8 billion yen ($126 million) from the sale of its holding in Rover P.L.C., the decline was only 4 percent, Honda said.
Honda said a weaker yen and strong domestic demand for its recreational vehicles might mean better profits than it had originally forecast for the year.
The company, which posted earnings for last year of 61.53 billion yen ($609 million), raised its full-year group net profit forecast to 65 billion yen.
Reuters


Germans and French Press Single Currency
Germany and France, the main backers of a single European currency, made clear today that they still backed the idea and wanted to put it into effect by  1999.
At a meeting at this city's airport, the German Finance Minister, Theo Waigel, secured French support for a German-led initiative to insure that each country meets certain financial goals so that the single-currency plan can be adopted.


Solomon Liptzin, 94, Educator And Advocate of Yiddish Study
Solomon Liptzin, an educator and prolific author and scholar in Yiddish and German literature, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Jerusalem, where he had gone to live after retiring from the City University of New York in 1962.
He was 94.
Writing mostly in English, he published many scholarly articles, book reviews and 20 books and biographies, at least a half-dozen of which remain active on publishers' lists as reprints.
One work of 1932, "Arthur Schnitzler: Studies in  Austrian Literature, Culture and Thought," was reissued this year by Ariadne Press.


Court Date Set for Police Chief
Robert Spina, the suspended police chief of West Orange, made his first court appearance yesterday since being indicted Nov. 2 on charges of beating his wife, warning a drug suspect about a raid and lying under oath.
In Superior Court for a pre-arraignment interview, Mr.
Spina was allowed to remain free on a personal recognizance bond of $50,,000.
Arraignment will be Dec. 18.
JOE SHARKEY


Francis Brown,91, for 22 Years Editor Of the Times Book Review
Francis Brown, the editor of The New York Times Book Review from 1949 to 1971, died yesterday at Mid-Coast Hospital in Brunswick, Me.
He was 91 and lived in Topsham, Me.
Mr.
Brown, who was educated as a historian, took over the Book Review at a time when its purpose and scope were changing substantially, and when the number of books being published each year in the United States was rapidly increasing.
During his tenure, the Book Review made an effort to obtain books at least six weeks before publication to insure more thoughtful, comprehensive reviews.
He also commissioned important writers to contribute essays and literary statements.
James Baldwin, for example, wrote on discovering his American identity in Europe, and Saul Bellow wrote on the perils of deep reading.


Corrections
A report in the Daily Briefing column in New Jersey copies on Wednesday about the deaths of three elected officials in just over a year in Clinton, N.J., misstated their titles and gave an incorrect first name for one.
The officials were Councilmen, not Commissioners; the one who died six weeks ago was Richard A. Simpson, not Robert.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 15 about the influence of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association in the New York State Legislature misstated the union's position on  a 1991 bill that would have prohibited the Police Department from dismissing officers who failed drug tests.
The P.B.A. opposed the bill; it did not use its  influence to help bring about passage.
The article also misstated the size of the union.
It has 29,000 members, not 22,000. (The union telephoned to report the errors soon after the article appeared, but the writer was vacationing, and  other staff members failed to relay the message to responsible editors.)


In G.O.P. Plan, Some See a Widening Gap Between Sick and Healthy
Along with reinventing the way medical care is provided to the elderly and poor, the Medicare and Medicaid legislation agreed to by House and Senate negotiators would profoundly change the nation's health insurance system, allowing companies to vastly increase the marketing of an encyclopedic array of  policies to the nation's sickest people.
Republicans and other proponents hail the changes as fostering competition, creating greater personal choice and containing costs.
But many critics, including consumer advocates and Democrats, fear that the changes would push the healthy and sick into different forms of coverage, which would tear at an underpinning of insurance: that the healthy subsidize the less healthy in plans  to which they all belong.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5


F.D.A. Advisory Panel Backs Approval of a Fat Substitute
The Food and Drug Administration's Food Advisory Committee today recommended  approval of Procter &amp; Gamble's fat substitute, olestra, despite testing by the company that showed some adverse health effects on people who consumed the product.
While the committee's recommendation is not binding on the agency, its advice is usually accepted.
In this case, 5 of the 20 committee members expressed strong reservations about olestra's safety.


Pound Off Sharply vs. the Mark, Diverting Attention From Dollar
The dollar was little changed yesterday, as a sharp drop in the British pound against the German mark diverted currency traders' attention from the budget impasse in Washington.
The pound fell as low as 2.1680 marks -- below its previous low of 2.1755 marks, set in May -- on concerns that the budget being prepared for Britain would include tax cuts.
There was further pressure on the pound from speculation that British interest rates would be moving downward.
The pound, which had been  falling in previous sessions, later recovered slightly.


Cranberry Yield Off 20 Percent
There were a lot of cranberries, but "the size was very small," said Neva Moore, a spokeswoman for the American Cranberry Growers Association, as estimates put the 1995 cranberry crop at 20 percent smaller than last year's.
The culprits: an unusually cold spring and hot, dry summer.
Still, the yield was 432,725 barrels -- the third best cranberry crop ever in the state, which is the third leading producer of the berry, The A.P. reported.


William Boucher 3d Baltimore Civic Leader, 76
William Boucher 3d, who helped turn this city's downtown from a shabby shopping area into a tourist center of restaurants and boutiques, died of a heart attack on Monday.
He was 76.
One day during the mid-1950's, Mr.
Boucher, who had worked in his family's tobacco business and was vice president of a specialty grocery, took a walk around the city and found what he later described as conditions worse than the North African slums he had seen during World War II.
He then helped form the Greater Baltimore Committee and was its executive director for most of the following three decades.


California Gets Tough With Insurers Over Meeting
The California Insurance Department yesterday threatened reprisals against insurers should they miss a meeting next week to discuss long-contested rebates  on policies.
The department is trying to speed the settlement of longstanding disputes about rebates and rollbacks on property and liability premiums for both individuals and businesses.


Desegregation Emissary Named
Education Commissioner Leo Klagholz named Harry Galinsky, the former superintendent of schools in Paramus, as his peacemaker to help officials in fractious school districts in eastern Bergen County to draft their own desegregation plan for Englewood's Dwight Morrow High School.
"I am sure that we can agree that a locally developed solution is preferable to a state imposed one," Dr.
Klagholz wrote to 20 school districts near Englewood.
The state is considering creating a regional district to end racial imbalance at Dwight Morrow, whose student population is about 92 percent black and Hispanic.
Dr.
Galinsky proposed one option of changing Dwight Morrow into a voluntary, multidistrict magnet school offering specialized academic themes.


Actor Had Nazi Past
To the Editor:
Phil-Heiner Randermann's Nov. 13 letter on the Sachsenhausen concentration camp states that after World War II the Russians imprisoned prominent Germans, "among them non-Nazis like Heinrich George, a brilliant actor, who did not survive."


Nigeria Ruler Accuses West Of Smears
In an address on his second anniversary of seizing power, Nigeria's military  ruler, Gen.
Sani Abacha, accused the West today of waging a smear campaign against Africa's most populous nation.
General Abacha said Nigeria would not be "cajoled nor intimidated" into changing its behavior "just to satisfy the whims of foreign interests."


Congresswoman's Husband Surrenders to Officials Investigating CampaignFinances
Six days after he vanished, the husband of Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz of Utah turned himself in to Federal authorities here today to face questions about the couple's convoluted finances and how his wife paid for her 1994 campaign.


China-U.S. Ties Warm a Bit as China-Taiwan Relations Chill
China and the United States made new progress today in resuming a program of  high-level military contacts by agreeing to an exchange of visits of their top military officers next year.
But American defense officials visiting here this week reported that during private conversations they encountered trenchant rhetoric and signs of unrelenting determination by Beijing's military and civilian leaders to undermine the rule of the President of Taiwan, Lee Teng-hui.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL


Transactions
Baseball


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


COMPANY BRIEFS
JITNEY-JUNGLE STORES OF AMERICA, Jackson, Miss., a retail grocery concern, has agreed to sell a majority stake in its company to Bruckmann, Rosser, Sherrill &amp; Co., New York, an investment firm.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
PETCO ANIMAL SUPPLIES INC., San Diego, an animal care and pet supply stores concern, completed the purchase of Pet Supply Depot and Just for Pets, both pet  supply retail chains, as well as Super Pets, a two-store chain, for $23.5 million.
AKZO NOBEL SALT INC., Clarks Summit, Pa., a salt products concern and a subsidiary of Akzo Nobel N.V., Arnhem, the Netherlands, agreed to sell its salt  plant in Manistee, Mich., to Ambar Inc., Lafayette, La., an oil and gas field service.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


ROCK IN REVIEW
In Yearning and Anger, The Volatility of Young Love Lisa Loeb Irving Plaza


Jets' Secondary Is Picking Up the Pieces
Otis Smith felt helpless.
Hobbled by a foot injury, he watched from the sideline as the Jets' season collapsed.
"I talked to my wife about it," he said today, "and she said there's nothing  I can do about it. And she's right."


NORCEN SELLS ITS 12% STAKE IN CANADIAN IRON HOLDING
Norcen Energy Resources Ltd. has sold its 12 percent stake and 7 percent royalty interest in the Iron Ore Company of Canada to Labrador Iron Ore Royalty  Income Fund for about $208 million.
The Canadian energy concern said late Thursday that the Labrador fund, which was established for the purpose of buying the stakes, paid for the interests with proceeds from an initial public offering of 30 million trust units.
The move is a major step in the restructuring of Norcen's asset portfolio that will allow Norcen to pay down some of its debt, the company said.
The fund intends to distribute to trust unit holders income derived from the assets of the Iron Ore Company.


Talk Radio's Conservatives Enlist in the Budget Battle
Warren, calling from Linthicum, Md., was irate about high taxes.
"It's axiomatic," he said, "that people in power cannot resist taxing people to the nth degree."
Tony in Frederick was having a hard time with liberals.
"They are not content to let me believe the way I like to believe," he said.
"They force me at gunpoint, under threat of death, to believe the way they believe."


Correction
Because of a transcription error a letter Wednesday by Rabbi David Eliach on  the wearing of knitted yarmulkes in Israel stated, "This has nothing to do with  support for our opposition to the Government's political agenda." It should have stated, "This has nothing to do with support for or opposition to the Government's political agenda."


HOUSE AND SENATE APPROVE G.O.P.'S 7-YEAR BUDGET PLAN; PRESIDENT PROMISES A VETO
As the first cracks developed in the deadlock between the White House and Congress that has caused a partial Government shutdown, Congress today approved  mammoth Republican budget legislation to change the course of the American Government.
President Clinton said today that he would veto the legislation.
"We should balance the budget in a way that reflects our values," he said in a statement.


Shuttle Crew Bids Farewell To Mir Station
The crews of the space shuttle Atlantis and the Russian space station Mir said an emotional goodbye today and closed the hatches of their two ships in preparation for their uncoupling.


Budget Worries Leave Treasury Prices Flat
Treasury prices ended little changed yesterday in a lackluster trading session as market participants awaited signs of progress on budget negotiations  in Washington.
"I think most people came into the day expecting little and they got little," said Joshua Stiles, an economist with the consulting firm of IDEA Inc.
"A lot of people would prefer to stay where they are until Monday," he said, because if a breakthrough on the budget occurred over the weekend, "it would trip people up."


Marine Dies in Fall
A Marine master sergeant fell 300 feet from a helicopter in a training exercise on Thursday night, and his body was recovered today after a search by more than 700 marines, sailors and civilians.
The soldier, Master Sgt.
Jack W. Hinesley, 36, of Farmersburg, Ind., was stationed at the Marine Corps Air Station New River at Jacksonville.


Bethlehem Pullout
Israeli soldiers will leave Bethlehem on Dec.  18 -- three days earlier than  planned -- to allow preparations for the first Christmas under Arab control in 28 years, Palestinian officials said today.
Israel is also scheduled to withdraw from five other West Bank towns.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Jack Finney, a science-fiction writer, misstated  the day of his death in some copies.
He died on Tuesday, not Thursday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Congress and White House In Talks to End Impasse


No Headline
The proposal is dead.
I am not going to put the State Senate through this again." -- GOV. JOHN G. ROWLAND of Connecticut, on casino gambling. [1:3.]


CLASSICAL MUSIC
New York Violin Debut For Student Prize-Winner Jennifer Koh


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 11 about the Animal Rights Law Center at Rutgers University misstated the basis for the release of Taro, the Akita that was ordered killed after it injured a 10-year-old girl.
The rights center argued that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman could spare the dog under a provision in the state constitution giving her the power to return confiscated property to its owners -- not that the Governor's clemency power extended to dogs.


Yugoslav Army Reported to Aid Bosnian Serbs Despite Promises
As President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia negotiates a peace settlement in Dayton, the army under his control is rebuilding the Bosnian Serb military in violation of Mr.
Milosevic's own pledges, American and United Nations officials  said today.
Yugoslav Army technicians have replaced the communications links blown up by  NATO warplanes in air strikes two months ago and have repaired some of the air defense systems, the officials said.


U.S. Judge Approves a Prudential Settlement
A $110 million settlement by Prudential Securities Inc. with thousands of investors received final court approval yesterday.
The settlement of the class-action lawsuit, which accused Prudential of engaging in a racketeering conspiracy in its fraudulent sale of limited partnerships in the 1980's, was approved by Judge Milton Pollack of the Federal  District Court in Manhattan.
The judge had given preliminary approval on Aug. 30.


Theater in Review
Woman Goes Through Changes, Both Bodily and Spiritual 'Wake Up, I'm Fat' Joseph Papp Public Theater


3 Killed and 1 Hurt in Accident
Three young men were killed and another critically injured early yesterday when their speeding sports car crashed into some trees, the A.P. reported.
Two of the dead, and the injured man, were sophomores at Gloucester County College, the police said.


FEDERATED TO REVAMP, SELL OR SHUT 82 STORES
Federated Department Stores Inc. disclosed yesterday that it planned to turn  40 of the 82 stores formerly operated by Broadway Stores Inc. into Macy's outlets and to sell 9 other stores to Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
The remaining stores will be sold, closed or turned into Bloomingdale's. the company said.
Terms of the sale to Sears were not disclosed.
All but one of the stores acquired are in California, where Sears has had a limited presence.
The other is in Colorado.
Federated, the Cincinnati-based company that completed the acquisition of Broadway Stores in October, said the 9,400 employees at the 40 stores would remain employed.


Judge Asked to Dismiss Charges In Crown Heights Stabbing Case
A lawyer for the man accused of violating the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar killed in the racial violence in Crown Heights in 1991 asked a Federal judge yesterday to dismiss the charges because they were vindictive and a result of political pressure.
Christine Yaris, the lawyer for the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., 20, contended after a court hearing that the Justice Department was acting as a "tool of the Brooklyn District Attorney's office" in bringing the case.


Hewlett-Packard Net Surges; Stock Falls
The fastest-growing major computer concern, the Hewlett-Packard Company, reported yesterday that it had a 42 percent jump in profit for its fiscal fourth quarter ended Oct. 31.
However, its stock fell from investor resentment over the price for such growth: a lower profit margin.
The company's earnings of $678 million exceeded consensus forecasts on Wall Street.
Much of the growth came from personal computers, which have a lower profit margin than other computers.
By contrast, profit was up 66 percent in the fiscal third quarter from a strong performance in the comparable period a year earlier.


Adidas Shares Gain
The shares of Adidas A.G. rose 12 percent yesterday from the sale price in last week's initial public offering in their first day of trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
The shares rose to 76.20 marks ($54.40) each from a sale price of 68 marks a share.
The sporting goods company said the issue was 10 times oversubscribed.
Adidas sold 27.3 million shares, raising about 1.8 billion marks ($1.3 billion) for the existing shareholders, including the company's chief executive, Robert Louis-Dreyfus.
Bloomberg Business News


Nelson's Strange Brew Carries Lots Of Kick
Little Charlie Ward came in for big Patrick Ewing tonight.
And the 6-foot-6-inch Doug Christie was posting up the 7-2 Dikembe Mutombo.
It was the second quarter, and once again Coach Don Nelson was brewing some weird concoctions.
The beaker boiled, but it never exploded.
The Knicks held off the Denver Nuggets, 103-94, at McNichols Arena by relying on Nelson's latest experiments.


Referees Reject N.B.A.'s Proposal
Negotiators for the National Basketball Association's locked-out referees said yesterday that they have rejected the league's latest contract proposal.
However, rank-and-file union members have received copies of the proposal and could decide to act against the wishes of their leadership by taking a vote on the deal.


Day of Upsets Has Only Graf Left Standing
Conchita Martinez blamed it all on an ice bag.
Gabriela Sabatini had nothing  to blame, just an opponent who may have wanted it a little bit more.
And, for the first time since the tournament went to a 16-player format in 1983, the season-ending WTA Tour Championships has just one seeded player left heading into today's semifinal round.


The F.B.I.'s Wiretap Request
Last year the Federal Bureau of Investigation persuaded Congress to force telephone companies to provide enough wiretapping capacity to keep pace with changes in technology and in criminal activity.
Last month, in a small notice in the Federal Register, the bureau announced its estimate of the capacity needed.
Its request is an indefensible bid for vast new wiretapping capability.
Governments always crave more eavesdropping power, but that appetite must be  curbed.
Importunings about terrorism, organized crime, white-collar crime and crimes of violence often tempt the public to relax the caution counseled by the Constitution's safeguards for liberty and privacy.
The latest temptation is  technology itself, the fear that electronic changes will frustrate the Government's eavesdropping agents.
This temptation, too, must be resisted.


Nabisco's Tobacco Overseer to Refocus on a Food Unit
H.
John Greeniaus, the 50-year-old food-marketing expert who has been overseeing the tobacco operations of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Company since July, will refocus his efforts entirely on the company's Nabisco cookie, cracker and snack unit, the company said yesterday.
When Mr.
Greeniaus's tobacco oversight role was announced in June, along with the new title of vice chairman, it was widely interpreted as strengthening the company's corporate succession and as a signal to Wall Street that RJR Nabisco was trying to reverse the disappointing performance of its tobacco business.


Taxi Panel Seeks to Test Flat $30 Fee From J.F.K.
Responding to complaints from passengers about overpriced cab rides from John F. Kennedy International Airport, the Taxi and Limousine Commission has proposed an experiment in which riders would pay a flat $30 fee for the trip.
The commission will hold a hearing and vote on the proposal at its meeting on Dec. 21, the chairman, Christopher R. Lynn, said.
If approved, the fare would be imposed a month later, on Jan. 21.


Protest Alters Pep Rally
The University of Southern California's annual hanging of an effigy of its crosstown rival's mascot has long been part of the university's football tradition.
But this year there was a change in the practice, in deference to a group of black students who said the hanging was too reminiscent of the lynchings of blacks.
U.S.C. students normally hanged a stuffed Bruin, the mascot of the University of California at Los Angeles, by its neck and then burned it at a pep rally before the big game.
That changed on Thursday when the university's campus spirit committee allowed the giant stuffed bear to be hanged by its waist, after the concerns were raised by the Black Student Union.


The Young Coloradan With Endless Oxygen
When Adam Goucher of the Colorado University cross-country team goes out to train on the pathways of Boulder, he runs on hallowed ground.
His long stride covers Flagstaff Mountain, Mesa Trail, the roads of a fitness mecca that lured Frank Shorter 20 years ago and continues to attract distance champions from throughout the world.
Eventually, Goucher could supersede them all with a physical gift his coaches have observed but no one can explain.


VOTE IN HARTFORD BY SENATE REJECTS BRIDGEPORT CASINO
The Connecticut Senate today overwhelmingly rejected Gov.
John G. Rowland's proposal for a casino in Bridgeport, ending more than four years of debate over  whether to allow casinos in the state outside of Indian reservations.
The 24-to-10 vote crushed Bridgeport residents' hopes of seeing their ailing  city, one hour from New York, become a gambling mecca.
But for Atlantic City, it meant that a potential competitor, which experts said could have siphoned away as much as 30 percent of its business, had been stopped.


Cigarette Lighter Recall
The Government is recalling 50,000 imported cigarette lighters because they can flare up and fail to extinguish, the Consumer Product Safety Commission said today.
The disposable City-Lites and Liberty-Lites cigarette lighters are also not child-resistant.
The lighter name is engraved on its metal flame hood.
The New York Lighter Company of Brooklyn imported the lighters last year.
They were sold in packages of three, for about $2, at convenience stores and service  stations nationwide, the commission said.
Consumers who own the lighters can call New York Lighter at 1-800-626-4732 to receive a postage-paid mailer to return them.


Observer;Let's Get Sore!
It's time to give class warfare a chance.
The Republicans had me muzzled a long time on this subject, but no more.
"Let the class warfare begin!" is my cry to all who are fed up with outrageously overpaid rock stars and industrial tycoons, with $12 million lunkheads in jockstraps and overgrown boy billionaire egomaniacs from Hollywood.


DU PONT JOINS IN PLASTIC PLUMBING SETTLEMENT
The Du Pont Company yesterday joined the Hoechst Celanese Corporation and the Shell Chemical unit of RoyalDutch/Shell in a $950 million settlement over plastic plumbing.
Du Pont had agreed to contribute $120 million to settle a similar class action lodged in a state court in Eutaw, Ala.
As part of the agreement signed yesterday, the judge in that case transferred Du Pont's settlement to a state court in Tennessee and dismissed the claims against Du Pont in Alabama, a Du Pont spokeswoman said.
Du Pont will not pay any more than  the $120 million, the spokeswoman, Cathy Forte, said.
Hoechst, Shell and Du Pont supplied plastic resin and some parts of the polybutylene plumbing, which, lawsuits have contended, develops leaks after reacting with chlorine in tap water.


Giuliani and Labor Reach Deal To Raise Wages and Keep Jobs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and leaders of New York City's unions announced tentative agreement last night on contracts with 140,000 civilian employees that would increases wages and benefits by 13 percent over five years and protect unionized employees from layoffs for three years.
Like a deal reached with the teachers' union two weeks ago, the agreement with a coalition of 17 unions -- representing more than 60 locals -- would offer no raises for the first two years of their contracts.
And it would also extract modest concessions from the unions that trim overtime, extra pay for working nights and the number of sick days for new employees.


Sports of The Times;Loyalty Issue Crystallizes On Mattingly
WHEN Bob Watson, the Yankees' new general manager, says that he plans to take the team in a new, bold direction, I say "Amen."
Even if it means reassigning the congenial Gene Michael, even it means pushing the hard-working company man Buck Showalter to the desert.
And yes, even if it means drastically reducing the role of Don Mattingly, the team's most consistent symbol of Yankee tradition.


DELTA IS CLEARED TO LEASE SOME T.W.A. AIRPORT SLOTS
A Federal judge cleared the way yesterday for Delta Air Lines to lease 10 slots at LaGuardia Airport in New York from Trans World Airlines, rejecting breach-of-contract and antitrust arguments made by Valujet Airlines.
Judge G. Ernest Tidwell of the Federal District Court in Atlanta denied Valujet's request for an injunction that would have blocked the lease.
Delta immediately announced plans to expand service at LaGuardia.
Valujet contended that it had reached an oral agreement with T.W.A. on Nov. 1 to lease the slots and planned to begin service between Atlanta and LaGuardia on Dec. 15.


Monologues In Sound That Subvert
Our encounters with Luciano Berio's Sequenzas are usually one at a time.
We come across them nestled between the Rococo and the Romantic on some instrumental or voice program.
More rarely do they show up side by side, as all  13 did on Wednesday night at the 92d Street Y.
Individually, Mr.
Berio's monologues in sound tend toward subversion; they disrupt the accustomed contemplation of history and upset the calm of reacquaintance.
Yet played as a sequence in an evening stretching over three hours, the Sequenzas have quite a different effect.


At the Talks, Raging Bull Meets Bulldog, Cordially
When the Bosnian Government found itself at odds in Dayton, Ohio, with Richard C. Holbrooke, the American negotiator branded by his critics in the Clinton Administration as "Raging Bull," what did it do?
It hired Richard Perle, the man branded by his critics inside the Reagan Administration as the "Prince of Darkness."


Marne-la-Vallee Journal;At Barricades, Students Seek Francs
In 1968, French students took to the streets and nearly made a revolution.
In 1995, they are taking to the streets again -- for more professors, bigger classrooms and better libraries from the Government so they can study harder and find good jobs.
That is the message from the barricades around the architecturally stunning cantilevered and glass-paneled buildings of the new university here.
And it is essentially the same in some 15 other French universities on strike this month for better conditions.


Ranger Excursion Ends In a Frustrating Way
The Rangers streaked to the mid-continent at the beginning of the week with a vapor trail of four consecutive victories behind them.
After losing by 6-3 to the Winnipeg Jets tonight, they boarded another chartered airplane and streaked back eastward with two consecutive defeats in their wake and three in a row without a victory.


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
Football


Man Held in Parents' Deaths
A man fatally shot his elderly parents and a nurse Thursday afternoon, then shot and critically wounded himself, the authorities said yesterday.
The man, Stephen Spranger, 54, was charged in the shooting deaths of his mother, Madeline, 89, his father, Harvey, 85, and Marcia Granucci, 45, who was employed  to assist the couple.
The suspect, who is unemployed and lived with his parents, was in critical condition yesterday with a bullet wound to the head.
The authorities said they do not know the motive for the killings, The Associated Press reported.


Time to End the Stigma Of Mental Illness
To the Editor:
The profile of Michael B. Laudor, a Yale Law School graduate diagnosed with schizophrenia (news article, Nov. 9), makes the points that people who have mental illnesses may be brilliant and successful, and that according to a 1987 study, the majority can and do recover if given the same things everyone needs,  such as social supports and job opportunities.


Israeli Tombs May Shed New Light on Maccabees
Clawing through soft chalk this week to expand a highway near Jerusalem, an excavator suddenly opened up a man-made cave full of ancient tombs.
That in itself might not be major news in a land where scratching any parched and rocky surface is likely to yield imprints of ancient history.
But in this case, archeologists found that one of the 23 containers with bones, the ossuaries, had four extant letters of ancient Hebrew that spelled "Hasm..."


Bodies Found Were Mutilated
The bodies of a man and a woman found Tuesday in two suitcases near a bridle  trail in the South Mountain Reservation were missing their heads, feet and hands, Essex County law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The victims remained unidentified, and causes of death had not been determined.
Investigators suspect the two were murdered Sunday night or early Monday.
Neither appeared to resemble any person reported missing in the area, said Peter J. Francese, the First Assistant Prosecutor.


Dispute Erupts at '60 Minutes' Over Canceling of Interview
The debate over a CBS management decision to block an interview on "60 Minutes" with a former tobacco industry executive broke into a heated family feud yesterday between correspondents for the news program.
Meanwhile, legal complications over the network's decision intensified.
Morley Safer, a veteran on the program, said his longtime colleague, Mike Wallace, had left him "twisting slowly in the wind" by asking him to appear on the public television talk show "Charlie Rose" to defend the interview but not giving him the full details of arrangements made between "60 Minutes" and the tobacco executive.
Mr.
Safer said he felt he had been "sandbagged."


METRO DIGEST
CONNECTICUT CASINO PROJECT IS DEFEATED


Country May Be Losing Money With Government Closed, but the Amount Is Disputed
Keeping the Federal Government closed can cost a lot more than keeping it open, the White House and Congress agree -- even though they do not know exactly how much more.
The size of the tab depends on whether Federal workers are paid for the time  they miss, as they have been after previous shutdowns, and how much is lost in uncollected taxes.


Public Atria at the Heart of a Policy Debate
The atrium of the I.B.M. building, a public space designed in return for approval of the addition of 131,000 square feet to the skyscraper, is the city's premiere example of a public benefit gained by granting developers a bonus.
But  recently it has been a high-profile target for critics.
Early this year, the building's new owner, Edward J. Minskoff Equities, wanted to remove the atrium's bamboo trees.
And this month there was a squabble  over daytime closings.


Balancing Health Care Costs Without a Safety Net
WITH Congressional Republicans trying to cut the Medicare and Medicaid programs, paying for medical care may become a serious problem, particularly for the poor and middle class.
So Money magazine's calm and thorough discussion of the financially Darwinian situation, and possible remedies, in its December issue is timely and welcome.
After skillfully laying out one family's story as an example of what thousands of families may face, the magazine prepares readers for some tough news.


THE GREENING OF THE HUMANITIES
From his use of the term "gurus," in referring to academic nature writers, to his description of them as "magnificent specimens . . . sinewy, tall, sun-tanned," to the photograph of the Middlebury College professor in a canoe, there is an unmistakable air of elitism to Parini's article.
No wonder the public regards environmentalism as the pastime of the educated minority who do not have to choose between jobs and trees, who have time to enjoy the unspoiled  Maine landscape and who never have to come into contact with the messy places where environmentalism is equivalent to survival.


Adding Color and Ease to Holiday Vegetable Dishes
IN my experience," wrote the late English food writer Jane Grigson, "clever food is not appreciated at Christmas.
It makes the little ones cry and the old ones nervous."
I feel the same about Thanksgiving.
I don't approve of doing weird things with turkey such as gussying it up with curry, chilies or pineapple.
But when it comes to vegetables, I do like to do more than serve the usual broccoli, creamed onions and Brussels sprouts.
I happen to love them, but I also like to add other vegetables to the display, chosen for color to brighten the look of the table.
Purees of bright green spinach and orange acorn squash look very pretty served side by side in the same dish.
And beets, roasted in their skins so that their flavor is concentrated, add a cheerful note.


A 'Honeymoon' on the Rocks
On Friday morning, Gov.
John G. Rowland made an impassioned appeal to fellow  Republicans in the State Senate to support his proposal for a Bridgeport casino  out of party loyalty.
"We as a party, the party of local control, the party of welfare reform, the  party that's trying to reach out to cities and trying to reach out to minorities, this is our opportunity," Mr.
Rowland told them.
"This is our chance."


Michelle Kosche, Stuart A. Anfang
Dr.
Michelle Anne Kosche and Dr.
Stuart Alan Anfang, staff psychiatrists at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., were married last evening.
Rabbi David A. Whiman officiated at the Lenox Hotel in Boston.
The bride, 31, is also an assistant director of residency training at McLean.
She graduated from the University of Chicago, from which she also received her medical degree.
She is a daughter of Margaret Kempf of Frankenmuth, Mich., and the late Allen Kosche, and a stepdaughter of Daniel Kempf.
The bride's father was a commercial artist.
Her mother is a senior manager at Frankenmuth Mutual Insurance.


THE PAIN GAME
Zuger's essay made my blood boil.
Pain is not a game.
As a person who is in constant pain from spinal stenosis, I can attest to the disabling thrust of pain into every crevice of your life.
It shortens your temper.
It makes you stumble and fall.
It brings tears to your eyes.
It keeps you from restful sleep.
It nauseates you.
It prevents you from accomplishing even the simplest of household chores.
Zuger's attitude only adds to the pain of her patients.


GETTING INTO CHARACTER
Your feature "Getting Into Character," with photographs by Stephane Haskell (Oct. 29) was great fun on a chilly October evening.
However, as a lifelong resident of upstate New York and a fan of Joyce Carol Oates, I couldn't help but wonder why she just did not go as herself.
This lady is truly weird (and wonderful!).
DAVID H. NOWICKI Interlaken, N.Y.


High in the Himalayas, Winter Deepens Abducted Men's Ordeal
Somewhere in the Himalayan mountains that loom through the winter mists to the southeast of this old traders' city, four Westerners who came here on trekking vacations -- one from the United States, two from Britain, and one from Germany -- are now well into their fifth month as hostages of a shadowy gang of  kidnappers.
At the heights in the Anantnag range where the hostages are believed to be held, perhaps as much as 14,000 feet above sea level, it is bitterly cold.
The winter snows that block high passes and trails have been falling for weeks, compounding hardships imposed on the hostages since they were seized by a group  of Kashmiris, Pakistanis and Afghans who say they are fighting for the secession of this state, where Muslims are in the majority, from India.


Stacey French, Thomas Britt 3d
Stacey French, a daughter of Sandra Rhodes of Easton, Md., and Arthur E. French of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas M. Britt 3d, the son of Patricia F. Britt of Philadelphia and the late Mr.
Britt Jr.
The Very Rev.
Marcia E. M. Davenport performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Cathedral in Easton.
Until May, Mrs.
Britt, 32, was the manager of the training department in New  York for Chanel Inc., the fashion and cosmetics company.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.


Remember The 50's? Stocks Sure Do
Prices went up and up. And never was seen a discouraging trend.
So it is for the stock market in 1995.
Last week, with the Washington politicians squabbling worse than ever, with talk of a possible default on Treasury securities, interest rates fell and the Dow neared 5,000.


Double Trouble for Double-Deckers
When Maria Vazquez spots a double-decker tour bus idling outside her back window on West 22d Street, she sees red.
For the last four months, the crimson buses, owned by New York Apple Tours, have been cleaned, parked and repaired in  a roofless garage just off 10th Avenue, and city officials say such activities are illegal there.
"I've been gassed out of my apartment," Ms.
Vazquez, 35, said through a surgical mask she wore at a recent protest against the tour company.
Along with  a dozen neighbors, she picketed New York Apple's ticket office at Eighth Avenue  and 50th Street, urging tourists to boycott the buses.
"They're killing us," Ms.
Vazquez yelled to passing tourists, some of whom ignored her and bought $25 tickets anyway.


Following the Yellow Brick Road Again
They're off to see the wizard again.
Yes, the scarecrow will get his brains,  the tin man will get his heart and the cowardly lion will get his courage, the same as always.
But they will all be standing on a stage this time, wearing evening clothes.
The lion in a velvet smoking jacket?
Well, yes.
THE WIZARD OF OZ IN CONCERT -- WEDNESDAY at 8 P.M. on TNT -- is not the 1939  MGM movie, it is a staged version of music from the children's fantasy about the little girl from Kansas who desperately wants to find her way home again.
It was
taped at a Lincoln Center benefit performance for the Children's Defense Fund.
And it will not have the monkeys flying on piano wire, the muslin wind-sock tornado or the makeup for Dorothy's companions (so frightening they were banned  from the MGM commissary).
It will not have Judy Garland, either, or Bert Lahr or Ray Bolger.
Jackson Browne will be its scarecrow.
Nathan Lane will be the cowardly lion and Roger Daltrey the tin man.
Jewel (in photograph) will sing Dorothy's part; Natalie Cole will be Glinda the Good Witch; Debra Winger will be the Wicked Witch of the West, and Joel Grey will be the wizard.


Who's Really Who
IT APPEARS THAT IN business as in politics nowadays, Americans feel only as good as their press.
No matter how inwardly wise or influential, politicians hunger for the media to validate their achievements; unnoticed, they wilt on the vine.
So, too, the billionaires.
For the very wealthiest Americans, money alone  hardly seems to matter until the media appreciate their riches; without a net worth inscribed on their foreheads, they feel, well, unworthy.
Even the most ostentatious consumption no longer satisfies until Town &amp; Country photographs your mansions.
Generosity no longer gratifies until The Times pictures your charity ball.
And what fun is a ballooning fortune if Fortune fails to celebrate your investment strategy?


Michele A. Estrin, Neil K. Gilman
Michele Andrea Estrin, a daughter of Judith and Alexander Estrin of Columbia, Md., was married last evening to Neil Keith Gilman, the son of Denise and Jeffrey Gilman of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Murray Simon performed the ceremony at the National Press Club in Washington.
Mr. and Mrs.
Gilman, both 27, received law degrees from the University of Michigan and are associates at law firms in Washington.
The bride, who graduated cum laude from Duke University, works at Arnold &amp; Porter.
The bridegroom, who graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College, works at O'Melveny &amp; Myers.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Howard M. Spiro;Rx for Doctors: A Dose of the Humanities
HOWARD M. SPIRO is a gastroenterologist at Yale-New Haven Hospital and an instructor at the Yale University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Spiro, 71, a graduate of Harvard Medical School with privileges at 10 Connecticut hospitals, is widely published in the conventional medical literature.
But he also devotes a considerable portion of his time to areas considered rather unconventional in the medical community.


Corporate Angels and Computers
ON a recent Tuesday morning, Dick Julius, 78, was sitting behind a desk in the office of the Corporate Angel Network at the Westchester County Airport, staring at a bright blue computer screen.
Mr.
Julius, a volunteer who works on recruiting companies into the program, was using the computer to keep track of his contacts with company officials.
"I knew nothing about computers when I started coming here six years ago," Mr.
Julius said.
He had worked previously as a salesman.
"After I retired, I thought that I was finished learning," he said.
"But if you are not at least partly computer literate today, you're out of it."


Charles Gordone Is Dead at 70; Won a Pulitzer for His First Play
Charles Gordone, who pioneered a polemical form of race-conscious theater with a blistering drama that made him the first black playwright to win the Pulitzer Prize, died Friday at his home in College Station, Tex.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, said his former wife, Jeanne Warner.


3 Are Questioned in Deaths of Taxi Drivers in Newark
Three suspects are being questioned in the shooting deaths of three Newark taxi drivers in the past month, and more people may be detained this weekend, law enforcement sources said today.
Anticipating a formal announcement of arrests, taxi owners said they were planning a mass protest of slow-moving cabs through downtown Newark to demand the death penalty for anyone convicted of the killings.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
RHODA A Life in Stories. By Ellen Gilchrist. Back Bay/Little, Brown, paper, $13.95.


Yo-Yo Ma on CD-ROM for Teachers
WITH the click of a mouse, children can create new combinations of sound, visit a jazz room or learn about a classical composer.
Whereas their parents may recall doing dull, repetitive musical exercises, these children are thoroughly engaged in learning about music.
Interactive technology is slowly changing music instruction.
Teachers today have a wide array of materials to stimulate interactive learning, not just for young children but for older learners as well.
But how can instructors try out the ever-expanding technology without making costly purchases?
Where can they preview highly specialized videos?


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Fancy Food, No Frills On the Upper East Side


Ending of Federal Speed Limit Wins Congressional Approval
The House today approved a compromise bill that would repeal national speed limits, establish a national highway system and free states from a generation of Federal regulations, including motorcycle helmet requirements, a billboard ban on scenic highways and putting metric information on road signs.
The measure was approved in the House on a voice vote.
The Senate passed the  bill on Friday by a vote of 80 to 16.


Election Disrupts Orderly Board 8
In the civilized world of the Upper East Side, there had not been a fight for the chairmanship of Community Board 8 since the 1980's, when a new city rule ended secret ballots.
Board 8 groomed its leaders, promoting them through ranks  to first vice chairman and then to the top post.
So it was a shock last week to have a sharply contested election, a divided  board and charges of political intrigue.


Fake Designer Clothing Will Go to Charities
More than $25,000 worth of counterfeit designer clothing, the haul from a 1993 raid by the county Prosecutor's Office, will go to the poor and needy of Burlington County.
Boxes overflowing with clothing bearing designer tags and trademarks like Polo, Guess, Nike and Champion and characters from the movie "The Lion King" have filled a large corner of a warehouse at the Burlington County Occupational  Training Center since they were seized in a raid of the Columbus Flea Market in  the summer of 1993.
The cases have closed, and prosecutors no longer need the evidence.


MARION BARRY CONFRONTS A HOSTILE TAKEOVER
The quote attributed in Goldberg's article to James Walsh, chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the finances of the District of  Columbia, makes it clear that he should be given another assignment.
He displays his contempt when he says that there is no need for concern over D.C.'s continued taxation without representation because, as he says, "They knew what the law was when they moved here." The same words could well have come from King George III discussing -- and dismissing -- those pesky colonists.
DONNA R. HIMELFARB Skaneateles, N.Y.


Number Theory
YOUNG investment bankers don't like to mention the Number in polite society.
They know how appalling their calculations sound.
But in private, after a few drinks, they will ask one another: How much money do you need to leave your job?
What sum will make you a permanent member of New York's leisure class?
What is . . . the Number?
The Number is often used interchangeably with another term, an unprintable one that describes the sum you need to be able to tell your boss you've had enough.
Its family-newspaper approximation would be Forget You Money.
But linguistic purists on Wall Street insist there's a difference between the two concepts.
"It doesn't take much money to tell your boss to get lost," one money  manager explains.
"With a million in the bank you can afford to look for another job. But if you want to live the rest of your life without worrying about money, you need the Number."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about low-risk mutual funds referred incorreclty to the management of Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark Inc., the company that manages the Scudder Growth and Income Fund.
Its chairman is Daniel Pierce. (Howard Stein, is the chairman and chief executive of the Dreyfus Corporation, not Scudder.)


Hospitals Give New Mothers 24 Extra Hours of Coverage
JANET BELLANO took a moment to study her newborn daughter, Jenna Marie.
The baby she had delivered moments ago was a beautiful, healthy child.
But Mrs.
Bellano's thoughts soon shifted from the miracle of life to matters less divine  -- like insurance coverage.
"I'm sitting in bed and thinking that I know my insurance company gives me two days, but I don't know when the clock starts," Mrs.
Bellano said in an interview at Northern Westchester Hospital Center here.
"I got to the hospital at 10:20 P.M. on Tuesday, and I delivered at 12:02 A.M. on Wednesday. So does that hour and a half count as a day? I'm already exhausted."


A SON OF ISRAEL: Rabin's Assassin -- A special report.;Belief to Blood: The Making of Rabin's Killer
Yitzhak Rabin's handshake with Yasir Arafat at the White House on Sept. 13, 1993, spelled the end of the world that Yigal Amir believed God had given the Jews.
At the Institute for Higher Torah Studies, where Mr.
Amir was a diligent, argumentative student, the moment of reconciliation between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders that was greeted so warmly around the world seemed a catastrophe; the celebration at home obscene.


The Downswing Is Over and the Big East Is Back
It was the spring of 1993. The low point of the Big East Conference as we know it.
There was a blizzard outside Madison Square Garden that tournament weekend.
Inside, water was dripping from the roof.


Once Ignored, a Middle-Ground Budget Advances
Even as President Clinton prepares to veto a huge budget-balancing bill, Administration officials are completing their own proposals to achieve a similar fiscal goal while protecting programs for poor people and the elderly.
The President has yet to give in to the Republican demand that a balanced budget be achieved in seven years, but his aides are crafting just such a proposal that would, among other things, dramatically reduce the size of Republican tax cuts.


Nancy L. Kessler, Lawrence McCabe
Nancy Louise Kessler, the daughter of Clara and Frederick J. Kessler of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Lawrence Damian McCabe, a son of Catherine H. McCabe of Eastchester, N.Y., and the late Hugh J. McCabe Jr.
The Rev.
Joseph DeSanto performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church.
The couple received law degrees from Fordham University.


An Art Tour Comes Home, Its Fortune Made
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME THE Hausder Kunst had ever stayed open all night.
Then  again, it was also the first time a museum show in Munich had drawn more than 400,000 people.
The exhibition, "From Cezanne to Matisse: Great French Paintings From the Barnes Foundation," was on the last day of its last stop on a two-and-a-half-year international tour.
Christoph Vitali, director of the Haus der Kunst, had decided that keeping the museum open for 24 hours would let art lovers make one final "meditative visit" to see the famous Cezannes and Matisses, Renoirs and Manets without the crowds that had swarmed around the museum's galleries since the show opened on June 23.
But in the early morning hours of this "long night of art," on Oct. 22, the museum was packed.
Couples in black tie, straight from the opera, bumped into red-haired punkers.
Guards had trouble keeping visitors from getting too close to the paintings.


Shakespeare and Smokey Robinson
CONTEMPORARY American culture is inconceivable without African-American life.
Can we imagine the high art of fusing religious rhetoric with secular complaint  without the contributions of Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X?
Can we think of American fiction and its fierce negotiations with the cataclysmic forces of modernity without the magisterial art of Toni Morrison, Gloria Naylor, John Edgar Wideman and Alice Walker?
Can we imagine the will to spontaneity, and what the anthropologist Melville  Herskovits termed the "deification of accident," that thread through American music without the artistry of Louis Armstrong, John Coltrane and Duke Ellington?
And can we think intelligently about the American essay, that venerable form of  address that splits the difference between opinion and art with abandon, without the elegiac anger of James Baldwin and the sophistication of Ralph Ellison?


Stephanie Dooney And Scott Wall
Stephanie Wheeler Dooney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Peter Dooney of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to David Scott Wall, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Wall of Nassau Point, L.I.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Wall, 25, is a broker at Prudential Brad Hvolbeck, a real estate agency  in Greenwich.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the president of Dooney &amp; Bourke, the leather-goods manufacturer in Norwalk, Conn.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Thomas W. Dewart of Greenwich, was the publisher of The New York Sun, as was his father, the late William T. Dewart.


Arena Rock Loses One Voice and Gains Another
THE VOICE IS BIG AND GUTSY, with strength behind its rasp.
It aches and it exults; it pleads, and it accuses.
Behind it, the band sounds muscular and polished, with power chords chiming atop a big unswerving beat, propulsive but unhurried.
Within the new songs are traces of old ones, half-remembered hits from the days of Phil Spector and Roy Orbison and the early British Invasion, evoking an unbroken rock heritage.
A decade ago, that could have described the music of Bruce Springsteen.
But Springsteen has pulled back from his old, heroic sound; his new album, "The Ghost of Tom Joad" (Columbia), broods quietly over unemployment, frustration and short, wasted lives.
In some ways, it's like a hi-fi, West Coast sequel to "Nebraska," the homemade album he released in 1982 between the grander statements of "The River" and "Born in the U.S.A." It's also where his award-winning, AIDS-haunted "Streets of Philadelphia" has led, to a territory of sober rumination and chronic bummers.


Bookshelf
TUSK AND STONE.
By Malcolm Bosse.
Front Street. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up) The setting is medieval India.
Arjun is a boy of high birth, abducted from his family and eventually trained as an elephant driver.
Strong historical fiction,  especially appealing to boys, from the author of "The Examination."


POSTINGS: 1.2 Million Square Feet, 12 Anchors;Elizabeth Getting An Outlet Mall
Ground was broken earlier this month for a 1.2 million-square-foot manufacturers' outlet mall that will rise on a desolate 166-acre former landfill near Newark Bay in Elizabeth, N.J.
When MetroMall opens in September 1997 it will include 12 anchor stores averaging 40,000 square feet each and 250 smaller  outlets.
The $300-million project, which will also have 16 food outlets, is to be linked to Exit 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike by an elevated roadway that is now under construction.


Feed Houseplants With Care
A PRIMER on the many kinds of water-soluble houseplant fertilizers might be a good thing to ponder now.
There are so many products on the shelves that it is hard to know which one to choose.
Often a buyer heads for a particular brand name just because it has been highly praised in a commercial or advertised in a gardening magazine.
Sometimes sales clerks are eager to tout one product over another, adding to the confusion.
But decisions must be made.


Ex-Suspect Named as Informer
The leader of the militant right-wing group Eyal, who was arrested after the  assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and then freed, was identified by  Israeli television tonight as an informer for the country's domestic security service.
Israeli television reported that security officials had confirmed that Avishai Raviv infiltrated the radical right in Israel two years ago to supply information about plans by militants to stage attacks against Arabs and Israeli  Government leaders.


Is the Glass Too Small?
A joke making the rounds in corporate America goes like this: An optimist looks at the proverbial glass and sees it as half-full, a pessimist sees it as half-empty, and a reengineering expert takes a look and says the glass is just too big.
This week, managers at AT&amp;T Corporation weren't laughing.
By mid-January, many of them will be out of a job, thanks to a buyout offer the company extended to 77,800, or about half, of its managers.
And after January there may be some involuntary layoffs.


The Commissioner vs. the Criminologists
Combating drug dealers and gang leaders, the New York City Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, has declared victory after victory in his efforts to clean up the streets.
But he returned to his native Boston on Friday  night to confront another tough crowd: criminologists who have withheld their accolades for his department's crime-fighting efforts.
In a debate before the American Society of Criminology, Mr.
Bratton challenged some of the nation's most esteemed crime experts to rethink their theories linking the decline in reported crime in New York City to the easing of the crack-cocaine craze, to the aging of the baby boom generation or to a national trend of decreasing violent crime.


Pennsylvania Recalls the Century of Steam
I RECOGNIZED the sound of the train whistle, of course, but what was that smell?
It was rich, slightly sweet, quite pleasant and completely unfamiliar.
Then I saw the thick gray smoke billowing from the far side of the parking lot,  where Engine 3254 of the Canadian National Railway was moving slowly down the track, and I realized that for the first time in my life, I was smelling the steam of a working steam engine.
We were in Scranton, Pa., at the Steamtown National Historic Site, the country's newest national park (just four months old), a long-debated and much-maligned urban development project designed to shore up the struggling downtown of this old coal and railroad center as well as to recall the century,  roughly from 1850 to 1950, when steam locomotives dominated the landscape and captured the imagination.


Ashley Harmar, Jason Rappoport
Anna Ashley Harmar, the daughter of Anna and William Harmar 3d of Chestnut Hill, Pa., was married there yesterday to Jason Elliott Rappoport, a son of Joan Rappoport of New York and James E. Rappoport of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Robert Tate performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields.
Rabbi Julie Greenberg took part in the service.
Mrs.
Rappoport, 27, is known as Ashley.
She is an assistant manager at Rothschild Catering in Ardmore, Pa.
She graduated from Temple University.


Win a Few, Lose a Few, And Get a Few to Graduate
The season has barely started, but the results are already in.
What follows are not first-half scores; they are graduation rates:


The Stories, the Life in the State's Old Burying Grounds
AT Hammond Hill Cemetery in Hampton, centuries-old gravestones line a little  hill overlooking a marsh.
On a recent autumn afternoon James Slater set off for  the stones, taking his tall mirror with him.
"I never go without it," he said.
After long decades of exposure to the elements, the carvings on some stones can be hard to see, especially when the sun is hidden or doesn't hit just right.
But Dr.
Slater places his trusty mirror where it can best reflect available light onto the fine faces, wings, borders, letters and numerals that were chiseled so long ago into sandstone, slate, granite and marble.


Holiday Shopping: How Much?
Will this Christmas be extravagant or economical?
Tell Chatter about your plans for holiday shopping.
Joy on a Budget


Nowhere to Run, Nowhere to Ride
Perhaps New Yorkers should try bicycles for a change.
Last week there was a piece of bad news for virtually every mode of urban travel.
The subway and bus fares went up a quarter, to $1.50, despite the best efforts in Federal court of  civil rights and transit advocates to roll back the increase.
At least, though, the fare increases mean the subway system will continue to  get better, right?
Well, despite the fact that Metropolitan Transportation Authority says it plans to spend $7.3 billion over three years on capital improvements, some say the financing for the plan is about as real as Rolex watches sold on streetcorners in Times Square.


In the Suburbs, Survival Isn't the Problem
While the new Elizabethport Catholic School is working to recruit students, parochial schools in the suburbs are bursting at the seams.
In the Diocese of Metuchen, which includes Hunterdon, Middlesex, Somerset and Warren counties, enrollment is growing by about 5 percent a year, said Leonard DeFiori, the Superintendent of Schools.
It enrolls 18,000 students in pre-kindergarten through high school, making it the smallest school system in New Jersey's five dioceses, but by far the fastest growing.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14


E.P.A. Bill, Modified, Still Faces Veto Threat
House Republican leaders could bring to the floor as early as the coming week a spending bill that would make what the Clinton Administration calls unacceptable cuts in the Environmental Protection Agency.
The new bill is a compromise in which House negotiators, yielding to their Senate counterparts, joined them on Thursday in removing or softening the most intensely disputed provisions of the legislation as originally adopted by the House.
As a result, the bill now appears likely to escape another bruising round of criticism by House Republican moderates.


Going for the Gold on Columbus Circle
IT'S GARISH." "IT LOOKS CHEAP." "IT'S Miami Beach." "It's really awful." "Why didn't you warn us?" These were some of the comments put to me by angry callers  demanding to know whether something can be done about the Trump International Hotel and Tower, the remodeled version of the Gulf and Western Building now in construction on Columbus Circle.
If by "something" they mean stopping this project in its tracks, the answer is no.
The 45-story building required no special permissions, no exemptions from the zoning code.
By maintaining the height and footprint of the Gulf and Western Building, Donald Trump, the building's developer, was able to proceed "as of right."


Elizabeth Nager, Anthony Thompson
Elizabeth Loring Nager, the daughter of Deborah Hirst Nager of Warrenton, Va., and George Norton Nager of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Anthony de Vasconcellos Thompson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. Thompson 3d of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Thompson, 31, was until recently a coordinator for Island Consulting, a  computer software company in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father retired as the senior partner in Archer &amp; Griner, a Philadelphia law firm.
The bride is a descendant of James Monroe and of George Mason, an author of the Bill of Rights.


Holding That Line, Wailing That Sax
With both teams relying on the run, it had been a bruising first half, particularly for the linemen, in Friday night's championship game between Wilton and Brien McMahon of Norwalk.
As the gun sounded to end the half before a crowd of about 7,000 at Boyle Stadium at Stamford High School, players from both teams headed for the locker rooms.
All, that is, except for Peter Yarusavage, a 250-pound lineman who had played the entire half, which ended with Wilton leading the defending state-championship McMahon team, 7-6.


A Little Green Shoot Sprouts From a Seed 1,288 Years Old
Scientists have grown a tiny green shoot from a 1,288-year-old lotus seed from China.
The seed is believed to be the oldest ever to germinate, and it may  yield clues to how to slow aging.
"This sleeping beauty, which was already there when Marco Polo came to China  in the 13th century, must have a powerful genetic system to delay its aging," said Dr.
Jane Shen-Miller, a plant physiologist at the University of California  at Los Angeles.
"It's unbelievable it could sleep for thousands of years and in  four days a little green shoot emerged."


Queens Man, 32, Is Arrested In Savage Attacks on Elderly
The blood on Anthony Gordon's boots when he was arrested Friday for trying to use a stolen credit card in Queens was evidence, the police said last night, of  his role in a string of far more serious crimes: a seven-week robbery spree in which the victims, many of them elderly, were savagely beaten.


Feed Houseplants With Care
A PRIMER on the many kinds of water-soluble houseplant fertilizers might be a good thing to ponder now.
There are so many products on the shelves that it is hard to know which one to choose.
Often a buyer heads for a particular brand name just because it has been highly praised in a commercial or advertised in a gardening magazine.
Sometimes sales clerks are eager to tout one product over another, adding to the confusion.
But decisions must be made.


Penn Wins The Game, Princeton The Title
A late field goal by Princeton up at Hanover, N.H., denied Pennsylvania a share of the Ivy League football championship today, despite the Quakers' convincing 37-18 victory against Cornell.
Penn in turn denied Cornell a share of the title in what was the closest finish the Ivy League has had since it began round-robin play in 1956.


Mind Over Muscle
Running up 13,000-foot volcanoes?
Yes, that's a pretty good way to squeeze out your best performance at the New York City Marathon.
It worked for German Silva of Mexico, the men's winner last Sunday.
But what really lights a runner's fire is the magic of round numbers.
You hear it all the time: "If I can just get under four hours," "Break three  hours and I can die in peace." Runners carry these mantras around for months, even years.


Deals and Discounts
EUROSTARTER WITH EUROSTAR Sabena, the Belgian airline, offers Eurostarter packages that include a new program featuring the Eurostar train through the Channel Tunnel.
The package, priced at $499 from New York, Boston, Chicago and Atlanta -- Atlanta flights are operated by Delta -- includes round-trip air fare between the United States and Brussels, a one-way coach ticket on the Euro star train from Brussels to London and a Sabena flight back to Brussels from London's Heathrow airport.
The $499 price is in effect through March 31, except  for Dec. 15 through Jan. 7, when it is $100 more.
The package must be purchased  at least two weeks in advance, but it cannot be purchased more than two months ahead of time.
The package is nonrefundable; changes may be made up to seven days in advance for a $100 fee.
Other Eurostarter packages include hotel stays,  car rentals or rail passes.
Information: (800) 955-2000.


MISSING PRICES
Prices for more 300 mutual funds were not available at press time on Friday because they were not reported to Nasdaq.


How Sanctions Bit -- Serbia's Neighbors
GRANTED, three years of international trade sanctions may have helped to nudge Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian strongman, to peace talks in Dayton, Ohio.
But at whose expense?
Ordinary Serbs were inconvenienced by shortages and higher prices, but there  were no images of dying Serb children to truly undermine the Serbian President's hold on power.
Nor did sanctions appreciably slow the Serb war machine (though the forces of Croatia and NATO did) because Serb forces never lacked for imported fuel and other supplies from the outside world.


Chefs Who Dare To Be British
FOR many Americans the very term "British food" conjures visions of groaning  boards laden with roast beef, vegetables steamed to a pulp, and cholesterol-freighted Yorkshire pudding.
Visitors to today's London need no longer be sentenced to such Dickensian fare.
Like Londoners, they can explore what for lack of a better term is called modern British cookery.
The term is literally a portmanteau phrase, having arrived in the baggage of  Odyssean British chefs eager to ally their traditional larder with the sharp, fresh seasonings and exotic (and quicker) cooking methods they encountered abroad.
This new crop now runs a variety of restaurants where the atmospheres differ dramatically but the food, however eclectic in its inspiration, is distinctly British.


When Patients Try to Protect Medical Records;Cholesterol Drug
To the Editor:
Re "Benefit to Healthy Men Is Seen From Cholesterol-Cutting Drug" (front page, Nov. 16): The men in the research study might have been called healthy only in that they had not yet developed overt heart disease.


Pop Briefs
PASSENGERS: 'ORIGINAL SOUNDTRACKS 1' Island


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE PHYSICIAN OF LONDON By Stephanie Cowell. Norton, $23.


Lumbering Toward War
IN A DARK WOOD The Fight Over Forests and the Rising Tyranny of Ecology.
By Alston Chase. 535 pp.
New York: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $29.95.


Holding Her Own With the Big Boys
AMERICAN ACTORS LOVE TO be loved, even when they're playing villains.
Using the Hollywood yardstick, Sharon Stone has just made a reckless throw of the dice in "Casino," the Martin Scorsese film that opens Wednesday.
Her character, Ginger McKenna, is not nice.
A Las Vegas showgirl turned hustler, she's a smooth operator with larceny in her heart and all the warmth of a dollar slot machine.
Marriage to Sam Rothstein, a casino manager played by Robert De Niro, does not mellow her.
She turns his life inside out, then sinks fast in a swamp of alcohol and drugs.


Deficits Have Kept Us Out of a Depression
To the Editor:
"Deficit-Cutting's International" (Week in Review, Nov. 12) outlines how European countries are reducing deficit spending.
You restate the common economic belief that deficits "bring high interest rates and divert investment from its most productive uses."


Hummer on a Date: Rambo Comes Courting
HAD Lady Godiva romped through Coventry in a Hummer instead of atop a horse,  she would have raised as many eyebrows while keeping her modesty intact.
No matter what its occupants are or aren't wearing, the Hummer makes a Peeping Tom  of every passer-by.
Parading around in the Hummer causes a four-star rumpus.
Jaws drop, eyes bulge and little boys salute.
My dog barked at it in the driveway.


A New Formula Adds Up to More Time for Learning
In Melanie Jacobson's history class at San Marcos High School, students not only have time to read about King Louis XVI, they also have time to act out part of his life before the class bell rings.
That's because a typical class these days lasts 90 minutes -- 40 minutes more than it once did.
"We can have so much more variety now without being cut off by a 50- minute period," Ms.
Jacobson said.
"I have time to develop an activity or simulation, which makes for a richer education."


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Pop Briefs
ROGER ROGER: 'GRANDS TRAVAUX' VPRO Eigen Wijs/Koch Screen


Habitats: Bernardsville, N.J.;Into the Woods, for Privacy, and Privacy, and Privacy
THE woman of the house likes three things about the large stone home she and  her husband purchased deep down the winding dirt roads amid the woods of Bernardsville, N.J.
"Privacy, privacy and privacy," said the slim dark-haired woman, who looks like a combination of Nefertiti and Anjelica Huston.


Whitaker and Trinidad Set Up Showdown
By knocking out their opponents tonight, Pernell Whitaker and Felix Trinidad  positioned themselves for a welterweight showdown next year.
Whitaker, regarded as perhaps the world's best boxer, pound for pound, defended his World Boxing Council welterweight title with a sixth-round knockout of Jake Rodriguez before 5,112 at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
Trinidad  was equally impressive in the co-feature bout, defending his International Boxing Federation 147-pound championship with a fourth-round knockout of Larry Barnes, the No. 1-ranked contender.


Drifter Asserts He's Innocent In Killings Of 5 People
A drifter suspected in five slayings has said in an interview from jail that  while he had met "millions" of women in bars around the world, he had not killed any of them.
But a Kentucky State Police detective said that when the police interviewed the jailed man, Glen Rogers, about the five slayings, he had bragged that the figure was "more like 70," according to an affidavit obtained by WTVQ-TV in Lexington, Ky.


Dole Wins Florida Straw Poll, but He Fails to Deliver a Knockout Punchto His Rivals
Senator Bob Dole prevailed tonight in a hard-fought straw poll among the Republican Presidential contenders, but his hardly commanding finish was the latest sign that the Senator might not coast easily to his party's nomination.
The event at a convention here organized by the Florida Republican Party has  been widely viewed as the most crucial political test before the primaries and caucuses early next year.
And it furnished the most convincing evidence thus far that Mr.
Dole faces his stiffest competition from the two runners-up: Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and former Gov.
Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Basking Ridge, N.J.;A Rich Hamlet That Gobbled Up a Town
DESPITE the presence of large office complexes, including the 1.27-million-square-foot world headquarters of AT&amp;T, Basking Ridge retains its small-town character.
Nearly all of the 39 stores and offices in the three-block downtown on South  Finley Avenue are converted 19th-century houses.
The red-brick sidewalk pavers skew just enough to make them seem if they were laid a hundred years ago.
The signs on the businesses are small and understated, as if to say, "Everyone here  knows us."


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
TO GETTYSBURG AND BEYOND The Parallel Lives of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain and Edward Porter Alexander.
By Michael Golay.
Crown, $27.50.


Studies in the Lives of Slaves
PLAYING AN AMERICAN slave in two consecutive films would undoubtedly be an emotionally wrenching task for any actor, but for Thandie Newton, an Englishwoman who was studying social anthropology at Cambridge University, it was an intellectual challenge as well.
And she believes this informed her performances in James Ivory's "Jefferson in Paris" and the recently released "Journey of August King," directed by John Duigan.
"The year leading up to the two films was a revelation because I had been reading history having to do with race and the problems of the slave trade and how America fitted in with West Africa," she recalled one day last month in New  York.
"When I got these two scripts, I was determined to be involved in the films. How better to understand what I was reading? In many ways, the degree informed the films and the films informed the degree."


Dad's Wish for Daughter: Walk Down Wealthier Aisle
To the Editor:
After reading about the current strategies of young single people on the East Side to meet potential appropriate spouses ("Marrying Well," Nov. 5), I had two  questions.


Admiral's Gaffe Pushes Navy To New Scrutiny of Attitudes
The uproar over remarks made by the commander of United States forces in the  Pacific about the rape of a 12-year-old Japanese girl has rekindled criticism over the Navy's insensitivity toward women.
The commander, Adm.
Richard C. Macke, was forced to step down late Friday after he told reporters that the three American servicemen accused of raping the girl in Okinawa could have avoided the whole incident by hiring a prostitute.


Republican to Be Next Louisiana Governor
State Senator Mike Foster, a conservative Republican, won the race for Louisiana Governor today by a landslide.
With 99 percent of the votes counted, Mr.
Foster had won 64 percent of the vote, while United States Representative Cleo Fields had 36 percent.
Mr.
Foster, 65, is white, and Mr.
Fields, 32, is black; the last black Louisiana Governor served during Reconstruction.


Some Help for Divorced Dads
NOBODY denies that after divorce, some men disappear from their children's lives.
But Robert Bernstein and Richard Worth are among those convinced that most men want to keep on being fathers to their children, and that more would do so if only they knew how.
Mr.
Bernstein and Mr.
Worth, authors of the "Divorced Dad's Handbook: 100 Questions and Answers," say that after divorce many men feel embarrassed, angry and alienated from their families.
They don't know how to maintain relationships with their children, and they don't know where to turn -- so they  turn away.
"By nature, men don't seek advice. They fall into fight-or-flight," said Mr.
Worth, who lives in Fairfield.


Can This Man Untie Bergen's Racial Knot?
SUPPOSEDLY, Harry Galinsky retired last year, on Halloween, after nearly 50 years in the public schools.
At 69, one would think he'd earned some rounds of golf and long, lazy visits  with his grandchildren in South Florida.


CRIME
MANILA TIME (Carroll &amp; Graf, $22) is Jack Trolley's sequel to "Balboa Firefly,"  which means that we're back on stakeout with Sgt.
Tommy Donahoo in San Diego, eating junk food in an unmarked vehicle, watching the sewage bubble in the Tijuana Slough, waiting for something illegal and possibly ugly to happen.
When  it does -- the execution of a legendary Mexican gangster by a North American rival -- Donahoo misses the whole show; but his opportunistic partner videotapes the shooting and later blackmails the triggerman.
Unluckily for Donahoo, his bent partner dies in a bank holdup, leaving his blackmail victim ("A killer, a torturer, a rapist. A thug and a pig") with the unfortunate impression that Donahoo has the incriminating video and is in on the extortion scheme.


Governor Pataki's Mystery Donors
Politicians can deal with ethics laws in one of two ways.
They can use them as guideposts, charting the road to open government.
Or they can view them as roadblocks to be skirted with the aid of every possible legal loophole.
Gov.
George Pataki is a member of the loophole-loving camp.
Mr.
Pataki's latest blow to the spirit of New York's campaign finance law involves his glitzy inauguration ceremonies last January in Albany.
An extravaganza by the capital's dowdy standards, the event included a laser light show, a black-tie gala, a "people's reception" that fed and entertained thousands and a swearing-in before 13,000 supporters in a sports arena.
But now it appears that the state's  voters will never get a full accounting of who paid the bills.


Baltimore Exhibit on Classical Greek Women
The rituals and myths of women that inspired artists during Athens's Golden Age are examined in "Pandora's Box: Women in Classical Greece," an exhibition of 138 masterworks and artifacts dating from the fifth century B.C., on view at the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore through Jan. 7.
The exhibition includes works on loan from 54 private and public collections  spanning three continents and 14 countries, and from the Walters's own cache of  antiquities.


A Clean Modern Look,Or Look-Alike
White leather coats, and white vinyl coats that are leather look-alikes, are  early signs that fashion is moving away from the past and into a clean, modern look.
The all-white style was the foundation on which Courreges, in 1963, built  his space-age revolutionary vision, using vinyl as one of his signature materials.
This time around, the interpretation of modernism is a white leather  or vinyl coat, with the look less severe than that of Courreges.
White, because  of its upkeep, is considered impractical and therefore the ultimate luxury.
Today, white coats are often worn with a black accent, although some young women have carried the color from boots to umbrellas.


James Madison High: The View From the Loyal Class of '35
When they crooned, "Madison, we're ever loyal to thee," it was hard to accuse James Madison High School's Class of 1935 of hyperbole.
It was their diamond anniversary reunion, and even after 60 years many of the Madison alumni remembered the words to the school's four songs.
They came from as near as Brooklyn and as far away as Miami and Canada last  weekend to reminisce about the high school on Bedford Avenue where they had made matches that became marriages, learned skills that sparked careers, and hatched  lifelong friendships.


Leslie Rosenfeld and Chuck Wash
Dr.
Leslie Karen Rosenfeld, a research assistant professor of physical oceanography, and Dr.
Carlyle Hilton Wash, a professor of meteorology, both at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif., are to be married today in the school's chapel.
Lieut.
Comdr.
Jeffrey Rhodes, a Navy chaplain, is to officiate.
The bride, 40, is also an assistant scientist at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in Pacific Grove, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Washington and received a doctorate in physical oceanography in a joint program from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
FRIENDS GO ADVENTURING Written and illustrated by Helme Heine.
Unpaged.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $16. (Ages 4 to 8)
CAN a book whose ideal reader is 5 years old be long-awaited?
More than a decade after the American publication of "Friends," Helme Heine's farmyard fantasy of a rooster, pig and mouse who become all but inseparable, its original audience has doubtless moved on to Stephen King and Anne Rice.
Their loss!
Mr.
Heine's sequel, "Friends Go Adventuring," is a delight, richly infused with genial humor and sophisticated whimsy.


Six Degrees Of Celebration
The causes range from education and scholarships to preservation and awareness, Nov. 13-15.


Accident Brings Curtain Down On Buskers
Street entertainers lead an uncertain existence, eluding the police and depending on the generosity of strangers.
So they were delighted at the prospect of Broadway featuring their profession in the musical "Busker Alley." Better yet, the show sought real buskers (the British term for strolling entertainers)  to perform outside the St.
James Theater on West 44th Street before the curtain  rose and at intermission.
Many acts auditioned; four were hired.
Each was to be paid $50 per show, plus whatever they collected by passing the hat among spectators.


Mob Takes A Holiday As V.I.P.'s Tour Osaka
There may have never been so opportune a time to look a loan shark in the eye and tell him to take a hike.
Even gangsters can be patriots, and so this week the mob in Osaka is reluctant to break the arms of a debtor or force the debtor's daughters to work off the loans in massage parlors.
With leaders from Pacific rim countries gathered here for a meeting, everybody from police officers to criminals are pulling together to protect the city's image.


Kong Rhapsody
Music helps.
A rush preview of KING KONG (1933), shown minus a sound track reportedly struck out.
Hollywood's first great musical score by Max Steiner ("Gone With the Wind") did wonders to the eye-popping "Kong," often subtly -- THURSDAY at 2:35 P.M. on CHANNEL 21.
Listen as the ship approaches Skull Island  (to an eerie, speculative harp).
The music soars full-throttle when the giant ape defends his captive, Fay Wray.
Atop the Empire State Building, the wounded Kong takes a final, adoring look, to a poignant surge, and plunges.
Way to go, man.
-- Howard Thompson


Warmongering, Swiss Cheese, Gershwin Tunes
TIMES have been good to those who love a Gershwin tune.
Even with popular music's drastic changes since the 20's and the 30's, the embraceable songs of George and Ira have never been far from earshot.
And Broadway's musical wasteland has been nourished by such makeshift rewritten shows as "Crazy For You" and its more winning precursor "My One and Only," both strung together by Gershwin standards, randomly sampled.
A real honest-to-Gershwin musical is hard to find.
For the next four weeks, though, an ebullient realization of "Strike Up the Band" (in its first version,  produced in 1927, not the 1930 revision), with a condensed George S. Kaufman book (satire intact) is restoring the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam to its glory days.
Those were when the frivolous musicals of this era were enlivened by the vivacity and zip of a signature Goodspeed style.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
IMPACT JUPITER The Crash of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9. By David H. Levy. Plenum, $25.95.


Not All Runners Are 'Not Athletes'
I take offense at "Out of Order, Feverish, From 5K to Cheering in Front of the TV" [Nov. 5].
He comments that most runners in local 5 and 10-kilometer races are "not athletes." but mostly "a gasping mass of out-of-condition humanity."
There could be nothing further from the truth!


How Their Kids Are Just Like Them
With its red-brick New England-style buildings and its leafy campus setting,  the Lakeside School, a private institution for grades 5 through 12 in north Seattle, looks like the quintessential East Coast prep school -- an Ivy League steppingstone from the other side of the continent.
But the similarities end at  the tall white doors of the main building, called Bliss Hall.
On the East Coast, an expensive private-school education is considered a rung on the ladder  to upper-crust America, and in the halls of such places the quiet codes of high-society conduct are imparted along with lessons in trigonometry and French.
At Lakeside, the tone is distinctly . . . well, there isn't tone.
There are faded T-shirts and lots of neo-grunge flannel and every make of athletic shoe imaginable -- and not a blue blazer in sight.
There is no one, in fact, who is dressed or talking as rich kids do, or are thought to.
There are garden burgers  being prepared in the cafeteria and scores of computers booting up and, on the stage in the community meeting room this particular morning in September, a girl named Katie Coxon.
She is describing for about 200 middle-schoolers a brainstorming session at which she and other eighth graders worked up a list of  adjectives with which they hoped to describe their lives come the year 2005: relaxed, bold, talented, friendly, productive.
Lakeside is expensive (about $12,000 a year).
And Lakeside is proud of its alumni, who include Bill Gates, his founding partner at Microsoft, Paul Allen, and Craig McCaw, the founder of McCaw Cellular Communications, bought last year  by AT&amp;T for $12.6 billion.


Horror Cabbies Add to Burdens Of Honest Ones
NEW YORK'S taxi drivers have been taking it on the collective chin.
First, the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission reported last week that 5 percent of cabbies in the yellow fleets lack valid driver's licenses.
Then it issued a list of 10 drivers who are the top code violators, quickly dubbed "cabbies from hell."


GETTING INTO CHARACTER
If Norman Mailer outfitted himself as Captain Ahab, it is not at all obvious  that he ever read "Moby-Dick." From his costume, Mailer seems to believe that Ahab was not a whaling captain who lost a leg, but a pirate who lost an eye and  required a napkin for an eye patch.
Herman Melville never actually described Ahab's appearance or his attire, but if he had, it is a sure bet that he would not have had the captain wear what appear to be remnants from Admiral Nelson's sea chest.
RICHARD ELLIS New York


'The Last Refuge Of the Untalented'
To the Editor:
Shock for its own sake has always been the last refuge of the untalented in  both art and commerce.
Assaulting the senses to grab attention is easy.
Rewarding the mind is not.


It's Back To Mickey Mouse
To the Editor:
I often come up to New York from Miami for what might be termed a culture fix.
Imagine my bemusement by your portrait-of-a-young-hunk-as-an-artist piece on Nikko Sedgwick, a hirsute fellow who proclaims an epiphany -- not via Picasso or Cezanne or even Pollock -- through Ross Bleckner.


Adding Color and Ease to Holiday Vegetable Dishes
IN my experience," wrote the late English food writer Jane Grigson, "clever food is not appreciated at Christmas.
It makes the little ones cry and the old ones nervous."
I feel the same about Thanksgiving.
I don't approve of doing weird things with turkey such as gussying it up with curry, chilies or pineapple.
But when it comes to vegetables, I do like to do more than serve the usual broccoli, creamed onions and Brussels sprouts.
I happen to love them, but I also like to add other vegetables to the display, chosen for color to brighten the look of the table.
Purees of bright green spinach and orange acorn squash look very pretty served side by side in the same dish.
And beets, roasted in their skins so that their flavor is concentrated, add a cheerful note.


Land Or Life?
Listening to the debate in Israel in the wake of Yitzhak Rabin's assassination, I hear a question being asked that was never asked before: "Is Judaism a threat to Israel?"
That profound, troubling question arises from the fact that Yigal Amir, Mr.
Rabin's assassin, was a product of the best religious-Zionist schools in Israel.
How could that system have produced such a person, and his accomplices?
The answer, say some religious-Zionist scholars, is that too many of their schools and rabbis give more emphasis to the value of land than to the value of life.
They stress Jewish teachings about preserving sovereignty over the land of Israel more than Jewish teachings that say he who sheds the blood of another human being destroys the image of God in the world.


Across a Racial Divide: Rutgers, Then and Now
To the Editor:
Twenty-five years ago, I taught English at Douglass College, the women's campus at Rutgers.
So much has happened in those years, yet your front-page article "Balkan U.: Rutgers Gropes for a Vision" (Nov. 5) has much that's familiar.


Two Domestic Airlines Are Adding Routes
Two United States airlines are among those adding domestic routes this fall.
Western Pacific Airlines, (800) 930-3030, will begin daily nonstop service on Boeing 737-300's from Colorado Springs, Colo., to Newark and Tulsa, Okla., on Nov. 15, and to Washington on Dec. 15.
One-way fares to Newark and Washington start at $109, when purchased at least 21 days in advance.
One-way fares to Tulsa start at $49, also with a 21-day advance purchase.
Western Pacific uses a  ticketless reservation system, providing the passenger with a confirmation number to check in with rather than a printed ticket.
On Dec. 14, Carnival Airlines, (800) 824-7386, will start daily nonstop flights on Boeing 737-400's between Islip, L.I., and Fort Myers, Fla.
Fares start at $109 each way, and have no minimum-stay, advance-purchase or round-trip requirements.


F.Y.I.
Hailing From Herkimer


Colorful Vegetables For Holiday Tables
IN my experience," wrote the English food writer Jane Grigson, "clever food is not appreciated at Christmas.
It makes the little ones cry and the old ones nervous."
I feel the same about Thanksgiving.
I don't approve of doing weird things with turkey like gussying it up with curry, chilies or pineapple.
But when it comes to vegetables, I like to do more than serve the usual broccoli, creamed onions and Brussels sprouts.
I happen to love them, but I also like to add other vegetables to the display, chosen for color to brighten the look of the table.
Purees of bright green spinach and orange acorn squash look very pretty side by  side in the same dish.
And beets, roasted in their skins so that their flavor is concentrated, add a cheerful note.


Russia Fails to Meet Arms Reduction Quotas
Russia failed to meet its commitments to reduce its military presence in two  regions by a treaty deadline Friday night, and Western nations were working with Russia to seek a compromise, diplomats said today.
Russia did not meet conditions called for in a NATO-Warsaw Pact treaty to reduce troops and weapons in the Caucasus and around St.
Petersburg, but met other terms.


Furor at Holy Cross Ends in Black Students' Victory
Virtually all of the 68 black students at College of the Holy Cross, many of  them recruited athletes who play for the college's football or basketball team,  gathered at 5:30 P.M. on Thursday outside a campus dining hall, just as they had each night all week during their boycott of sports and other extracurricular activities.
This time, though, they exuded a hint of victory as they filed to the back of the cafeteria, took their places at the last three tables, joined hands, bowed their heads over the food trays and said grace.


A Modernist Under a Celtic Spell
THE MODERNIST DESIGNER Archibald Knox lucked out with the Celtic style.
He was born in 1864, as interest in the Celts was just beginning to awaken.
He grew up in a Scottish household on the Isle of Man, surrounded by stone monuments emblazoned with Celtic imagery: ringed crosses, knotted ornaments, interlaced bands and weird beasts.
As a boy, he began collecting fossils, stones and relics that bore mystical Celtic symbols, a fascination he never outgrew.
Eventually, he helped popularize a 20th-century interpretation of the Celtic period in the jewelry and tablewares he designed in silver and pewter for Liberty and Company, the London style setter.


Malina Poshtova, Theodore Zang Jr.
Malina Poshtova, the daughter of Dr.
Nevena and Panayot Poshtov of Plovdiv, Bulgaria, was married in New York on Friday to Theodore Zang Jr., a son of Harriet Zang of Honolulu and Theodore Zang of New York.
Dr.
Ronald B. Sobel officiated in his study at Temple Emanu-El, where he is the senior rabbi.
Mrs.
Poshtova Zang, 27, is a financial correspondent in Toronto for Reuters Canada.
She graduated from the University of Sofia in Bulgaria, where she also received a master's degree in English philology, and received a master's degree in journalism as a Fulbright scholar at New York University.
Her father retired as an electrical engineer at Bulgartabac, a tobacco company in Plovdiv.
Her mother retired as a gynecologist in Plovdiv.


Sports of The Times;Mattingly's Typically Quiet Exit
AT the time, all those Yankee fans seemed to know that it would end like this for Don Mattingly and Buck Showalter, that neither would return in 1996, that this would be a last formal opportunity to say goodbye.
When the first baseman and the manager each were introduced before the opener of the divisional series  against the Seattle Mariners, the roar shook the Bronx County Courthouse.
The next night Mattingly hit a home run in what now appears to have been his  last game in Yankee Stadium.


Q and A
To Panama by Bus


Maureen C. Regan, John R. Iannitto
Maureen C. Regan, a daughter of Catherine and John M. Regan of Westchesterfield, N.H., was married on Friday to John R. Iannitto, a son of Teresa Iannitto of Brooklyn and the late Salvatore Iannitto.
The Rev.
Joseph Hertel performed the ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church in  New York.
Ms.
Regan, who is 39 and is keeping her name, is the president of Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello, a medical advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Molloy College and received an M.B.A. from Manhattan College.


Tarkanian's Last Picture Show: Red Carpet Out at Fresno State
The wife is in Las Vegas, the son is on staff and the National Collegiate Athletic Association is on alert.
Jerry Tarkanian's three-year hiatus consisted of a cup of coffee in San Antonio, a grandchild on his lap and trips to the fiction section of a bookstore.
He was well-read, well-rested and about to hit retirement age when his alma mater asked for a donation: him.


POSTINGS: 59 Unfurnished 1-Bedroom Units;In Riverdale, Apartments For the Elderly
When it's completed in the spring of 1998 on Johnson Avenue near West 235th Street in Riverdale's commercial hub, Riverdale Terrace won't be as ordinary as  it looks.
Inside the seven-story, red-brick building, sponsored by the Hebrew Home for the Aged, will be 59 unfurnished one-bedroom apartments for the independent elderly, each 540-square-foot unit designed to accommodate wheelchairs.
There will be handrails in hallways, and the 100- by 120-square-foot ground floor will include a pantry, community room, offices and  glass-enclosed lobby.
Tenants will also be able to meet on a 35- by 125-foot outdoor deck one flight up for shuffleboard, card games and gardening.
"You don't kick out a person who turns 85 and is slightly infirm," said Peter Samton, a partner at Gruzen Samton Architects, which has worked on projects for  the Hebrew Home since 1963.
"If someone collapses, someone can ring a bell."


Three Score and 10, Plus 13: Religious Life Begins Again
WHAT A triple double: Three 83-year-old men celebrated their second bar mitzvahs on Nov. 11 at Beth El Synagogue in East Windsor, Mercer County.


On Preseason Lists, UConn Women Start Where They Left Off
Until recent years, women's college basketball was almost always an afterthought.
The women often played in smaller, outdated gymnasiums before a handful of spectators who got in free.
Many athletic directors regarded women's  teams as a drag on the budget and wished they would go away.
A year ago, the women continued the climb out of obscurity.
More games were nationally televised.
The weekly media polls that kept attention on the men's game were extended to the women.
And Connecticut's 35-0 season, culminating in a national championship, showed the women's sport at its most exciting.


Caryn Weinberg And Keith Fink
Caryn Renee Weinberg, the daughter of Pearl and Jerome Weinberg of Roslyn, L.I., was married there last evening to Keith Alan Fink, a son of Judith and Stanley Fink of New York.
Rabbi Myron Fenster performed the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Fink, 28, is an assistant district attorney for Kings County.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received her law degree from Queens College.
Her father is the chairman of Resorts of the World Inc., a New York-based company that owns and operates hotels.


Inciting a Hubbub Is Part of What This Writer Does
IMAGINE NEWT GINGRICH bothering to write a pugnacious article attacking a new play by David Mamet, or fierce rows breaking out in the Democratic Party because of something penned by Sam Shepard, or even an editorial in a major American newspaper discussing the relevance of the latest work by Arthur Miller.
It doesn't seem too likely, does it?
Still, when what is familiarly known as the David Hare Trilogy ran in its entirety at Britain's National Theater one Saturday in 1993, the following week  not only brought the usual clutch of reviews examining the plays' artistic merits and demerits: pundits, parliamentarians, columnists, eminent lawyers and  senior churchmen felt impelled to join a debate about the issues that had been raised.


Colorado's 2-Mile-High Country
BEFORE we even reached Summit County, Colo., where every ski town has a base  elevation above 9,000 feet, my husband, Rolf, and I had already noticed the altitude.
The 90-mile drive on Interstate 70 from the new Denver airport, opened just before our March ski vacation, involved a steady, at times dramatic climb.
Suburban hills grew into rugged mountains punctured by old mine shafts.
When we reached Loveland Pass and saw our first real snow, we had hit the Continental Divide at 11,992 feet.
Our ears ringing, we descended a few thousand feet, then took exit 70 through the town of Silverthorne that merged imperceptibly with Dillon, our destination for the first night in Colorado.
Our  B &amp; B in Breckenridge could not take us until the next night, Sunday.
Beside our bed at the Ptarmigan Great Western on the shores of frozen Lake Dillon lay a brochure from a local clinic warning us about dizziness, headaches and other "altitude adjustment problems."


A Change In the Law On Co-ops
STARTING next year, married couples who own co-ops in New York will have an unusual opportunity: They will be able to enhance their individual ownership interests in their apartments, gain better insulation from creditors, obtain increased protection under Federal bankruptcy laws and even reaffirm their marriage vows all in one decisive stroke.
On Jan. 1, 1996, a change in the state's real property law will allow married co-op owners to hold title to their apartments the same way that married couples have traditionally been allowed to hold title to real estate -- in a form of ownership known as tenancy by the entirety.


Easy, Colorful Holiday Vegetable Dishes
IN my experience," wrote the English food writer Jane Grigson, "clever food is not appreciated at Christmas.
It makes the little ones cry and the old ones nervous."
I feel the same about Thanksgiving.
I don't approve of doing weird things with turkey like gussying it up with curry, chilies or pineapple.
But when it comes to vegetables, I like to do more than serve the usual broccoli, creamed onions and Brussels sprouts.
I happen to love them, but I also like to add other vegetables to the display, chosen for color to brighten the look of the table.
Purees of bright green spinach and orange acorn squash look very pretty side by  side in the same dish.
And beets, roasted in their skins to concentrate their flavor, a cheerful note.


Attorney General Hires Wife of Politician
The New York Attorney General, Dennis C. Vacco, who has drawn criticism that  his office is rife with political patronage, has hired the wife of the Republican County Executive here as a lawyer.
The woman, Mary Gehl Doyle, who is married to the Monroe County Executive, Jack Doyle, works in the Rochester branch of the Attorney General's office.
"She's a great lawyer," Mr.
Vacco said on Friday.
"I don't think she should be precluded from employment because her husband is in public service."


Sing-Along in Space
The secret to working together in outer space is simple.
First, become friends.
Last week, the space shuttle Atlantis and the Russian space station Mir came together for three days.
Atlantis carried a docking module for Mir that is supposed to make future visits safer and easier.
It carried a ton of fresh water, food, scientific equipment and mail for the Mir crew.
But it also brought together a bunch of friends -- eight astronauts from the United States, Canada, Germany and Russia who had trained together in Houston and in Russia's Star City.
They greeted one another with handshakes and hugs.
And whether they were hauling supplies back and forth between spacecraft, or eating dinner in Mir's central module, one thing was clear.
These guys actually liked working together.
Therefore, they may be forgiven for their farewell, when they broke into the 1968 song "Those Were the Days."
WARREN E. LEARY


On Tobacco Lobby Lists, Two Unlikely Names;Black Congressmen Defend Donations
Representative Edolphus Towns, Democrat of Brooklyn, defends the huge contributions he receives from tobacco companies this way: He is from Chadbourn, N.C., the son of sharecroppers who depended on growing tobacco for survival.
And besides, tobacco is a legal product.


Correction
Because of a production error, an essay on Oct. 29 about the changing relations between scholars and university presses, headlined "Keepers of the Tenure Track," misspelled the surname of the author of an article in the journal Scholarly Publishing.
He is David Richter, not Ritchie.


Real Targets For Giuliani
By agreeing to unusually long union contracts this month, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani did more than simply secure labor peace until the next century.
Having  come to power vowing to transform the structure of government, he has now emphatically revealed where that transformation will take place, and where it will not.
The most intensive efforts at reducing and restructuring government will focus on those programs used mostly by the city's poorest residents: health care, social services and, to a lesser degree, education.
The unionized employees, who deliver services related to so-called quality-of-life issues, will make only small sacrifices, and have agreed to step out of the way as Mr.
Giuliani sells off public hospitals and puts welfare recipients to work.


A Man Short, A Second Late
One, two, three, four.
Four!
Islander defenseman Bryan McCabe yelled when he  noticed his team was one skater short with time running out in overtime Friday night here against the Mighty Ducks.
But it was too late.
By the time the Islanders reacted, a desperation shot by the Mighty Ducks was being tipped into  the net with only 0.3 seconds showing on the clock.
The Islanders had gone to literally the last second to lose by 2-1.
The Islanders, riding a magnificent performance from their goaltender, Jamie McLennan, who stopped 46 of 48 shots, needed a line change with 15 seconds left, so they dumped the puck deep into Anaheim's zone, hoping to hold on for a tie.
As the Mighty Ducks counterattacked, five Islanders skaters went off the ice --  only four came back on.


After Rabin's Death, Orthodox Jews Look Within
Vilified from the outside as provocateurs of Yitzhak Rabin's assassination and roiled from within by self-examination, the Orthodox Jewish community has been profoundly shaken by the slaying and divided over how to respond.
The sense of siege among the Orthodox is evident in New York, having grown steadily since Mr.
Rabin's death two weeks ago, with reports of men wearing yarmulkes being called "murderer" in the city, as in Israel.
Proponents of the peace agreements in Israel have attributed the assassination partly to the charged rhetoric used by some religious opponents of Mr.
Rabin's policies as Prime Minister.


Melanie D. Talley, Harlan Whatley
Melanie DeVoe Talley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Truman Macdonald Talley of New York, was married yesterday to Harlan Douglas Whatley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanford Baker Whatley Sr. of Shreveport, La.
The Rev.
Carlisle Dickson performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Whatley graduated from La Varenne culinary school in Paris.
Her father is the publisher of Truman Talley Books, an imprint of E. P. Dutton in New York.
Her mother, Madelon DeVoe Talley, is a writer and an investment consultant in New York.


Remembrance of Musical Things Past
NO ARTIST WAS EVER more obsessed with the mysterious power of art than Marcel Proust, and his vast novel "A la Recherche du Temps Perdu," known in English as  "Remembrance of Things Past," has at its heart the question of how art exerts that power.
Although what action there is in this famously slow narrative revolves around its protagonists' tortuous, neurotic love affairs, several of the characters who remain with the reader most vividly are drawn from artistic milieus: the dramatic actress Berma, the painter Elstir and the dandified esthete the Baron de Charlus.
And while the madeleine dipped in tea has become proverbial (primarily, no doubt, because it occurs early in the novel, which is as far as most readers get), a metaphor of perhaps even greater importance is a musical one: the "little phrase" from a violin sonata by the fictional composer Vinteuil.


The Divorcing Kid
REBEL HEART The Scandalous Life of Jane Digby.
By Mary S. Lovell.
Illustrated. 365 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.
THE search for what used to be called heroines leads into strange corners, none stranger than the life of the 19th-century adventuress and serial bride Jane Digby.
Between 1807 and 1881 this daughter of the English aristocracy, gently reared in country houses in Dorset and Norfolk and "finished" at a seminary for young ladies, contrived to marry three distinguished men and juggle innumerable lovers, notably King Ludwig of Bavaria, before becoming, in her late 40's, the wife of an adoring Bedouin sheik and ending her days in the desert and Damascus.


L.I. Vines
Premier Cuvee Pindar Vineyards, Peconic, brut, 1988. About $13.


Support Group Is Easing Post-Stroke Anxieties
MORE than 100,000 people do it daily in Westchester but for Robert Leoni of Larchmont, it was an accomplishment.
Mr.
Leoni, 48, recently took the train by himself to Manhattan and walked to his midtown office.
Later, he shared the news with the participants of the Stroke Support Group at White Plains Hospital Center here.
Mr.
Leoni, who had a stroke in July 1994, is among the youngest of the members, who are in their late 40's through mid-80's.
The White Plains group is  the only organization of its kind in Westchester.
The free meetings provide support and education for 20 to 30 patients and family members each week.


2 Days of Frolic? Not for These Teachers
DODGING cruise buses on the Garden State Parkway hauling gamblers to Atlantic City like migrant workers, I'm tuned to 101.5 FM, New Jersey talk radio, and they're screaming bloody murder about the teachers shutting the little children  out of public schools for two days while they scoot off to Atlantic City for their annual convention.
The radio vibrates with phone-in fury.
Later, walking onto the Boardwalk, I'm half-expecting to see giddy schoolteachers dropping water balloons out of hotel windows, or giving one another gag joy-buzzer handshakes.
But a forlorn rolling-chair man tells me that as conventioneers go, teachers are stiffs who stay inside Convention Hall all day.
"This crowd don't spend no money," he says.
"Next week, we got the mayors'  convention. Now, they spend money."


Foster Care System Wary of Welfare Cuts
Waiting for the school bus in a frosty dawn, 12-year-old Andy Munoz explained the secret of making a pair of shoes last when there is no money to buy new ones.
"Try not to run in them," he said, shrinking into the hood of last year's  winter jacket.
"Try not to bend."
Andy has learned the lessons of poverty in a childhood shaped by slim paychecks that stop without warning and slimmer welfare checks that often come late.
With his father gone, his mother, Olga L. Munoz, somehow manages between short-lived jobs, even when fuel bills eat up the grocery budget and rent money  redeems the Christmas lay-away.


When the Load Isn't So Heavy
OF the many attempts to determine whether it makes sense to pay a sales charge for a mutual fund, most studies have found a small advantage for funds sold without a charge.
But such studies tend to look at the industry in its entirety.
A look at the  core funds from Fidelity Investments produced a different picture.


THE GREENING OF THE HUMANITIES
Jay Parini's "The Greening of the Humanities" (Oct. 29) reflects yet another  effort by feel-good hacks on the political left to hijack the arts for their own ends.
Art stands alone and should be left alone.
Those who insist on linking the work of artists and writers to pet social causes -- environmentalism, feminism,  racism, etc. -- cheapen it.


Commission Recommends Easing Soil Standards
To help stimulate the state's economy, a special panel in Trenton is recommending relaxing the standards for cleaning up contaminated soil, even if it means a greater risk of cancer.
New Jersey's environmental standards currently require that polluted soil be  cleaned up or contained to prevent exposure to the public that would result in an additional cancer in one in a million people over a lifetime of exposure.


The Women in Their Ranks
Flashback to a fashion magazine, circa 1960's-70's.
Its editors cannot complain of overwork, not really, but they have a lot to say about being underpaid.
They are, in fact, miserably paid.
But do they squawk?
They wouldn't  dare.
They have been assured by the personnel department that there are millions of people like them out there just dying to occupy their chairs.
Even if the pay is next to nothing, they will come.
This is probably true, since the women "out there" are presumably of the same mind set as the women inside.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 24 about reducing liability for estate taxes included one asset incorrectly among those that a surgeon put into a limited partnership.
He  did not include his home.
A lawyer for the doctor reported the error in a letter dated Nov. 2; this correction was delayed until the writer could be reached for  checking.


Rise of H.M.O.'s Threatens Research
To the Editor:
In a drive to reduce health care costs government and corporations like the Eastman Kodak Company are increasingly turning to H.M.O.'s ("A Doting Uncle Cuts Back, and a City Feels the Pain," Oct. 8).
In theory, H.M.O.'s should do much to reduce costs through purchasing health care services, including preventive care  and prescriptions, in volume.


The Way the Beatles Remember It
THE Beatles learned early that the quickest way to get the world's attention  was to go on television.
In 1963, they had a string of No. 1 records and had been playing nonstop tours of small British theaters for years, but it wasn't until they appeared on a popular variety show, "Val Parnell's Sunday Night at the London Palladium," that October that the national press began to write about Beatlemania.
When they visited the United States for the first time, four months later, they skipped the theater circuit and went directly onto "The Ed Sullivan  Show," beaming their well-tested charm directly to some 73 million viewers.
Now, a quarter-century after their breakup and 15 years after John Lennon was murdered, the Beatles are returning to television.
In "The Beatles Anthology," a six-hour documentary on ABC Sunday, Wednesday and Thanksgiving Day at 9 P.M., Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr offer what they consider the definitive telling of the Beatles' story, with ample commentary from Lennon, who covered the subject thoroughly in radio and television interviews during his lifetime.


THE RICH: How They're Different;How They're Different . . . Than They Used to Be
I've been loitering in the vicinity of rich people for nearly 15 years now, and in that time I have seen and heard a lot of strange things, but nothing as strange as what was related to me during a single brief encounter with the species in the summer of 1982.
It was during a picnic in the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina.
I was minding my own business, more or less, when a middle-aged woman appeared and introduced herself as a close relation of Pierre du Pont 5th, with whom I had just graduated from Princeton University.
After she asked what I intended to do with my life, and I replied that I had no  idea, she explained to me how much more difficult things were for young Pierre.
In a surprisingly aggressive tone she ticked off his many achievements: Pierre had graduated with honors, she said; Pierre had "23 job offers"; Pierre was already putting in 14-hour days at some computer company; the company was paying Pierre nearly $30,000 a year.
The list was long but somehow failed to include the fact most central to Pierre's existence: the du Pont family fortune recently estimated by Forbes to be at least $10 billion, a large chunk of which he stands to inherit.
Clearly, something was amiss.
I had no trust fund (or job) and yet there I was having a picnic.
Young Pierre was well on his way to inheriting millions, and yet there he was, a veritable human workhorse, enslaved to some dreary corporation for a pittance.
The contrast was a clear confirmation of my own lassitude -- but also, I think, a small sign of the shift taking place in the imaginations of the rich: just as new money once sought to obscure itself with the trappings of ancienne noblesse, old money was now shifting its focus to achievement.
The antimarket snobbery, the pursuit of useless hobbies, the preference for filigreed personalities over human ramrods, the taste for understatement -- all those qualities that had distinguished du Ponts for more than a century apparently had vanished.
Old money was being buffeted not merely economically but culturally.
It was uncomfortable in its own skin.
In his marvelous 1988 memoir, "Old Money," Nelson Aldrich revealed, among other things, the then-recent creation of a support group for troubled heirs.
The Dough Nuts, as they dubbed themselves, felt ill at ease in the modern world.
You could sympathize -- after you heard the gruesome tales about the rich kids who failed to overcome their trust funds.
One evening in 1989 a young Mellon found the decal on the back window of his BMW defaced.
On top of "The Wharton School" someone had scrawled "Night School" in thick black letters.
The villains, as it turned out, were a couple of full-time Wharton students.
The worst part was that it was true.
A Mellon was attending night school.
Life was that harsh.


Nicole D. Motz, William Wilson 4th
Nicole Darcy Motz, the daughter of Marcia Goldstein Motz of Hackensack, N.J., and Dr.
Robin O. Motz of Tenafly, N.J., was married last evening to William David Wilson 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson 3d of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph  Gelberman officiated at the Sheraton Crossroads Hotel in Mahwah, N.J.
The couple graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, he summa cum laude.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
THE CACTUS GARDEN By Robert Ward. Pocket Books, $22.


An All-Mozart Program Offered in Pleasantville
NINETEEN years ago, the founders of the Pleasantville Chamber Music Society decided to make fine music available to the public free of charge.
That policy has been maintained, so no tickets are required for the new four-recital season  that begins today at 3 P.M.
Featured in an all-Mozart program at the Presbyterian Church are Musicians from Marblehead (the Marblehead Summer Music Festival, which this year completed its own 19th anniversary season in Massachusetts): the flutist -- and Festival director -- Robert Stallman, the violinist Bayla Keyes, the violist Katherine Murdock and the cellist Susan Salm.
Interestingly, Mozart wrote three Quartets for that precise instrumental combination.
The intriguing program introduces Mr.
Stallman's transcriptions for flute and strings of three Piano Sonatas, K.331, 333 and 570.


Environmental War Simmers in California
For nearly a month now, this desolate outpost of sand and scrub in the eastern Mojave Desert has been a camp for a rag-tag group of environmental guerrillas.
Put baldly, their objective is to take direct action -- even if it is illegal -- to stop Government officials from turning the area into a nuclear waste dump.
The 1,000-acre tract of Federal land at issue is about 225 miles east of Los  Angeles and 20 miles from the Colorado River, an irreplaceable water source for  at least 15 million Southern Californians.
The fear that toxic substances could  trickle down 650 feet to the water table and leach into the nearby river has made this issue a great deal more than a garden variety dispute.


Bill on Ethics Charges Against Gingrich Is Shelved
Heeding advice from the Republican ethics committee chairman, the House has rejected a Democratic attempt to force a public report on an inquiry into Speaker Newt Gingrich's conduct.
Republicans, joined by one Democrat, stuck together on Friday in the 219-to-177 vote to table -- in effect to kill -- a resolution that would have required an ethics committee report by Nov. 28.


THE PAIN GAME
Zuger's self-confessed paranoia reads like a soliloquy by Edgar Allan Poe.
What do you want from me, you and your pain? she exhorts.
Woe to her patients and their pain, real or imagined.
KACHADOOR V. KACHADOORIAN Plainview, L.I.


Why Their World Might Crumble
The year 1968 was among the worst years this century for the United States -- assassinations, riots, campus uprisings and the infamous Democratic National Convention in Chicago.
But an event that attracted little or no attention at the time may ultimately prove to have the most lasting and destabilizing effects of  all.
Suddenly that year, like a surge in a long immobile glacier, economic inequality started to rise.


Police Officer Starts Group To Defend White Men
A sergeant with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department has formed a group whose goals are to protect the rights of white male law-enforcement officers, and is defending his right to do so.
"Why can't you condone this organization when you condone the black peace officers' association, the women's peace officers' association and the Asian peace officers' association?" the organizer, Sgt.
Ed Kirste, told reporters on Friday.


Melinda Panella, Ronald G. Insana
Melinda Marie Panella, an associate producer in Fort Lee, N.J., for CNBC, the cable television network, was married yesterday to Ronald Gerard Insana, a CNBC  news anchor and program host.
The Rev.
Kenneth M. Near performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Insana, 26, is a graduate of Hollins College.
She is a daughter of Patricia and Charles Panella of Tenafly, N.J.
The bride's father is an executive director of the packaging division at Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc., the distilled spirits producer in New York.
Her mother is a broker and the office manager at Saydah Realtors in Tenafly.


Washington, Watch What You Wish For
BEWARE, lest stern heaven hate you enough to hear your prayers!" Anatole France said it 114 years ago, but the warning still resonates in the current battle over the Federal budget.
For more than a decade, mainstream economists have been begging, pleading, demanding that the chronic deficit opened in the Reagan years be closed.
"Cutting the deficit will boost growth and help restore confidence that our elected representatives know how to run the store," explains Henry Aaron, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institution in Washington.


From Organization Man To the Odd Man Out
JOHN N. McBAINE is one of those men who has everything.
But in the lean and mean 90's, that didn't save him from losing his job.
Mr.
McBaine, a broadly built, nattily dressed 54-year-old, used to be a partner in the prestigious law firm of Coudert Brothers in New York City.
But not anymore, and much that surrounds the change is sharply disputed, in court and out.
Mr.
McBaine says that Coudert purposely starved him of work and then booted him out, and that the firm had no legal right to do so.
But officials of  the firm, who noted in a letter to Mr.
McBaine that they were terminating his partnership because of his "professional performance," say they did not single out Mr.
McBaine and that the partnership agreement allows them to remove him.
The firm declined to discuss the matter in detail.


The Airy Fare: 3 Wheels, 4 Bits A Pedal-Minute
Laraine Goodman depends on her legs for a living.
At night, she's a tap dancer and performance artist.
But by day, Ms.
Goodman pedals a pink pedicab around lower Manhattan, ferrying tourists, local residents and businessmen around town for 50 cents a minute.
Ms.
Goodman, 47, is among the first drivers to enter a month-old cottage industry that by spring will have 19 brightly colored cabs waiting for fares on  Manhattan streets.


Group Calls for Halt To Rate Increases
New Jersey Citizen Action, a consumer and public policy lobbying organization, launched a campaign last week to get telephone users to protest proposed rate increases for calls to directory assistance, and a Democratic assemblywoman asked that the time limit for public comment on those increases be extended.
Under the proposal submitted by Bell Atlantic to the state Board of Public Utilities in Newark, the number of free calls to directory assistance would be reduced from 10 a month to two, and the cost of calls above the limit would increase from 20 cents to 35 cents.


THE GREENING OF THE HUMANITIES
Humanities and social-science faculties may want to jump on the environmental bandwagon.
But the cold, hard truth is that this field demands solid foundations in chemistry, biology and earth sciences.
These courses are essential for careers where you can develop a "genuine concern for the environment."
MAUREEN SCHARBERG San Jose, Calif.


Casino Defeat Puts Rowland to the Test
Despite Gov.
John G. Rowland's appeals to party loyalty, Connecticut's Republican-controlled Senate voted resoundingly against his proposal for a Bridgeport casino, dealing a significant blow to Mr.
Rowland's reputation as an  effective consensus builder.
Article, page 46.


Smitty Stanley and Patience Moore
Patience Moore, a daughter of Bishop Paul Moore Jr., of Morristown, N.J., and the late Jenny McKean Moore, was married yesterday to Smith Billingslea Stanley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Stanley of Willow Street, Pa.
The Rev.
William Davidson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Riverdale, in the Bronx.
The bride is an actress and a singer-songwriter specializing in country music.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was the Episcopal Bishop of New York from 1972 to 1989.
Her mother, an author, wrote "The People on Second Street," an account of her experiences as a rector's wife  in a poor parish in Jersey City.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Brenda Moore, who represents American artists in Europe.


Wrestling Match
To the Editor:
My initial response to Patricia Volk's profile of the painter Nikko Sedgwick ["Painting as Fast and Furiously as He Can," Nov. 5] was laughter.
How else to react to what resembled Fabio wrestling with tracing paper and canvas?
Then I remembered I was reading The New York Times, not People magazine.


Adding Color and Ease to Holiday Vegetable Dishes
IN my experience," wrote the late English food writer Jane Grigson, "clever food is not appreciated at Christmas.
It makes the little ones cry and the old ones nervous."
I feel the same about Thanksgiving.
I don't approve of doing weird things with turkey such as gussying it up with curry, chilies or pineapple.
But when it comes to vegetables, I do like to do more than serve the usual broccoli, creamed onions and Brussels sprouts.
I happen to love them, but I also like to add other vegetables to the display, chosen for color to brighten the look of the table.
Purees of bright green spinach and orange acorn squash look very pretty served side by side in the same dish.
And beets, roasted in their skins so that their flavor is concentrated, add a cheerful note.


Who Will Endure The Rugged Road To April Fool's Day?
They will need much more than a road map to reach the Meadowlands on April Fools' Day for the final moments of the college basketball season.
They will be  forced to rely on faith, persistence and hope.
They will have to call upon all their navigational skills along a highway that is sure to include roadblocks, potholes and unnecessary detours.
They may find that the journey ends prematurely, or they may discover the joy of making it all the way to Byrne Meadowlands Arena for that memorable Monday night.
And that's just the ticket-holders.


Denver-Based Airline Ends Service
Markair, a small airline that offered service from Denver to 11 cities -- including New York, Chicago, Dallas and Los Angeles -- stopped operating late last month.


Schools Can Help Form Enlightened Eating Habits
To the Editor:
Julie O'Sullivan Maillet's essay "Weight: Too Heavy. Fortune: Bleak" (Soapbox, Nov. 5) failed to address a central issue about children's obesity.
By and large, children eat the meals put in front of them.
This generation of parents was cheated out of learning about nutritious meals and how to cook them  by school boards whose first item of budget cutting was domestic science.


Mining a Heart of Gold
BEVERLY KIDD'S day out began at 11:30 A.M. when the limo driver honked.
Ms.
Kidd's downstairs bell was broken.
She peered out the window of her one-room apartment over a diner on East 22d Street, and waved me up.
She was dressed to party, but Maxwell von Katz Kidd was balky.
The big 11-year-old orange tabby has the true cat's buzz-off attitude.
"You're the star, Max, you're the show," crooned Ms.
Kidd, but Maxwell kept squirming out of his cloth carry-bag.
Her disabled 71-year-old husband, Robert,  smiled and nodded at his soup.
His sitter watched people talking about their racist relatives on the Jerry Springer Show.


Sequence in Survey Of West Meadow Beach
In "Owners Hope History Can Save Cottages" [Sept. 24] on a survey we are conducting in West Meadow Beach, there are several factual errors which must be  clarified.
Long Island Traditions was awarded a grant from the Preservation League of New York and the New York State Council on the Arts to conduct a cultural-resource survey of West Meadow Beach.
The article states that the cottage owners approached Long Island Traditions to conduct this survey, so that properties would be declared historic landmarks.
This is absolutely not true.
I  did not talk to the cottage owners until the grant was announced.
I will be conducting interviews and research to fulfill the requirements of the grant.
The article also implies that I will be actively involved in the struggle to  preserve the cottages.
This, again, is not true.
I will file a cultural-resources report with the Preservation League and the State Historic Preservation Office.
A report will also be prepared for the Town of Brookhaven.
I will not be involved in any further efforts beyond this level.


How They Indulge Themselves
Most Americans do not have a knack for indulging in a sybaritic bath.
Efficiency, not flourish, is the hallmark of the American toilette.
In 1851, when Millard Fillmore installed the first tub in the White House, he was chastised for wallowing in "monarchical luxury." And while the Jacuzzi has become a commonplace amenity, the extravagant bath still bears the taint of forbidden pleasure.
It is a conundrum the rich have yet to resolve.
Their bathrooms waver between the marble excesses of imperial Rome and the impersonal  luxe of a hotel powder room.
Alexander Gorlin, a Manhattan architect, recently completed a bath for a Long Island cardiologist.
Inspired by Nero's first palace, Domus Transitoria (circa A.D. 64), it has a cruciform plan like early Christian churches.
The barrel-vaulted ceilings and the deep-red marble walls ("I wanted Brunelleschi colors," says Gorlin) create an aura of grandeur despite the room's three rather tiny wings.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate 1.
Spending: Vote on passage of a second temporary spending bill that would finance Government agencies and bring all Federal employees back to work.
Approved 60 to 37, Nov. 6. 2.
Balanced Budget: Vote on passage of a Republican plan to have a balanced budget by the year 2002.
Approved 52 to 47, Nov. 17.


MARION BARRY CONFRONTS A HOSTILE TAKEOVER
apparitions of Joyce Carol Oates dolled up as Emily Dickinson and Norman Mailer  dressed up as a swashbuckling Captain Ahab (holy raging egomania, Robin!), but it is Halloween everyday here in the nation's capital, with Newt Gingrich and Marion Barry tricked out as statesmen ("Marion Barry Confronts a Hostile Takeover," by Jeffrey Goldberg, Oct. 29).
Here's looking forward to next month's stuffed turkeys.


'Magnificently Human'
To the Editor:
I read with special interest Michael Kimmelman's essay "Brancusi Reveals His Human Side" [Oct. 22].
I had the extraordinary experience of visiting Brancusi at his studio in Paris in 1947.
As a veteran of Patton's Third Army, I decided to return to Paris to study art after finishing my Bachelor of Arts.


Lisa Brauston, James Ginsburg
Lisa Mara Brauston, a daughter of Roberta G. Brauston of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and Dr.
Bruce B. Brauston of Strongsville, Ohio, was married on Friday to  James Steven Ginsburg, the son of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Prof.
Martin D. Ginsburg of Washington.
The bridegroom's mother, an Associate Justice of the  Supreme Court, officiated at the University Club of Chicago.
Mrs.
Brauston Ginsburg, 30, is an art historian who until recently was a director of decorative objects and antiques at Hanzel Galleries, an auction house in Chicago.
She graduated from Lake Forest College and received a certificate in American fine and decorative arts from Sotheby's.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS


Beauty Is As Beauty Doesn't
THE prints were thrown together in a discordant mix.
The eerie green, harsh blue and dung brown were as jarring to the eye as the weird proportions of the clothes.
"Hideous" and "ugly" were two of the kinder descriptions given to Prada's show when it hit the runway in Milan, Italy, in October.
At the spring/summer collections in New York, Miuccia Prada threw down another defiant challenge.
In her Miu Miu line, she offered a look of slimy synthetic housedresses and nylon cafeteria uniforms with banal underwear deliberately showing through.


Halfway Across Times Sq., Many Questions Will Be Answered
In a city where space is rationed in feet, not acres, even skinny traffic islands can be strategic sites.
Take the archipelago of median strips where Broadway and Seventh Avenue crisscross in Times Square.
The military recruitment station there has been a fixture for more than a half-century.
And since the TKTS trailer opened in 1973, bargain-hunters have queued up to buy nearly 30 million theater tickets.
Now there are plans to squeeze in a new addition: a $974,400 steel and glass booth topped by a large question-mark logo.
The oversized punctuation does not signify any mystery about what will be inside.
Rather, it is the international symbol for an information booth.
This will be the city's new center for answering questions from tourists, with nearly 2,000 visitors expected daily.


A Child of Segregation Says It Was Not All Bad
The latest N.A.A.C.P. chapter president to rebel against the national organization's integration policies is a sharecropper's son who grew up in the officially segregated schools of southern Virginia.
While the experience had humiliations he would not want to relive, it also, he said, had virtues not always found in today's integrated schools.
At his one-room school in little Palmer Springs, said Robert H. Robinson, president of the Bergen County chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, "you got the leftovers from this and the leftovers from that," including dogeared books inherited from white schools.
But, he said, black teachers "had a thirst to teach" and "gave of themselves."


SPOTLIGHT&lt;HEADLINELike Romeo and Juliet
An aerial camera glides over Manhattan, then plummets to the pavement and the fierce clash between two young gangs.
WEST SIDE STORY (1961) dances to life.
On  the screen, with a breathtaking new start, the Broadway hit easily caught fire again, with Leonard Bernstein's stunning music, Jerome Robbins's electric choreography (he co-directed with Robert Wise) and Arthur Laurents's story blueprint.
Natalie Wood (above) and Richard Beymer led the cast.
The Oscar-winner also drew praise back home, as the first musical cited by the New York Film Critics -- WEDNESDAY at 11 P.M. on TNT.
Howard Thompson


Q. &amp; A.
Renting A Condo in New Jersey


Where Food Is Cajun and Music Dixie
GO south for Cajun food, not just in the United States, but also on Long Island.
A majority of Cajun and Creole restaurants are clustered on the South Shore.
The newest outpost of this flavor-packed cuisine is Bayou Uptown, which recently opened in Rockville Centre in quarters that once housed Gumbo Alley.
Jackson Square, another New Orleans-inspired restaurant, came to this community  about a year ago.
Other Cajun hot spots on or near Nassau's South Shore include  the original Bayou in Bellmore, Big Daddy's in Massapequa and Cap's in Seaford Harbor.


Bosnia Asks U.S. Arms Aid as Part of Any Peace Accord
The Muslim-led Bosnian Government has formally asked the United States to provide "on an urgent basis, significant materiel, training and logistic support" to insure a balance of forces with the Serbs as part of any peace agreement.
The demand, made in a draft memorandum of understanding given to American officials, calls on the Clinton Administration to "move at once" to obtain a lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and Herzegovina and then "take immediate steps to facilitate the urgent delivery of defense articles and services."


Giving a Roof Garden Shelter From the Storm
A gold rose swirled with scarlet was still blooming on Rebecca Cole's roof in Greenwich Village the other day as the wind came up and we started battening down her plants for winter.
We had to hurry (having waited, of course, until the last minute) as we bundled the potted perennials in bubble wrap and burlap, because a freeze was predicted behind the storm.
The air was so wet it did everything but rain as we pulled up the last of the annuals -- little orange zinnias and yellow nasturtiums -- and dumped the soil from their pots into sturdy garbage bags. (Which will be saved, of course, to keep from hauling more upstairs next spring.)


In the Region: Connecticut;A Million-Dollar Baby in a 5-and-10-Cent Store
EARLY next fall, Saks Fifth Avenue will open a 35,700-square-foot store for women at 205 Greenwich Avenue in downtown Greenwich.
This will be the second Saks in Connecticut: the first, a 75,000-square-foot anchor in the Stamford Town Center mall, opened in 1983.
A 125,000-square-foot store in nearby White Plains has been operating since 1954.
Refurbishing the building here, constructed and formerly occupied by F. W. Woolworth since the mid-60's, has begun with minor demolition.
But construction  will not start until after the first of the year.


Day Jails' Open Up Cells for Violent Felons, and Save Money
LAST year Michael M. of Smithtown, convicted as a drunken driver, might have  spent 10 months in jail for violating his probation.
But because Michael, 31, was arrested last month, he will serve his time at the Suffolk County Day Reporting Center in Hauppauge.
He is to receive drug treatment, psychological counseling and job training.


The Case for Using Less
HOPE, HUMAN AND WILD True Stories of Living Lightly on the Earth.
By Bill McKibben. 227 pp.
Boston.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


Trailing at Halftime, Stepinac Rallies to Win
C.H.S.F.L.


Shelley Bennack, R. G. McCullough
Shelley Ann Bennack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Bennack Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Graham McCullough, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. McCullough of Port Arthur, Tex.
Col.
Robert Vickers, a United States Army chaplain, performed the ceremony at the Gift Chapel at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio.


THE RICH: How They Spend It;A-Z: What a Lot of Money Can Buy
ACCESS


Theft of Prized Bonsai Is Sequoia-Sized Crime at Botanic Garden
An unlikely partnership of police officers and gardeners are hunting a horticultural burglar who has stolen $24,000 worth of bonsai trees from the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The thief (or thieves) apparently scaled two fences to uproot and steal 27 trees from the garden's renowned bonsai collection in October.
The 500 other bonsai were moved from the nursery to an indoor greenhouse.


Nets' O'Bannon Dunks 76ers With Two Thunderous Slams
Armon Gilliam scored 24 points, grabbed 12 rebounds and had 6 steals.
Jayson  Williams, fast becoming a monster on the glass, had 13 rebounds, eight of them off the offensive boards.
Chris Childs, the de facto No. 1 point guard in Kenny  Anderson's absence, dished out 14 assists.
But it was Eddie O who stole the show tonight in the Nets' 95-79 thumping of  the Philadelphia 76ers.


Three Are Charged in Substitute Driver Scam
In the village of Schoharie, N.Y. (population 1,045), the arrests of any three people in one day would be big news.
For those three to be Chinese residents of Manhattan, arrested after traveling 130 miles to take driving tests, was unprecedented.
The arrests Thursday in Schoharie, 30 miles west of Albany, were the latest effort to crack down on what appears to be an organized scheme to get driver's licenses for immigrants by having experienced drivers impersonate them for the test, said George Filieau, a spokesman for the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.


A Narrow Victory for Dole
Senator Bob Dole won a straw poll in Florida among the Republican Presidential contenders, but his margin was slim.
Page 30.


Mixed-Income Rentals as the Key to Housing Development
WHEN the stars are in line, new housing results.
The stars are a healthy market, a properly zoned site, a plausible financial plan and a source of mortgage financing.
The alignment of the stars over Manhattan in the mid-90's is beginning to produce a generation of new multifamily buildings that contrast strikingly with the new buildings 10 years ago.


A Genius for Suffering
THE DIARY OF FRIDA KAHLO An Intimate Self-Portrait.
Essay and commentary by Sarah M. Lowe.
Introduction by Carlos Fuentes.
Illustrated. 295 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams. $39.95.


Classical Brief
MOMPOU: 'MUSICA CALLADA' Herbert Henck, pianist. ECM 1523; CD.


After the Revolution
To the Editor:
In his review of Ivan Klima's new book of essays and interviews, "The Spirit  of Prague" (Oct. 29), Larry Wolff notes that Mr.
Klima, a Czech writer and leading dissident before the overthrow of Communism, considered "foolish" and "silly" a question that "a foreign journalist with a tape recorder" put to him in the aftermath of the Velvet Revolution.
The woman asked Mr.
Klima, "What are  you going to write about now?" and apparently Mr.
Klima later took her to task for her naivete in "an amusing essay" called "On Conversations With Journalists."


Culture and Race: Still on America's Mind
RACE relations haven't been so tense in years.
A new study of life in poor black neighborhoods exposes a level of poverty and despair that most whites never imagined.
The headlines tell of white supremacists and racist police officers, of black marchers in Washington and rioters in Los Angeles.
Even liberal whites are taken aback by expressions of black rage, and startled to find that blacks may have a very different perception of justice in America than they do.
Racial tensions are turning museums into political battlegrounds too, making words like tokenism, elitism and censorship part of the art lexicon.
I am talking about the late 1960's.
About the Kerner Commission report, with  its description of America as two worlds, separate and unequal.
About the Ku Klux Klan and the Black Panther Party.
About urban riots, school desegregation and the breakdown of black-Jewish relations.
And what summons it all to mind is  a new edition of the catalogue for a watershed exhibition called "Harlem on My Mind," which during a few turbulent months in 1969 brought the racial troubles of the era literally onto the steps and into the galleries of the august Metropolitan Museum of Art.


A Little Hope Pumps Up An Attitude
FIDEL CASTRO seems to have a new spring in his step since returning from his  recent visit to New York and the United Nations, and his brightened outlook has  quickly percolated through a state and party apparatus that has always taken its cues from him.
After enduring his six worst years since his revolution swept him to power nearly 37 years ago, Mr.
Castro and his Government once again seem  to be directing, rather than reacting to, events.
They also seem to have drawn a singular lesson from their recent successes: Perhaps there is no further need for their regime to loosen up, either toward political freedom, or toward more open markets.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Arts and Leisure Section 2


Caution Advised in Feeding the Houseplants
A PRIMER on the many kinds of water-soluble houseplant fertilizers might be a good thing to ponder now.
There are so many products on the shelves, it is hard  to know which one to choose.
Often a buyer just heads for a particular brand name because it has been highly praised in a commercial or splashed forth in a gardening magazine advertisement.
Sometimes sales clerks are eager to tout one product over another, adding to the confusion.
But decisions must be made.


Do Walls Keep Out Crime, or Just Neighbors?
The place where Hoboken wants to build a wall is sort of in the middle of nowhere, which is both the point and the problem.
It is near railroad tracks that lie at the base of a cliff at the back of town, several hundred feet west of the city's cluster of public housing projects.
At the top of the cliff is a Jersey City neighborhood called the Heights, and since the dawn of local history, residents of the two communities have climbed up and down the cliff on a system of improvised staircases and paths.
Some of the travelers, residents and officials say, are drug dealers or customers looking for a low-profile route.


It's a Jungle Out There
Swamp fever, marauding leopards, armed guerrillas -- for Grace Berggren, the  7-year-old protagonist of Margaret Meyers's impressionistic and lovely first collection of stories, SWIMMING IN THE CONGO (Milkweed, paper, $13.95), life with her missionary parents along the banks of the Congo River means confronting many disquieting realities.
But while Grace grows adept at sidestepping danger,  she quickly begins to resent the narrow quality of her parents' religious convictions; to them, even ballet lessons are sinful and decadent.
It is the late 1960's, but in their little world the atmosphere of an earlier era is emphatically preserved.
Bored with "ladies who have dining-room tables and short
DWIGHT GARNER


The 250-Pound House Cat, And, Boy, Can She Purr
IT'S not easy keeping the house clean," Roger Figg said. What with a tiger in it.
Rugs don't last. Neither do knickknacks.


For the U.S., Uncertainty May Cost a Certain Price
FOR decades Wall Street and Washington have been on the lookout for the world's deadbeats, tinderboxes and questionable bets: They rescued Latin America from its debt crisis in the 80's, worked to stabilize Russia's economy in the 90's, and even now are pressing India to insure that American companies investing in power projects are not left with giant cement holes in the ground.
But risk is in the eye of the beholder, and now the telescope has suddenly swung in the other direction.
Countries that America once worried about are beginning to worry about America.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Art of Dressing


A Social Conscience and Beethoven, Too
IF Luna Stage is going to be known as a theater of social consciousness, where does Beethoven fit in?
After two seasons of producing feminist works, the women who run the 65-seat  space on Erie Street insisted that theirs was not to be called a women's theater.
And now that racism is a dominant theme of the new season, Jane Mandel  and Dorothy Fine Siegert, jointly Luna's artistic and producing directors, wince at being tagged as "issue-oriented."


Dawn Hightower, Paul R. Lucas
Dawn Denise Hightower, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Fowler Hightower of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul Richard Lucas, the son of Mr.  and Mrs.
Richard Allen Lucas of Baldwinsville, N.Y.
The Rev.
William P. Deveaux  performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Memorial United Methodist Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Lucas, 27, is a clinical social worker at Prince George's Hospital Center in Cheverly, Md.
She graduated from Howard University, from which she also received a master's degree in social work.
Her father is the president of television and telecommunications at the Walt Disney Company in Burbank, Calif.


Roots of Tap In a Show
TAP dancing has enjoyed a revitalization in recent years, and with it has come renewed interest in the pioneers of this uniquely American art form.
Much of tap's heyday is explored in an exhibition, "Cookie's Harlem: A Tap Dancer's World," a retrospective of the life and career of the legendary dancer Charles (Cookie) Cook.
The exhibition, on display at the Museum of the City of New York, includes an overview of Mr.
Cook's life, highlighting his childhood in Chicago, his early career with his dance partner Ernest (Buster) Brown -- with whom he gained fame  for combining tap dancing with acrobatics and comedy -- his solo career and his  inspiration from musical legends like Eubie Blake, Duke Ellington and Sammy Davis Jr.
Mr.
Cook, who died in 1991, is remembered through photographs, personal memorabilia and a 37-minute videotape in which he and Mr.
Brown reminisce.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 19, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Downhill In the Dolomites
THE Dolomites of northern Italy are less forgiving than other mountains in the Alps.
Here the flesh of the earth has been ripped open, and from this wound  jagged peaks and needles protrude, so sharp and scaly that you feel that if you  ran your finger lightly over them you would cut yourself.
Yet harsh as these mountains appear, they are softened immeasurably by their color, changing throughout the day: now blushing rosy-pink, as soft as earthen clay; at sundown a flaming red; and then, seemingly within seconds, ashen-gray,  like a human face passing straight from life to death.


Keyboard Virtuoso
THE thousands of textbooks, stacks of paper and cluttered furniture in Miss Dee's apartment are straight out of the Collier Brothers school of interior decorating.
"They think I'm Superlady," she rants.
"Some student just called. Won't take  no for an answer."


Leslie Polychron, Howard Coale
Leslie Dale Polychron, a vice president and strategic planner at Loew &amp; Partners/SMS Advertising in New York, was married yesterday to Howard S. L. Coale, a writer.
The Rev.
Nigel Massey, an Anglican priest, officiated at the Eglise Francaise du Saint-Esprit in New York.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.


Gossip Central


Their Game Is Basketball, Their Playbook's in Yiddish
To the Editor:
The use of a button to illustrate the article concerning a conference about women and Yiddish ("Yiddish: the Seminar," Nov. 5) leaves the impression that the button was the seminar's logo.
Actually the button -- which bears the message "Speak to me in Yiddish" -- is produced and sold by Yugntruf/Youth for Yiddish, an international organization of young Yiddish speakers.


Bottle That Boycott
Worldwide opposition to France's nuclear tests in the Southwest Pacific put a damper on the annual welcoming of Beaujolais nouveau to foreign shores.
In Japan, where the Consumers Union called for a nationwide ban, one shop in  Akita invited customers to come in and smash as many bottles of the new wine as  they wished.
In Sweden, television commercials by anti-nuclear groups showed a woman swishing French wine around in her mouth, then spitting back into the glass.
In this country, no organized protest were reported.


'. . . If I Can Make It There . . .'
UPTOWN -- A year ago, Arthur Green was homeless.


After the Fire, the Heartbreak
With stained-glass windows and a gleaming copper cross adorning its stone facade, the Tudor-style church at Whitney Avenue and Judge Street has been an integral part of Elmhurst for 93 years, serving everyone from wealthy city folks who summered here at the turn of the century to the mostly blue-collar immigrants who now call it home.
To give thanks for its long years of spiritual guidance, the congregants of  the Elmhurst Baptist Church spent some $100,000 over the last two years to paint the walls, replace windows and bathrooms and install a drop ceiling in the sanctuary.
Their goal was to completely renovate the building in time for its 100th birthday, in the year 2002.


GETTING INTO CHARACTER
Yo, Joyce!
Is that your concept of Emily Dickinson?
Amanda Wingfield, Blanche DuBois, maybe -- but Emily Dickinson?
Never in a million years.
Emily wouldn't be caught dead in such a get-up.
Our New England landscape does not lend itself to such delicate and wispy froufrou.


Canyon Becomes Peaceful, Pleasing Nobody
Nature's silence was profound, ethereal and serene, and frankly a bit eerie.
Such quietude is hardly typical of the Grand Canyon this time of year.
Normally, about 8,000 people a day visit this national treasure, and there is hardly an inch not flanked by a crush of gawking visitors.
Hotels are usually booked weeks ahead, and trails are crawling with hikers.
Few come here anymore seeking solitude since they hardly see the canyon through the jumbo tour buses and encircling motels and fast-food restaurants.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'PULSE OF AMERICA'


Aspen
Aspen in winter is a virtual Victorian gem, still the Silver Queen of Colorado's mountain resorts.
In its spectacular setting of red mountains rising  almost vertically from a narrow valley, the town's gingerbread houses and rosy commercial buildings of brick and sandstone are at their most appealing when illuminated for the holidays.
Aspen Mountain's ski runs, which descend directly into town, have long been favored for their steepness and variety.
But Aspen has always had more to offer  than skiing.
Once a summer hunting ground for the Utes, later the largest silver-producing area in the country, Aspen in 1893 had about the same population as it does today.
But when Congress demonetized silver that year, the population began a descent that reached about 700 in a few years, and Aspen became a ranch town.


Suspect in Golden Venture Case Was Leading a Life of Luxury
In the 29 months since the rusting freighter Golden Venture ran aground off New York with its cargo of illegal Chinese immigrants, Lee Peng Fei, believed to be the operation's mastermind, has apparently continued to reap and enjoy the vast profits of the human smuggling trade, investigators said today.
He had been living in a stylish condominium apartment on the outskirts of Bangkok near the airport, and lately had been driving an $89,000, forest-green Mercedes-Benz, the fancy E-220 Cabriolet model, which he was polishing in the steamy tropical sun on Thursday when the Royal Thai Police, acting on a tip from American authorities, closed in and seized him without a struggle.


Really Odd Jobs
Many historians teach history, of course.
But one works in the libraries of London and Lisbon, where he retraces old shipping routes to help divers find sunken treasure.
Others are family genealogists, conduct historical walking tours or make sure that the period details in movies are on the mark.
Do you know someone who has turned conventional skills into an unconventional job?
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Jodi Schaiman, Scott Shahmanesh
Jodi Lynn Schaiman, a daughter of Jane and David Schaiman of Harrison, N.Y.,  was married last evening to Scott Dana Shahmanesh, the son of Dr.
Sassan Shahmanesh of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Arline Shahmanesh.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill, a catering establishment in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schaiman-Shahmanesh, 27, is a real estate consultant with the Marketing  Directors Inc., a real estate sales and marketing company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in real estate from New York University.


President's Proclamation
Following is the text of President Clinton's Thanksgiving Day proclamation.
The White House


Ann M. DiMaio, William M. Ricci
Dr.
Ann Mary DiMaio, the director of pediatric emergency medicine at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was married last evening to Dr.
William Michael Ricci, an orthopedic resident at the Hospital for Special Surgery.
Justice Francis X. Egitto of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn conducted the ceremony at the Stanhope in New York.


The View From: Ashford;Dump the Trash, Grab a Good Read, All at the Transfer Station
IT'S difficult to figure out the shelving scheme at Ashford's smallest library.
There are only three categories designated by sign -- mysteries, westerns and romance -- and the rest of the collection is, well, just sitting there.
Above the door "Ideas of the Great Philosophers" by William S. and Mabel  L. Sahakian rests next to Irwin Shaw's thriller "Acceptable Losses."
Jerry J. Berthelette, an Ashford resident, once picked up a reference book that described how to build a bridge with I-beams, right down to choosing mounting tips.
"And look at this," he said, pointing out a Viking paperback on a recent visit.
"You've got 'The Portable Dante' right here."


Pop Briefs
'EDWARD SIMON' Kokopelli (available from Descarga, 328 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y. 11238; [800] 377-2647)


Larsen and Wife Hurt
DON LARSEN, the only pitcher to throw a perfect game in the World Series, and his wife were in stable condition in a Northern California hospital yesterday after a 30-vehicle accident in which one person died.
Mercy Medical Center in Shasta would not disclose the nature of the injuries to Larsen, 66, and his wife, CORRINE LARSEN, 64.


ATLANTIC CITY


The Politics of Identity
THE NEW COLOR LINE How Quotas and Privilege Destroy Democracy.
By Paul Craig Roberts and Lawrence M. Stratton. 247 pp.
Washington.: Regnery Publishing. $24.95.
THE TWILIGHT OF COMMON DREAMS Why America Is Wracked by Culture Wars.
By Todd Gitlin. 294 pp.
New York: Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


Canada Links Ex-Premier To Kickback, Report Says
Canada's Justice Department has asked Swiss authorities for information to support allegations of "criminal activities carried out by the former Prime Minister," Brian Mulroney, a newspaper reported today.
Later Mr.
Mulroney's lawyer said he would file a $37-million suit against the Government and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police because of "false and reckless allegations" that he received illegal payments to influence Air Canada's decision to buy Airbus aircraft in 1988.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ROMANTIC RELICS


The Man Who Wouldn't Be President
REASON TO BELIEVE By Mario Cuomo. 191 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.


Tight Squeeze
DOMINION By Niles Eldredge. 190 pp.
New York: A John Macrae Book/ Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.
THE human population of the earth is a standing affront to the rules of ecology.
No reasonable scientific prediction would admit there to be so many of  us.
If we photosynthesized, or were microbes, a case could be made; but 5.7 billion bodies, with an average weight of maybe 20-45 pounds, and all feeding some links down the food chain, is more than can be justified.
There is no species like it on earth, now or in the past.


Old Parisian Ditties


Nuremberg Isn't Repeating Itself
AS negotiators shuttle among the Balkan factions housed along the wings of a  quadrangle on an Air Force base in Dayton, Ohio, the talk has mostly been over territory, sovereignty and troop deployments, the difficult but basic stuff of forging a peace.
But looming at the edge of the talks has always been one of the most profound moral and ethical issues of the 20th century: how to deal with atrocities of wartime.


BENEFITS
Building Bridges


ON THE TOWNS
COMMUNITY THEATER From Good Homes performs to benefit the Community Soup Kitchen of Morristown.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15-$18, plus two cans of  food to be donated to the kitchen. 100 South Street, Morristown. (201) 539-8008.


THE PAIN GAME
I have Crohn's disease and fibromyalgia.
Both create intractable pain.
With all the nonaddictive pain medications available, it is still impossible for me to get pain relief.
A friend of mine broke her back several years ago.
You can see that on an X-ray.
Her doctor will give her as much pain medicine as she asks for.
I have to buy pain medication from her.
Am I an addict?
Hell, no.
I am simply one of those patients whose pain cannot be seen on an X-ray.
The war on drugs has been very helpful in making sure that my doctors are afraid to give me pain relief.


Nelson and the Knicks Are Quick to Find a Fit
They were not always on their best behavior, sometimes letting teams off the  hook in the second half and occasionally losing their focus in the chatterbox wars.
But with all these newfangled ideas floating around and with six of their  first nine games having been played on the road, the Knicks have begun to show what they are about under Don Nelson.
They still put a premium on drama, sometimes enjoy a good scrape on the court to get their adrenaline pumping, often nail their biggest shots in the fourth quarter and always despise coming back to the team hotel after a loss on the road.


In Co-ops, Renting Is a Growing Concern
LORETTA KRIARIS thought she was doing her fellow co-op owners a favor two years ago by capping -- at eight -- the number of apartments that could be rented at any given time in her 115-unit building in the Briarwood section of Queens.
After all, a high percentage of rentals had made it difficult for her co-op to refinance its mortgage, for apartment owners to sell their units and for prospective buyers to get loans.


Easy on the Caviar
The Caterer caught a glimpse of himself in the double glass doors of the Client's Traulsen refrigerator.
In his Armani tux and Nicole Miller bow tie, he  looked perfect, of course.
But he was disturbed by his hair.
Thinning, it had to be combed just so, and the reflection showed it falling at a rakish angle to be  sure, but there it was: the hint of a pate.
Even as he caressed the errant strands back into place, the Caterer knew that something more than a hair crisis was pulling his signature smile into a troubled frown.


Nancy LeVine, Mark Handelman
Nancy Beth LeVine, a freelance photographer, is to be married today to Mark Handelman, the executive vice president of the New York Association for New Americans, an immigrant aid organization.
Rabbi Joel Gore is to officiate at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Lopsang Ngodup, a Tibetan Buddhist monk, is to take part in the ceremony.
Ms.
LeVine, who is 40 and is keeping her name, is studying for a master's degree in photography at New York University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Ithaca College.
She is a daughter of Zelda LeVine of New York and the late  Herbert LeVine.


Devils' Hopes Shot Down As Brodeur Is Off His Game
Shoddy goaltending by the Devils' Martin Brodeur and plenty of brilliant saves by the Sabres' Dominic Hasek resulted in a 5-4 victory for Buffalo this afternoon before a sellout crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Brodeur was so ineffective that he allowed 5 goals on 20 shots, including 2 on the first 3.
He was replaced early in the third period, after Buffalo's fifth goal, by Corey Schwab, who made his National Hockey League debut and saved all six shots he faced in 17 minutes.


Munich Memorial
To the Editor: Having grown up in Munich in the 1930's and 40's, I thoroughly enjoyed your article "The Bohemian Side of Munich" (Sept. 24), with its superb photographs by Herlinde Koelbl.
One photograph shows a student striding toward the University of Munich, also known as Ludwig-Maximillian Universitat.
On the sidewalk at the bottom of the picture lies what looks like a haphazard bunch of papers.
This is actually a monument to the students Hans and Sophie Scholl, a brother and sister who had organized a resistance movement called the White Rose at the university, and who were, together with several other students and a professor, executed by the  Nazis for treason on Feb. 22, 1943.


Editorial Notebook;Chinese Schizophrenia
Ding Fa Zhang, the editor of The Xinmen Evening News, a lively Shanghai tabloid that eschews political coverage, says business is so brisk he hardly knows how to spend the profits.
With the paper's ad space booked three months in advance, Mr.
Ding has become a construction tycoon, plowing the paper's surplus income into new office buildings.
Leo Yang, a Dale Carnegie instructor and general manager of a Shanghai dairy  products company, is developing new ice cream treats for next summer that he hopes can match the popularity of the Crunch Bar, a mixture of ice cream and crushed Oreo cookies that was this year's surprise seller.
His manufacturing plant is located in Pudong, a sprawling East Shanghai corporate and industrial zone that just a few years ago was undeveloped farmland.


Riding the Rails At What Price?
AT Pennsylvania Station in New York, Barbara Katende, who works in the Amtrak information booth, was speaking on her microphone to a traveler who wanted to go to Washington.
Ms.
Katende was marking a card showing the train times.
"Now I am checking the trains where you can get to Washington for only $51,"  she said, "providing you do not travel on Friday or Sunday between 11 A.M. and 11 P.M. Be very careful which time you pick, because if you take a Metroliner, it can cost you double."


Space Station and Shuttle Uncouple; Go Their Separate Ways
Like vacationers savoring the waning moments of a trip ending too soon, the crew members of the shuttle Atlantis and the Russian space station Mir separated today and returned to their routines after successful completion of their docking mission.
Atlantis and its five astronauts conducted experiments and prepared for Monday's scheduled landing at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at 12:34 P.M.
Eastern standard time.
The three-man crew of Mir continued to sort through and stow the supplies and materials left by their visitors.


No Headline
Welfare, I think it was made up so they can help people, and now they want to take it away.
People can't pay their bills, and they'll lose everything." --  ANDY MUNOZ, 12, of Milwaukee. [1:4.]


Schools Are Relatively Safe, U.S. Study Says
While children can face significant health hazards in school, students are actually at far more risk of death or serious injury when they are off school grounds, a new Government report concludes.
The study, one of the last issued by the Office of Technology Assessment, which was closed by Congress last week, found that the leading causes of mortality among teen-agers and children were automobiles and guns, which together accounted for about 50 percent of the 11,300 deaths of all young people from 5 through 19 in 1992.


One Exhibition In a Long Line
To the Editor:
Contrary to Alan Riding's assertion, African artifacts have long been appreciated for their artistic qualities in the West [" 'Primitive' No More, African Art Finds a Proper Respect," Oct. 29].
The current show of African art at the Royal Academy in London is merely another in a long line of exhibitions focusing on the esthetics of objects from Africa.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING


No Need Of Berlitz
To the Editor:
Sex and violence aren't popular just for their shock value.
Sex and violence are a universal language that cuts through class and racial differences.
It has  become an easy and accessible language requiring no education, requiring no effort.


20 Million Is Paid In Police Lawsuits
The City of Philadelphia has agreed to pay $20 million to cover misconduct lawsuits against its Police Department, much more than the amounts paid by police departments twice the size of Philadelphia's, a newspaper reported on Friday.
City officials said the payments, which involve more than 200 civil cases, showed that Philadelphia juries awarded higher payments, while critics said the  awards were just the fallout from a corruption investigation of the police.
The  cases included 78 complaints of police assault, 56 of false arrest, 50 of excessive force, 18 of civil rights violations and 7 of police shootings.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
THE HERETIC'S FEAST A History of Vegetarianism.
By Colin Spencer.
University Press of New England, $29.95.


DUSTY RIDES AGAIN
Evidently, the Zeitgeist machine is oiled and running ("Dusty Rides Again," by Rob Hoerburger, Oct. 29).
Not two weeks ago she came to mind, and I walked into a record store and asked for anything by Dusty Springfield.
I came away with the only tape it had, a "greatest hits" collection.
Had I first heard her on the "Pulp Fiction" soundtrack? asked the 20-something clerk.
Well, no.
"I Only Want to Be With You" lodged itself in my brain 30 years ago and was insisting on being heard.
ADRIENNE KLEIN Niskayuna, N.Y.


Making an Entrance Out of a Central Park Gate
A $3 million makeover is planned for one of Central Park's most popular -- and disorganized -- entrances, Merchants' Gate at Columbus Circle.
Last week, the Central Park Conservancy and the Parks Department presented the layout to a  Community Board 8 meeting.
The redesign, to go before the Landmarks Preservation Commission on Tuesday, calls for extending the plaza around the Maine Monument,  installing a long stone bench as a border wall and adding food kiosks, tables and chairs.
The area is newly landscaped, and its road entrance has been closed.
The plan seeks to provide a more attractive place for people to linger at the entrance and to guide them more easily onto the park's pathways, to destinations like the zoo, Wollman Rink and the carousel.
The project is expected to be completed in the spring of 1997.


Stargazer


Crime Continues to Decline, but Experts Warn of Coming 'Storm' ofJuvenile Violence
The nation's overall crime rate dropped 2 percent in 1994, the third consecutive year it has fallen, with a 4 percent decrease in the rate of violent crimes, according to an annual report to be released by the Federal Bureau of Investigation today.
The rate of violent crimes, which include murder, robbery, rape and assault,  actually fell to its lowest level since 1989, the F.B.I. reported, and the murder rate itself continued its recent decline, similarly sinking to its lowest level since 1989, 9 murders per 100,000 inhabitants.


Hamilton H. Hobgood, 87, North Carolina Judge
Hamilton H. Hobgood, who won national respect for the North Carolina judiciary when he presided over the racially charged Joan Little murder trial in 1975, died on Friday at Franklin Memorial Hospital in Louisburg, N.C.
He was 87 and lived in Louisburg.


Seems Like 100 Years Since a Jet Went Over 100 Yards
Do something.
But 2-8 teams usually don't.
And that sums up the situation as the Jets return from their bye week today to face the Bills, in first place in the American Conference East with a 7-3 record and with a tradition of making something happen.


Cruise Itinerary
To the Editor: On Sept. 17 we arrived to board the Regal Empress for a six-night cruise to Nassau in the Bahamas.
After our luggage was taken aboard and we signed our tickets, we were handed a flier that indicated that there would be a change of itinerary because of the storm and that the ship would head north to Canada.
Although we understand that such a change was for the safety of the ship, crew and passengers, we object to the way it was done.
We were not given the opportunity to decline the cruise.
Our luggage was abroad and our transportation gone.
We were not advised by any member of the staff or crew whether there were any options open.


Cancer Finding In Suicide Case Of Kevorkian
A woman who took her life in the presence of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian in early November after battling breast cancer also had cancer in her spine, the medical  examiner's office has found.
A medical examiner, Dr.
L.
J.
Dragovic, who performed an autopsy shortly after Patricia Cashman's death on Nov. 8, had said she had no visible signs of cancer except a mastectomy scar.


Why a Window Is Like a Poem


Caution Advised in Feeding the Houseplants
A PRIMER on the many kinds of water-soluble houseplant fertilizers might be a good thing to ponder now.
There are so many products on the shelves, it is hard  to know which one to choose.
Often a buyer just heads for a particular brand name because it has been highly praised in a commercial or splashed forth in a gardening magazine advertisement.
Sometimes sales clerks are eager to tout one product over another, adding to the confusion.
But decisions must be made.


GETTING INTO CHARACTER
After looking at the photograph of Norman Mailer in a Captain Ahab costume, I can only conclude that he has confused "Moby-Dick" with "Treasure Island."
BARBARA D. FLATT Brooklyn


Jodi Rosenbaum, Lawrence Fiedler
Dr.
Jodi Allene Rosenbaum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry Harris Rosenbaum  of Hollywood, Fla., was married there last evening to Dr.
Lawrence Michael Fiedler, the son of Dr.
Ina Fiedler and Dr.
Robert Fiedler of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Frazin performed the ceremony at Temple Solel.
The couple, both 27, received their M.D. degrees from the Mount Sinai School  of Medicine.


Big Italian Flavor and Size but Tiny Prices
THE antipasto at Carnevale, a generous new Italian ristorante in Port Washington, costs $6.95.
The dish includes lentil salad, grilled eggplant, marinated green beans, fresh mozzarella and tomato, moist herb-scented couscous, marinated wild mushrooms, caponata, delicate calamari rings, smoky white beans,  marinated bocconcini, garlicky green peppers, artichokes and a bottle of especially fragrant vinegar.
Along with a towering basket filled with warm focaccia and coarse country-style bread and a thick eggplant spread, the portion, intended as an appetizer, can provide a meal for one or a starter for two, three or even four diners.


Present at the Founding Of the Forest Hills Houses
To the Editor:
In "At the Forest Hills Co-op, a Reminder of Past Fury" (Oct. 22), you quote  the Rev.
Dr.
Timothy P. Mitchell as saying that the Forest Hill Houses were made a cooperative "to keep poor blacks and minorities out." What really happened is  as follows.


Dorie A. Schwartz, Robert Gordon
Dorie Schwartz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Schwartz of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., was married there last evening, to Robert Gordon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Gordon of Baldwin, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Seawane Club.
Mrs.
Gordon teaches special education at the Stephen Gaynor School in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in special education from Hunter College.
Mr.
Gordon is an options trader on the American Stock Exchange in New York.
He graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.


Psychiatric Fictions
To the Editor:


No Marlboro Man Here
REMINISCENT of scenes of Madison Avenue fantasies spun in many glossy magazines these days, three old friends relaxed in butter-soft sofas and armchairs fashionably arranged in a well-appointed little refuge from the rush in midtown Manhattan.
For hours, the men, handsome and crisp as new money, alternately laughed and  joked and spoke seriously about their work, family and selves.
All the while, each blissfully puffed away on a premium cigar, heavily scenting the Cigar Bar of the Beekman Bar and Books, on First Avenue at 50th Street, with the heady aroma of expertly aged and spiced tobacco.


Growing Deer Herd Creates Hunter's Paradise
TIM LAMPINEN got up at 1:30 A.M. last Saturday at his home in the village of  Rindge, N.H., dressed in camouflage, grabbed his bow and arrows and made the three-and-a-half-hour trek down to Bedford to be in the woods by first light.
He leaves his home in the White Mountains every year at this time to bowhunt in Westchester because this is where he finds the big bucks.
The county has one of the longest bow-only hunting seasons in New York State.
It lasts from Nov. 1 to Dec. 31, almost twice the length of the average season.
The reason for this is that Westchester has no firearm season, no public land to hunt on, no natural predators and a deer population that had been growing at a rate of 30 percent a year since the 1980's.
The deer herd has been estimated at  up to 8,000.


Below Those Great, Big Baloons
On television the giant folk are colorful but a little distant.
To see what really goes on with a big bag of helium like Garfield the cat, you have to be down on the street where the handlers scramble and the crowds scream, especially when it's gusty.


Seeing Chefs at Work on Pizza and Pasta
YES, another Italian restaurant.
This one, Gusto, is a trattoria in Milford,  in a frame house on U.S. 1.
The welcoming interior consists of two large, high-ceilinged rooms, around whose windows are painted green shutters and awnings.
The first room is a bar with tables for dining from which guests can watch the chefs at work in an open kitchen.
The second dining room has a cathedral ceiling, lace-curtained windows and sponge-painted pastel walls.
During our visits both rooms were full.


State Invites Public's Ideas on I-287 Bottleneck
LIKE the irate tempers of commuters, the rhetoric is heating up over proposals to ease traffic congestion along Interstate 287.
Increasingly, as a public hearing on the matter nears, the battle lines are being drawn between environmental groups opposing further expansion of the busy east-west corridor and the business community, which wants better ways to bring more workers, travelers and shoppers to White Plains and its environs.
The Cross Westchester Expressway, as I-287 is also known, cuts a broad swath  through the county just north of White Plains, forming one of the most heavily traveled corridors in southern New York State.


Commercial Property: Madison From 50th to 57th Street;From Hodgepodge to Shopping Corridor
TRY this geographic free-association test on New York shoppers: Say Madison Avenue above 57th Street.
Then Madison south of 50th Street.
Now Madison between 50th and 57th Streets.
The first will probably pull some reference to high-fashion women's clothes selling for astronomical prices.
The second usually conjures up visions of well-cut men's suits.
And the third phrase generally brings to mind . . . nothing in particular.


Getting Ahead in College (Before the First Class)


U.S. and NATO Assembling Nuts and Bolts of Bosnia Move
Within weeks after a Balkan peace agreement is completed, American troops and equipment will begin arriving in Bosnia if all works as planned, some floating on barges down the Danube River, most speeding across Central Europe on German rail cars or landing in gutted airstrips as part of the 20,000-member American contingent of NATO's mission to enforce a peace plan.
For months American and NATO officials have been drawing up plans for the arrival of thousands of NATO troops in Bosnia and the departure of thousands of  other United Nations peacekeepers -- all in the middle of winter on war-shattered roads.
On Friday, the House of Representatives passed legislation  that would bar financing of American participation in the mission, but the White House would certainly veto such a measure if it passed the Senate.


A Good Jersey Fight
FIGHTS and casinos go together," Ron Katz said from his ringside table on a recent six-bout boxing night at Bally's Park Place. "They bring in the high rollers."
For 15 years, Mr.
Katz has been a matchmaker, but he doesn't arrange marriages.
An employee of Top Rank, a Las Vegas company that is one of a handful of fight promoters arranging boxing matches in Atlantic City casinos, Mr.
Katz said he just knows which fighters should square off.
Atlantic City audiences, he said, like to see "a Jersey fight."


CONGRESS CANCELS PLAN TO TAKE OFF FOR THE WEEKEND
Despite signs on Friday that Congress and President Clinton were making progress on reopening Government offices, neither side reported getting any closer to agreement today and lawmakers were forced to put off plans to go home  for the weekend.
In the early evening, Republicans sent the White House a new proposal.
But when Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, was asked whether he thought the President would accept it, he said, "I doubt it."


Joining the Army Is Hazardous to Health
To the Editor:
" 'Be All You Can Be': Fightin' Words?" (Week in Review, Nov. 12) fails to mention one factor that discourages young people from joining the military: the  prospect of chronic illness.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
STREETS A Memoir of the Lower East Side. By Bella Spewack. Feminist Press, $19.95.


Magnet Plan Attracts Barbs
Infamous for a fuss over a multicultural curriculum three years ago, Community School District 24 is now swimming in a new eddy of conflict over access to a magnet program for gifted and talented elementary school students.
Known as the Beacon Program, classes for kindergarten through fifth-grade pupils are housed at Public School 153 in Maspeth, at the southern end of District 24.


Trouble Spots On the Road For This Week
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Englewood.
Right lane closed, 7 P.M. to 6 A.M., through Saturday. 2.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving until the end  of the year. 3.
ROUTES 1-9 Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and Interstate 78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed. 4.
ROUTE 35 Victory Bridge between Sayreville and Perth Amboy closed today, 7 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Traffic will use Route 9. 5.
INTERSTATE 287 Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lanes closed until further notice. 6.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement through December. 7.
PLAINSBORO ROAD Plainsboro.
The bridge over Amtrak railroad is closed for repairs through January. 8.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road, until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle turn is permanently closed.


Mr. Speaker, May I?
It is Nov. 19, 1996.
The Federal Government has been shut down for a year.
The landscape is bleak, the city a trash heap.
Rats chew on rep ties and sensible pumps.
The rubble of old health care plans and $600 toilet seats are strewn across Pennsylvania Avenue.
The neo-classical buildings are shells.
Wild bands of unemployed bureaucrats roam the streets, forcing innocent passers-by to fill out huge volumes of paperwork.
A gang war has broken out between the G-6's and the G-7's.
Besides bonfires, the only pools of light are in the Capitol and the White House, where the two sides in the budget standoff are hunkered down.
How did a once-great nation sink into this dystopia?
Follow me back, as I explain:
Nov. 15, 1995: Newt Gingrich admits that pique over how he was treated by the President on the trip to Israel provoked him into writing a tougher spending bill -- which Mr.
Clinton vetoed, causing parts of the Government to close.
The  Speaker, aggrieved that he had to disembark by the back ramp, wails: "Where is their sense of manners? Where is their sense of courtesy?"


New Tech Stocks: Is the Feast of 1995 Finally Over?
INVESTORS have been feasting on new technology stocks all year.
They have watched their shares of Netscape Communications and Sandisk more than double in  price, for instance, while many other companies have enjoyed gains of 10 percent or more on the first day of public trading.
But last week there were signs that investors may finally be pushing away from the table, declining another helping of the type of stocks they might have  gobbled up a little while ago.
The primary reason seems to be the sheer number of recent offerings, while there are hints of a downturn in quality and signs that investors are becoming satiated.
Also numerous are the interpretations of industry observers, who see the weakness as anything from a temporary lull to a  possible sign of more serious cooling of the year's hottest market.


Harlem on Her Mind
THE ride from the airport was almost over.
We were near home -- at least the  place that would be my home for the next year.
My new landlady, a friend of my aunt, had picked me up at La Guardia and was giving me a brief tour of the neighborhood.
"This is Striver's Row," she said, as we passed Volvos and other imports dotting a street that appeared more arboreous than its neighbors.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE


Mission Impassable;After a Budget Side Show, This Way to the Egress
FINALLY, the main event.
Congress's votes to send President Clinton the Republicans' budget reconciliation bill, with its seven-year balanced budget, tax cut and sharp curbs of Medicare and Medicaid spending, will take a very serious fight beyond side issues.
The national debt and partial closing of the Government are hardly trivial, but as political problems they do not approach the one posed by the budget -- just how big a role the Federal Government should have in American life.


The Bard of Failure
TOM The Unknown Tennessee Williams.
By Lyle Leverich.
Illustrated. 644 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $35.
IF Tennessee Williams had been less troubled as a person, would he have been proportionately less interesting as a dramatist?
That the answer to this question should be a decided "yes" isn't exactly astonishing.
I suspect we would have to go back to Aeschylus to find a major dramatist whose own neuroses didn't find their way into his writing, and, had ancient Athens possessed the now-normal quota of psychiatrists, one of them would doubtless have attributed the ferocious grandeur of the works of Aeschylus to the trauma of fighting at Salamis.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
To the question "Is North Dakota really necessary?" let me give some reasons  why the answer is yes ("The Reopening of the Frontier," by Jon Margolis, Oct. 15).
North Dakota is a place of clear air, clean water and wide open spaces.
North Dakotans value family community, education, honesty and hard work.
Our state is  an important supplier of agricultural commodities and fuel resources to the rest of the country and the world.


Sarah G. Kaltman, Kevin B. Cantor
Sarah Grant Kaltman, a daughter of Sandra Kaltman and Dr.
Alfred J. Kaltman,  both of New York, was married last evening to Kevin Bruce Cantor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Cantor of Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi David J. Gelfand performed the  ceremony at the Americas Society town house in New York.
Mrs.
Cantor is a senior editor of House Beautiful magazine in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a cardiologist in New York and an associate professor of clinical medicine at New York University School of Medicine.


Ismail Finds His Way Both Spiritually and Professionally
If Raghib Ismail winds up in the right place at the right time Sunday afternoon in Oakland when the Raiders clash with the Dallas Cowboys, do not be surprised.
Call it destiny.
Call it divine.
Sunday afternoon, 24 hours after celebrating his 26th birthday, in a game that will be televised to most of the nation, America will likely be reintroduced to Ismail.
He is, after all, a piece of Americana.


Gay Public Service Ads Tell Story We Can't Afford to Ignore
To the Editor:
Re "Gay Advertising Campaign on TV Draws Wrath of Conservatives" (news article, Nov. 12): Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, or P-Flag, has produced two 30-second public service ads for which it is seeking to buy broadcast time.


When Patients Try to Protect Medical Records
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 15 front-page article on the medical records confidentiality bill reports that some consumer advocates have been advising patients to avoid filing insurance claims even though the services they used were fully covered by their  policies.
This strategy, the advocates say, will protect sensitive personal information about the patient's health, keeping it out of insurer databases and  reducing the risk of its disclosure.


Barred in New York, 'Extreme Fighting' Moves On
Chased from New York City under pressure from public officials, promoters of  "extreme fighting" shifted their tournament of bloody brawls from the Park Slope Armory in Brooklyn to a movie studio in Wilmington, N.C., and last night, the event was broadcast nationally on pay-per-view cable television.
Wilmington officials said yesterday that nothing could be done to stop the contest.
North Carolina lawmakers voted this year to create a state boxing commission, but its enforcement powers do not begin until January.


Agoraphilla: Celebrating Great Community Spaces
Reacting to what he calls a marked deterioration in public spaces in this country, a New York architect, Gianni Longo, has set out to celebrate the ones that work well.
In what he has called the Search of Great American Public Places, a panel of experts has put together a list of 62, including 14 in New York City.


Tribunal to Indict Muslim
The United Nations tribunal on war crimes in the Balkans said today that it was preparing an indictment against a Muslim soldier accused of having killed Serbian civilians while serving with Bosnian Croat forces.
The indictment would be the tribunal's first for crimes against Serbs and would help redress Serbian complaints of bias.


Patience? This Man Practically Invented It
THE blue eyes sparkle, the chuckles begin somewhere deep inside his throat, then churn through his body like waves of delight.
He sits in front of a slab of rare roast beef and a mountain range of mashed potatoes.
The bearish fellow -- indisputably seasoned enough to ignore broccoli sprigs and anything else he chooses -- is having lunch in the Marco Polo Club, started by his friend Lowell  Thomas, the explorer.
On Nov. 28, Philip L. Carret will celebrate his 99th birthday -- though, for  the eighth time now, he is calling it his 100th.
Worried that he would miss the  big party, he had his first centennial bash when he was 92, and now he feels ahead of the game.
"Phil Carret Turns 100 -- Again!" read the headline of a fake newspaper last year.


Trip Raises More Questions Than Rangers Can Answer
Even before his Rangers began their traumatic trek through the Central Division, Coach Colin Campbell spoke warily about the perilous path that lay ahead.
"Three tough road games with Central teams, then back home-and-home with Pittsburgh," Campbell said a week ago, when his team was on a four-game winning  streak.


Beat the Clock


Dow Chemical Asks Reversal Or New Trial In Implant Case
The Dow Chemical Company is asking a judge to throw out a $14 million jury award in a breast implant case or order a new trial.
The motion, filed on Friday in Washoe District Court, seeks to overturn the judgment awarded last month to Charlotte Mahlum, who claimed that leaky breast implants had caused serious health problems for her.


Well, Well (Almost): Elway and Young Mend
JOHN ELWAY said he is "fine." More surprisingly, STEVE YOUNG said he "feels great."
Elway, who hurt his shoulder and suffered a concussion in last Sunday's 31-13 loss to Philadelphia, will start for Denver against San Diego today despite some lingering soreness.
The Broncos had been preparing to start the backup quarterback BILL MUSGRAVE.


On the Slopes, But Indoors, In Tokyo
IT was broiling hot one evening in Tokyo, so a friend and I decided to go skiing.
Japan is like that -- a bit upside down for the Westerner -- and the indoor recreational experience at Ski Dome did not disappoint in the weirdness department.
The skiing was decent, too.
That afternoon, T. R. Reid, a Washington Post reporter who wrote a book on Japanese skiing, had briefed us on the unusual genesis of Ski Dome.
His account itself demanded that we check the place out.
Apparently N.K.K.
Steel, a  huge Japanese manufacturer, was worried about a shipbuilding subsidiary that couldn't compete anymore.
In typical Japanese fashion, the 800 employees had been guaranteed life employment, so the company tried to figure out how to apply their skills to something new.
Because the workers were good at welding, the company first tried to go into the stretch-limo business.
But it discovered that Toyota already made a good stretch limo.


Awash In a Surfeit Of Sleaze
A TIDAL WAVE OF TAWDRINESS HIT MOVIE screens this season, leaving startled audiences in its wake.
Viewers seeking sleaze-free entertainment were in for rude surprises, even if they gravitated toward product that sounded run-of-the-mill.
Thrillers always utilize the threat of violence, but it needn't be as plain as the nose on a beautiful woman's face -- a nose sliced off in the  stomach-turning "Seven," which emerged as the fall's biggest hit.
As for other beautiful women, they were cast with amazing regularity as prostitutes ("Jade,"  "Mighty Aphrodite," "Showgirls"), rape victims or both ("Leaving Las Vegas").
Paid killers ("Assassins") and imaginatively demented ones ("Seven," "Copycat," "Strange Days") shared screen time with drunks, drug pushers, lurid sexual menages ("The Doom Generation," "Total Eclipse") and Puritans without a whiff of Puritan tradition ("The Scarlet Letter").
By that standard, John Travolta in "Get Shorty" and Nicole Kidman in "To Die For" were the Eagle Scouts of the season, even if he worked as a mob debt collector and she had her husband killed to further her television career.


BEST SELLERS: November 19, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


Youths Feel the Pinch of Fare Increase
He is only 13.
But when he speaks of the extra 25 cents he must now pay to catch the subway, he does not dwell on how those quarters might be better spent  on bubble gum and pinball games.
Instead, he speaks of the cutting of family ties.
The boy, Jerrell White, a seventh grader at Wadleigh High School in Harlem, looks forward to his weekend trips from Manhattan to the Bronx to visit his aunt and uncle.
But because of the fare increase, he fears those trips will become fewer and far between.
"I'd spend $10 and save $10," Jerrell said of the  $20 allowance he receives every two weeks.
"But now I'm thinking I won't be able to take the subway anymore. My mother won't be able to give me the money for it."


Poor Doctors
With M.D. license tags on their BMW's and Jaguars, doctors have rarely hidden the rewards of a cost-plus system in which their paychecks got fatter the more tests and procedures they did.
But that is changing as managed health care spreads across the country.
Last week, the American Medical Association said doctors' average incomes were going down for the first time since the A.M.A. started keeping track 14 years ago.
In 1993, the median earnings of physicians, from specialists to general practitioners, was $156,000.
In 1994, that figure dropped 3.8 percent, to $150,000.
As managed care spreads, doctors' paychecks are expected to shrink even more.


Moonglow
The raffish sass of Peter Bogdanovich's PAPER MOON (1973) is contagious -- WEDNESDAY at 8 P.M. and THURSDAY at 1:40 P.M. on BRAVO.
This amusing tale of a 1930's Midwest con man (Ryan O'Neal) and his partner, a bright child (played by  his daughter Tatum) who stays several jumps ahead of him, unwinds with flavor, snap and sentimental nods to the era.
In the funniest episode, the youngster and a pal sabotage his romance with a carnival-working predator (Madeline Kahn).
There's a nice supporting cast but the picture is stolen lock, stock and barrel  by young Tatum, and a lovely bit of larceny it is.
-- Howard Thompson


THE GREENING OF THE HUMANITIES
We were cheered to have Parini's account of the explosion of environmental studies in higher education; the phenomenon does signal "a return to activism and social responsibility." But as Parini describes it, it has a distinctly middle-class bias, with a focus on canoes and countryside.
Students at nonelite urban colleges and universities unfortunately do not have the opportunity to commune with the great outdoors.
And they are not convinced that an interdisciplinary degree is the best ticket to a secure job.
Yet these students, who make up the bulk of the student population, must be reached; this means that environmental issues must be introduced into courses in the traditional college disciplines.
Our guide for the liberal arts, "Greening the College Curriculum" (Island Press, 1995), lists and spells out such curricular offerings.


Secular Israelis, Too, Have a Faith
AT the spot where Yitzhak Rabin was gunned down, two makeshift monuments remained last week, surrounded by flowers and memorial candles.
One was a pair of stone tablets representing the Ten Commandments and engraved with the Hebrew words: "Thou shalt not kill. 11.4.95." The other was a  bullet-riddled barrel brought from an army firing range, a sculptured dove huddling inside.


Life of the Party
A RAGE FOR JUSTICE The Passion and Politics of Phillip Burton.
By John Jacobs.
Illustrated. 578 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $34.95.


Shortfall In the Grain Fields
THANKS largely to rapidly increasing export demand, stores of American corn,  wheat and soybeans are lower than they have been for two decades.
The harvest farmers are just finishing would have been a record-setting bin-buster just 20 years ago, but it is a shortfall today, with roughly 1.5 billion more mouths to feed on the planet and a growing industrial market for vegetable oil and grain products.
Grain reserves worldwide amount to a 48-day supply, the lowest level since measurements began in 1963, according to the Worldwatch Institute, a Washington-based environmental group.
What does it all mean?
Not much, said Dennis Avery, head of the Center for Global Food Issues at the Hudson Institute in Indianapolis.
"The world has more  food security than at any time in history," he said, citing improvements in agricultural tools and techniques and the trend toward freer trade in agriculture.


Film Music Returns To Its Roots
WHEN THE CHARIOTEERS SWUNG around a giant Roman arena in Avery Fisher Hall last month, one could overlook the neo-fascistic sculptures some imaginative set designer placed behind Charlton Heston's carriage.
One could also ignore the kitschy pomposity of a scene that might have come out of an Albert Speer fantasy.
All of that was swept aside in a wave of sound.
Under a giant screen showing  the 1959 epic "Ben-Hur," John Mauceri led the New York Philharmonic through paces that seemed to support each step of the horses' hooves, each turn of the giant wooden wheels, each weighty glance by big-muscled primates from the early  Christian era.
Miklos Rozsa's music was gloriously emphatic, exquisitely ceremonious.
The performance was one of the best arguments I have heard for a good home theater system; the sound brought the images to life.


A Child's War
BATTLEFIELDS AND PLAYGROUNDS By Janos Nyiri.
Translated by William Brandon and the author. 536 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
DO we need another book about the Holocaust?
Already the bookshelves groan,  threatening to topple their novels, histories, memoirs, diaries, confessions, philosophical treatises, even crank tracts denying it ever happened, furious rebuttals to these tracts -- more anguish than a piece of furniture or the human heart can bear.
By repetition, the images of the trains and the camps, the sadistic Nazis and the wretched Jews have become common currency, clip art for atrocity.
Yet the absence of Jews on the face of Central Europe still gapes like a missing nose or eye, demanding explanation.
The continued systematic mass murder of civilians around the world, even in Europe's old killing fields, suggests that lessons have not been learned, or that we cannot agree what the lessons are, or that the hope of deriving profitable lessons from genocide is itself an  obscenity.
After Srebrenica, the words "Never again!" can be pronounced only mockingly.


Why They Deserve It
Michael Milken's employment contract with Drexel Burnham Lambert paid him $500 million in 1987, a nine-digit income.
Meanwhile, I was soaring along on a contract as an assistant professor who had started out near the bottom of the five-digit range.
At that pace, I would have needed about 50,000 years to match  Milken's one-year take.
Eleven minutes after the ball dropped in Times Square on New Year's Eve that year, Milken had earned more than I would in the entire year.
So much for the power of an M.I.T. degree.
Milken's income was astronomical even by Wall Street standards.
But others have also been collecting colossal incomes.
Michael Eisner of Disney earned a little more than $200 million in 1993, though he dropped off to a mere $8 million last year.
Barry Bonds will earn more than $40 million over the life of  his present six-year contract shagging fly balls for the San Francisco Giants.
David Letterman collects about $14 million a year cracking jokes on late-night television; Jim Carrey collects $20 million cracking jokes in one film.


Showing Up in a Shutdown
CALL it the Lindsay Rule.
By any name, Congress and the White House ignored it big time last week when they told 800,000 Federal workers to stay home.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir


Ticket to Jive
The first generation to take a ride on the Soul Train may have hung up its hip-huggers long ago, yet the funky tracks keep going.
THE SOUL TRAIN 25TH ANNIVERSARY HALL OF FAME SPECIAL celebrates a quarter centruy of evolution - from the O'Jays to Mary J. Blige - and pays tribute to a handful of soul legends with archival film of great performances.
Arsenio Hall is emcee, and many of the honorees take the stage, including Whitney Houston, Michael Jackson, Stevie Wonder and Diana Ross (above).
All can be counted upon to shimmy, shake and shout out a number or two - WEDNESDAY at 9 P.M. on CBS.
CAITLIN LOVINGER


Cranberries and Me: A Thanksgiving Sampler
Yes, yes, everyone knows the Thanksgiving table wouldn't be complete without  cranberry sauce.
But are cranberries good for anything else, other than those cranberry-and-popcorn strings you used to make for the Christmas tree?
The New Jersey section asked that question of three food writers; the answer in each case was emphatically yes.
Cranberry Walnut Crunch
Total time: 30 minutes, plus cooling time


Scrooge of Jail for Youths
This will be one Christmas the teen-agers at a juvenile detention center will never forget.
There will be no Christmas tree, no presents, no trips home and parents will  be allowed only a one-hour visit on Christmas Day, said Beth Oprisch, who this month became director of the Sargus Juvenile Detention Center.


Ilana Bachman, Dovid S. Gottlieb
Ilana Natalie Bachman, a candidate for a Ph.D. in education at Yeshiva University, is to be married today to Dovid Shimon Gottlieb, a rabbinical student at the university.
Rabbi Michael Rosenzweig, a professor at Yeshiva, is  to perform the ceremony at the Excelsior Grand, a catering hall in Rudolph, S.I.
The bride, who received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in education from Yeshiva University, also teaches the fifth grade at the Ramaz Lower School in New York.
She is a daughter of Renee and Harvey Bachman of Willowbrook, S.I.


On Language;Spookspeak in Deutchland
NEITHER THE NIO for warning nor any of the SIBlings knew that this article was being prepared for publication.
Transmitted outside the WASHFAX, it has not  appeared in the latest SNIE and was done with no knowledge in Deutchland.
"Deutchland" is what the surly set at the Central Intelligence Agency calls the mole-shocked agency in its post-Ames era.
John Deutch, the new D.C.I. (Director of Central Intelligence), is a hearty fellow from M.I.T. and the Pentagon, given to hugging and back-rubbing insecure case officers, who suspiciously refer to such physical reassurance as "the hug of death."


Baby Sitter Is Charged With Kidnapping
A 4-year-old boy who disappeared with his baby sitter on Thursday was found early yesterday morning in the care of an elderly couple in the East Tremont section of the Bronx.
The baby sitter, Milagros Colon, 47, surrendered at the 26th Precinct station house in Manhattan later yesterday and was charged with kidnapping and endangering the welfare of a child, the police said.


Hospital Workers Stung by Exclusion From Job Security
Robbie Curry went to work at Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn yesterday with a sense of dread even greater than usual.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, after all,  had already put the municipal hospital and two others up for sale.
But then, late Friday night, came the news that her union local would not be covered by a  no-layoff pledge the Mayor had promised other unions.
After 12 years as a security guard at the hospital, Ms.
Curry realized that the future of her job seemed uncertain.


$5,000 Reward: Who Took Plainfield's Lampposts?
They stood in front of the post office on Watchung Avenue for 80 years, shining dimly through rain, snow, heat and gloom of night.
But last month, two lampposts that decorated the building's facade disappeared, bewildering residents of this Union County city.
Someone made off with the twin posts -- which were 10 feet tall and weighed 300 pounds each -- during the week of Oct. 23, according to the Plainfield police.
Oddly, it was the town's second theft of decorative lights in two months.
In September, two lanterns that were reproductions of antiques were reported missing from the facade of the Young Women's Christian Association building on East Front Street.


Harvard Edges Yale in Final Seconds
Addressing his team before the Harvard game 72 years ago this month, the legendary Yale football coach T.A.D. (Tad) Jones solemnly intoned: "Gentlemen, you are now going out to play football against Harvard. Never again in your whole life will you do anything so important."


Travel Advisory;Indian Films in Paris
Indomania," a retrospective of Indian films, is being held in Paris at the Cinematheque Francaise until Feb. 4. The event, which started Nov. 8, includes more than 100 feature films ranging from early silent movies to the productions  of such contemporary directors as Ramesh Sippy and Kumar Sahani.
Many have never been shown outside India, and they represent a variety of different regions of India and filmmaking techniques.
About a third have subtitles in English, the rest in French or with no subtitles and a live translation in French.


How to Soften a Harsh Budget
The Republicans have fulfilled their campaign promise by giving initial approval to a "reconciliation" bill that eliminates the deficit in seven years without gimmicks.
The bill, which changes entitlement programs and taxes, is not devoid of merit.
For example, it targets two programs popular among Republicans, Medicare and farm subsidies.
But the bill is also needlessly harsh  and horribly unfair.
President Clinton's veto pen is the final defense.
Mr.
Clinton has moved toward much of the G.O.P.'s plan -- its seven-year horizon, huge tax cuts, large Medicare cuts and the end of federally guaranteed cash aid to the poor.
But the bill goes far beyond anything he has endorsed.
It pummels poverty programs and shovels tax cuts to the rich.
The President has to draw lines where the G.O.P. has gone too far.
Here are five such areas.


Berries in the Blood
It sounds stupid," says Sam Moore, lifting a cheese-dripping pizza slice, one of the few main dishes the Moores serve without a side of homemade cranberry sauce. Beside him at the kitchen table are his mother, Neva, and his father, Sam. Adjacent is a living room decorated with six many-antlered deer heads. Outside, on about 500 acres, are 10 water- and vine-filled bogs, the cranberry farm of Moore's Meadows.
"It sounds crazy," he continues.
"But if someone offered me a million dollars -- two million -- I'd still want to do this. I'm sixth-generation. I want to walk around here like my greats did. If I can do half as good as my grandparents did, as my dad did . . . ."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Luang Prabang, Laos, misstated the address and telephone number for visas.
The Laotian Government Embassy is at 2222 S Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20008.
The telephone number is (202) 332-6416.


Graf Gives Tour Final A Name It Recognizes
Just as it has been all year, the tale of women's tennis boiled down to a case of the best, Steffi Graf, against the rest.
After major upsets, major excuses and major controversy, there remained just  one major champion in the cast that assembled yesterday at Madison Square Garden to winnow the contenders at the 1995 WTA Tour Championships to two finalists, neither of whom would be named Monica.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Meryl Blackman and David Singer
MERYL BLACKMAN, 43, is a fixture in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn.
She has worked there for 10 years as a real estate broker and can readily indicate which brownstone apartments are recently renovated, reportedly haunted, seriously underpriced, cold in the winter or close to good Indian restaurants.
She met David Singer, 46, in 1986, when he moved into a one-bedroom apartment (he found it through another agent) directly across the street from the offices  of Barbara d'Erasmo Realty, where she was working.
It was a storefront business, and Ms.
Blackman sat near the front window, as close to passers-by as the mannequins in the Barneys windows.
It was hard not to notice her, and Mr.
Singer did right away.


It's 60th and Madison -- in Brooklyn


The Scholar Battled For Literary Tradition
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 16 obituary of the great literary scholar Rene Wellek asserts that  he "tended to stay somewhat above the fray" when it came to academic battles about deconstruction and similiar trendy movements.
On the contrary, he was a staunch campaigner against all efforts to supplant literary culture by ideology.


Frances Grant Bennett, Mormon Board Member, 96
Frances Grant Bennett, wife of the late Senator Wallace F. Bennett and mother of Senator Robert F. Bennett, Republican of Utah, died on Friday in Salt Lake City.
She was 96.
Mrs.
Bennett was on the primary general board of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
While in Washington, she was president of the Congressional Club, a group of Congressional wives.


News Restaurants Needed To Spice TriBeCa Column
To the Editor:
I was a little dismayed to read the Oct. 15 Good Eating column ("The Enticements of TriBeCa").
Instead of rehashing old standbys like Montrachet and  Bouley, you might have mentioned more worthy places.


Warming Fare In the East 50's
IL NIDO ** (212) 753-8450; 251 East 53d Street; $$$(c) all major credit cards


SEE DICK RUN, AGAIN
Roger Rosenblatt's article "See Dick Run, Again" (Oct. 1) fails on a number of counts, not the least of which is the acceptance of Dick Snyder's one-sided views as gospel.
In his haste to praise Snyder, Rosenblatt never contacted me, even though my accessibility to the press is well known.
Snyder has become a master at rewriting history.
For example, neither I nor any of our management teams recalls his proposal that we acquire Lippincott.
The Pergamon Press "story" is pure fabrication.
Our initial internal discussion of an offer of $600 million was increased, and Snyder did indeed have authorization to offer $750 million, a figure that was not low-balled by me or by anyone else.
When I negotiated with the infamous Robert Maxwell to try and conclude the deal, he raised his demand to $850 million, but we were not about to play his game.


Sports of The Times;Time to Polish His Image, Not His Game
MORE than two months have passed since the college basketball season that now begins ended for a New York City teen-ager named Richie Parker.
His season died  at an Arizona desert outpost, where the jury of public opinion executed its sentence, with no chance for appeal.
One year, minimum, without play.


Shady Character


Who's at First? For Sure It's Not Mattingly
Now the Yankees will prepare to face the future without Don Mattingly.
Under  his plan to try retirement but not retire, the Yankees will enter the 1996 season without Mattingly as their first baseman for the first time in 13 years.
It may be heresy, and no one would admit it, but the new regime is very likely not displeased at the prospect.


The Blast Heard 'Round the Gulf
The car-bomb blast in downtown Riyadh came as if from nowhere.
But the reverberations of the huge explosion that killed five Americans and one other foreigner last week are still shaking the vast desert kingdom and its conservative neighbors.
For years, Saudi Arabia has been remarkable for its placidity.
But in the aftermath of the blast that wrecked a three-story building used by Americans to  train the Saudi national guard, there is no shortage of suspects.


The Costs of Sleeping on the Job
IF a driver downs a sixpack and then has an accident, the person is a criminal and, in recent years, a social outcast.
But what if someone falls asleep behind the wheel?
Is that driver responsible?
Dr.
William C. Dement, a pioneering sleep researcher, asked that question of  500 officials gathered here early this month at a conference called by the National Transportation Safety Board and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
For years the question has bothered Dr.
Dement, who is director  of the Stanford University Sleep Research Center and who helped discover rapid-eye-movement sleep.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


DIARY
THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT


THE PAIN GAME
As a health care provider, I was intrigued by the care Abigail Zuger decided  to give her patient Milton (Hers: "The Pain Game," Oct. 29).
What exactly is she medicating?
Her patient's pain, his addiction or her own guilt about providing less-than-optimum care?
I'm sure that Dr.
Zuger is overworked, and writing a prescription is the easiest way to get this guy out of her clinic.
But I hope she can make the decision to intervene with something besides her prescription pad before another month goes by.


INSIDE
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 6/ A slowing economy and lower corporate earnings are making bonds and bond funds more attractive.
By Virginia Munger Kahn.


THE RICH: Who They Are;The Upper Tail
JUST HOW RICH IS RICH:


Wright House Restorations
To the Editor:
In spite of the fact that Frank Lloyd Wright never did a building with a roof that didn't leak, his mystique remains ("The Wrong Side to Ownership of a Wright House," Sept. 17).
So does the insidious myth that "preservation ordinances require renovations (a better word would be restoration) on landmark buildings be done in historically correct ways, which cost much more than modern approaches."


Good Influence?
To the Editor:
We thought that we were finally rid of hearing so much about Ross Bleckner,  whose recent retrospective at the Guggenheim was no more than Bleckner imitating Bleckner.
Is this a good influence on a 31-year-old artist?
Does beefcake, a price list and a third-rate gallery deserve to replace all the other art writing on your pages during the busiest time of the season?


Let's Keep Lilco Doing Gas Repairs
In "P.S.C. Weighing Plan for Lilco to Stop Doing Gas Repairs" [Oct. 22], Alexander J. Delemo of the Nassau County Association of Plumbing, Heating and Cooling Contractors says, "L.I. gas customers would save a total of $20 million  in the first year" if Lilco stopped doing repairs.
Perhaps the above is one way to reduce the Lilco prices for gas and electricity.
But let's find another way.


Fund-Raiser Aids Victim of Cancer
FREDDY BARROS stood in the spotlight on the Rye High School gymnasium floor.
Not by himself, but with his parents shouldering him up.
Last summer, the 15-year-old Rye freshman dreamed of making the basketball team.
His appearance last month came at a basketball fund-raiser instead.
Freddy has non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a life-threatening tumor affecting the lymph glands.
The once shy teen-ager has found the courage to accept the limelight and survive in order to help others.


New 911 To Aid All Of Suffolk In 1997
PEOPLE needing emergency help in Suffolk County should be able to obtain it even if they cannot speak or do not know their precise whereabouts after a new 911 emergency telephone system is installed countywide.
Under the new Enhanced 911 System, which is to give callers' locations, calls would follow town lines instead of the boundaries of telephone exchanges.
Southampton shares exchanges with the Towns of Brookhaven, Riverhead and East Hampton.
"It's pointless for them to go with any 911 service without the county," Jack Ruehl of Nynex said.
Under the new $1.3 million system, 12 locations would have 24-hour dispatchers.


Not So Differnt, Perhaps, After All
From Hollywood, then, came Barry, Michael and the other Michael.
Also, Steven, Jeffrey and David.
They came that summer in matching choppers, which landed on the croquet lawn, crushing several wickets and, with the might of their rotor wash, causing the potted palms to topple.
And Kevin and Harrison and Tom, or maybe it was both Toms -- I can't remember.
And Arnold and Sly, puffing  on cigars so big that an ordinary person couldn't lift them.
Madonna came several times, drawn in a chariot by four glistening men wearing dog collars and leather harnesses and loincloths.
They were not the same glistening men every time but they were so identical, one with another, that no one could tell the difference.
Mr. and Mrs.
Buttafuoco were from some other part of the Island, as I remember.
They came only once, uninvited it was said, and though Mrs.
B. made a  good impression, Mr.
B. got into some kind of row in the parking lot and had to  be evicted.


Streetscapes: The Bridge Cafe;On the Trail of New York's Oldest Surviving Bar
McSORLEY'S OLD ALE HOUSE has long claimed the title of the oldest surviving saloon in New York, giving its date as 1854.
But now new research by Richard McDermott, an amateur researcher, gives the title to the Bridge Cafe, in the sagging wooden building at 279 Water Street, which he has dated to 1847 -- and he's still working backward.
Mr.
McDermott, a retired John Adams High School science teacher, has always been interested in the history of New York and went on walking tours with his late wife, Joan.
In 1987 he began a quarterly, The New York Chronicle, filling it with book reviews, preservation editorials and reprinted articles from period sources.
But his publication has not concentrated on original research, and Mr.
McDermott genially describes himself as an absolute novice.


Hospital Is Classroom For Emotionally Fragile
UNDER the proud gaze of their teacher, Philip Feinberg, half a dozen pupils eagerly recited from memory the entire poem "The Village Blacksmith."
Such a feat would be admirable for any group of elementary school students.
This accomplishment was especially impressive because the students are psychiatric in-patients at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center Westchester Division, where taking part in classroom activities is part of their treatment.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
LIFE in these United States - from West Coast to East Coast to Gulf Coast and from post-Civil War days to the 60's - is the subject of some choice films this  week.
When it opened here in 1947, a featurette titled BILL AND COO, with a cast of small, trained birds, lassoed reviewers.
Narrated by Ken Murray, this delightful novelty has its hopping cast nimbly thronging a miniature village.
There's a central love story, a jet-feathered villain, even a local barfly tipsily swinging saloon doors.
Bill, Coo, friends and foes are enchanting - Thursday at 11:45 A.M. onChannel 21.


More Fantasies, Natural and Cultural in Arts Council Survey
THE Westchester Arts Council's survey of fantasy involves three exhibitions,  of which the one at the Rye Arts Center, "Fantasy and Form," was reviewed in this space last week.
That leaves "Natural Fantasy" and "Cultural Fantasies," the first on view in the Choate House Gallery at Pace University in Pleasantville, the second at the Association of Community-Based Artists in Westchester, a Mount Vernon Gallery that is better known as AC-BAW.
Fantasy is a theme that anyone can play, and it's just as well, for the 54 artists in this triple-header come in all stripes.
Besides, it suggested itself  as the subject of the show.
As explained in a brief statement, Rosemary Erpf, who masterminded the project for the council, was looking over the resources at  her disposal when she noticed a predilection for "imaginative subject matter," a predilection, which she felt located Westchester art in the "surrealistic mainstream."


Curriculum Update For 'Sesame Street'
ANOTHER TUNEFULLY SUNNY day dawns on "Sesame Street," but Big Bird has the Memory Flu.
He can't recognize his friends Elmo and Gordon or even his best pal, Snuffleupagus.
"It's a flu only 6-year-old, 8-foot-tall yellow birds get," Gordon explains, and it's called Memory Flu "because Big Bird's memory flew."
So begins the show tomorrow as "Sesame Street" embarks on what its creators like to call its 27th experimental season.
Of course, the format of the world's  favorite children's television program, which has brought smiles and a letter and a number a day to more than 100 million preschoolers in 120 countries, remains comfortingly familiar.
Comic skits about life's ups and downs, acted out by Muppets and their human co-stars, are snappily interspersed with animated and documentary segments that teach the alphabet, counting and simple social-studies lessons about coexistence.
But regular viewers may detect some changes beyond the day-care center that Gina opens in the vacant storefront next to the Furry Arms Hotel.


Catholic Schools Join Hands to Survive
When Muriel Parmelee attended St.
Patrick's School half a century ago, several hundred children streamed into the prim brick building each morning.
Now she is the principal of St.
Patrick's, a Roman Catholic elementary school in the city's gritty Elizabethport section, and she has watched the enrollment dwindle to 163.
Until this year, Mrs.
Parmelee said, she did not hold out much hope for the little school, which her parents and grandparents also attended.
Now, though, the future holds promise.


Syvert Nerheim, Catherine Dwyer
Catherine Jane Dwyer, a daughter of Jane and Francis Dwyer of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Syvert Eric Nerheim, the son of the late Margot and Sverre Nerheim.
The Rev.
James Zwernemann performed the ceremony at the Village Lutheran Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
The bride, 36, is an assistant vice president of the New York Life Insurance  Company.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a lawyer in private practice in Pelham, N.Y., where her mother is an agent for Prudential Stiefvater Real Estate.


Birth of Reconstruction
To the Editor:
"Assassins Usually Miss the Larger Target" (Week in Review, Nov. 12) repeats  mistaken cliches about America's experience of Reconstruction.
It may be true that "Lincoln's death only made it worse for white Confederates." But not for the reasons given: "Without him, Northern Republicans brought vengeance down on  the South with a ferocity that was alien to Lincoln, putting it under military rule."


Pop Briefs
COOLIO: 'GANGSTA'S PARADISE' Tommy Boy


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Winners and Losers In a Seamy World
WHAT I'm saying, what is our life?" (Pause.) "It's looking forward or it's looking back.
And that's our life.
That's it.
Where is the moment?" (Pause.) "And what is it that we're afraid of?
Loss.
What else?" (Pause.) "The bank closes.
We get sick, my wife died on a plane, the stock market collapsed . . . the house burned down . . . .
What of these happen . . . ?
None of 'em.
We worry anyway.
What does this mean?
I'm not secure.
How can I be secure?" (Pause.) "Through amassing wealth beyond all measure?
No.
And what's beyond all measure?
That's a sickness.
That's a trap.
There is no measure.
Only greed."
That's Richard Roma, top salesman, talking, venting, philosophizing, sans scatology.
It comes next.
To spare.


Managers in a Different League
Joe Torre and Tony La Russa sat huddled in the lobby of the Scottsdale Princess Resort, 10 minutes, 20 minutes, maybe 30 minutes.
By the time they were finished talking, they could have negotiated a mutual-assistance pact.
They could use it.


Cruise Lines Prove Bigger Is Better
WHEN Regency Cruises suddenly suspended operations last month, with three of  its six ships still at sea, travel and cruise officials did not lack for explanations.
These included Regency's financial instability, a long hurricane season that disrupted Caribbean and Mexican itineraries and an industry-wide drop in passengers.
What almost no one suggested was that Regency's problems may have had at least a tenuous connection with the woes faced by many cruise lines, which helped precipitate last summer's merger agreement between Epirotiki and Sun Line.


In a Former Porn Palace, a New Outlet for the Best of Bollywood
Until city health inspectors shuttered it earlier this year, the Earle Theater served up some of the raunchiest gay adult movies in town.
Now, three Pakistani businessmen are turning the 600-seat cinema into a venue for the latest musical melodramas from India.
There won't be anything resembling the films formerly featured at the Earle: until recently, Indian cinema censors didn't even permit kissing on screen.


How They Keep It
Although prenuptial agreements may seem like the ultimate mergers-and-acquisitions legacy of the 1980's, their toxic combination of love,  money and lawyers has been around since the ancient Romans.
In recent years, however, "prenups" have become more commonplace, creative and complex.
One that  joined two family fortunes was 70 pages long, required five sets of lawyers and cost more than $100,000.
Here are some of the latest must-haves:
1.
The Renoir Clause Typically when the wealthy scion intends to wed, the prenup tries to block the new in-laws from the trust accounts.
But now dynasties are also fretting about the family heirlooms.
So prenups are insuring that art collections, stables, season opera tickets and third homes remain with the original family, "or at least the wife will agree that her mother won't be allowed to visit the country  houses," says Eleanor Alter, a New York lawyer who represented Mia Farrow in her custody fight with Woody Allen.


Word for Word/Capital Gangs;They Started It. No, They Did. The Budget Debate Continues.
BUDGET negotiations between the Democratic White House and the Republican Congress had broken down and Federal buildings around the country were locked.
But the White House and the Capitol stayed open.
Inside, by early Tuesday afternoon, politicians were pointing fingers.


The Mouse Makes the Man


Poor Little Empress
AN UNCOMMON WOMAN The Empress Frederick, Daughter of Queen Victoria, Wife of the Crown Prince of Prussia, Mother of Kaiser Wilhelm.
By Hannah Pakula.
Illustrated. 701 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $35.


The Biggest Heart if Not the Best
THE PROGRAM-BOOK biography of the pianist Samuel Sanders lists the usual facts of his career: he appears regularly with stars like Jaime Laredo, Sharon Robinson and Paula Robison, as well as Itzhak Perlman, with whom he will perform on Monday evening in Avery Fisher Hall; he made his New York Philharmonic debut at 16; he was awarded a special citation at the Tchaikovsky Competition in 1966.
Not mentioned are the facts of his life: he was a "blue baby" with a malformed, malfunctioning heart; he had three heart operations, the first when he was 9, in the primitive early days of cardiac surgery; he had a heart transplant five years ago.


Nigeria Comes On Too Strong
AROUND the frayed edges of this part of West Africa, the fragments of a new order seem to be emerging.
Airlines run by Nigerian entrepreneurs are replacing  the old colonial companies in places like Sierra Leone, Liberia and Gambia, and  Nigerian oil companies, rather than huge multinationals, now supply much of the fuel.
Nigerian peace keepers are putting out brush fire wars.
And Nigerian bankers, not far behind, are cutting profitable deals.
On the hustings, meanwhile, Nigeria's confident diplomats tout their country as a natural candidate for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.
But as the execution of the playwright and environmentalist Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other minority rights activists on flimsy murder charges shows, in the enterprise of influence-building, Nigeria, West Africa's clumsy giant, is often  its own worst enemy.


Newark Mayor Hurt Slightly in Car Crash
Mayor Sharpe James was slightly injured today when a stolen car going the wrong way on a one-way street struck a car in which he was a passenger, the police said.
The police said the incident occurred at about 5 P.M. at the intersection of  Milford Avenue and West Runyon Street in the city's South Ward.
The driver of the stolen car fled on foot and remained at large tonight.


Atmosphere in the House Becomes Personal and Mean and Nasty
It was an emblematic moment in the House of Representatives, where the legislative courtesies and civilities have given way to a daily street brawl around the budget.
It was only midmorning on Thursday, but the two parties were already hard at  it, Democrats mocking Speaker Newt Gingrich's complaints about his treatment aboard Air Force One, highlighting The Daily News that depicted the Speaker as a "crybaby." Representative Martin Hoke, Republican of Ohio, finally had enough and demanded of the presiding officer: "Is it parliamentary to call the Speaker  of the House a crybaby?"


Civil Servants At Loose Ends
They've been calling their offices, filling the days with personal projects.
Some are so frustrated they've taken to working secretly at home.
In a city where much of the main business of Government has been shut down since Nov. 13 because of the budget impasse and where about half of all Federal workers have been told they're "nonessential," many workaholic Type A's  can't slack off.


Haitian Leader's Angry Words Unnerve Elite and Worry Allies
With an emotional outburst at the funeral of a slain relative a week ago, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide set off an outbreak of street violence, provoked panic among Haiti's elite and undermined his relations with the United  States and other members of the international coalition that restored him to power a year ago.
At least seven people have been killed and more than a score wounded in the unrest that erupted after Mr.
Aristide urged his followers a week ago today to "go to the neighborhoods where there are big houses and heavy weapons" to help the police disarm "the big men with heavy weapons" and other suspected wrongdoers.


Vatican Says the Ban on Women As Priests Is 'Infallible' Doctrine
In a statement approved by Pope John Paul II, the Vatican announced yesterday that Roman Catholics must consider their church's doctrine that only men can be  priests to be "infallibly" taught.
Invoking the word "infallible," which in Catholic theology is reserved for teaching considered irreversible, free from error and requiring full assent from the faithful, indicates the Pope's desire to rule out unequivocally the possibility of ordaining women.


Theme Park To Portray Key West
By the millions, American families avoid costly trips abroad by coming here for a stroll through Paris, a gander at the Great Wall of China or fajitas in the shadow of a Mayan pyramid -- all through the magic of theme park simulation.
But with all the best foreign sites already replicated at the various tourist attractions here, Orlando has turned its cloning skills closer to home.
In what may be the first step toward making the rest of Florida obsolete, Orlando is building a theme park based on a rival Florida destination, and by next summer, visitors to the state will have a new choice: Key West or Key West  World.


Private Police for Public Housing
TWENTY years ago, before Stamford became a corporate mecca and before drug-related violence had become a serious problem, the city had 278 police officers.
Today, despite a sharp increase in both population and violent crime,  the city has 271 officers, according to the Police Chief, G. Patrick Tully.
"When I became chief in April of 1994, we had even more officers, 284," said  Chief Tully, a former officer in the State Police.


Hofstra Loses in Its Bid for Perfection
Chris Parker rushed for 199 yards and a touchdown this afternoon as No. 6-ranked Marshall beat No. 7 Hofstra, 30-28, in a key National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA game.
Marshall (9-2) locked up a first-round home playoff game.
Hofstra (10-1) and  the Thundering Herd will learn their first-round opponents when the pairings are announced Sunday.


At Ground Zero
To the Editor: Your article "Ground Zero, 50 Years After the Blast" (Oct. 1)  brought back memories of an age of innocence -- the winter of 1941-42.
I was then a student at the Brownmoor School, a boarding school for girls at  the Bishop's Lodge near Santa Fe, N.M.
The most exciting social event of our year was a dance held with the boys of Los Alamos Ranch School.
One year the boys would come to Brownmoor and the next we would go to Los Alamos on a bus, over the rutted mountain road with hairpin turns looking down at the dizzying depths of the canyons.
We traveled in school uniforms, taking along our dancing dresses and shoes, to be donned after our arrival, in a special area of  the school declared off limits to the boys.
We were even allowed to wear silk stockings and lipstick, forbidden at all other times.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
A LITTLE HUNGARIAN PORNOGRAPHY By Peter Esterhazy.
Hydra Books/Northwestern University. $24.95.


Trouble Spots On the Road For This Week
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Englewood.
Right lane closed, 7 P.M. to 6 A.M., through Saturday. 2.
ROUTE 3 Rutherford.
Various lanes closed at night for repaving until the end  of the year. 3.
ROUTES 1-9 Essex County.
Southbound traffic has been shifted to new northbound express lanes between the Pulaski Skyway and Interstate 78.
Wilson Avenue exit is closed. 4.
ROUTE 35 Victory Bridge between Sayreville and Perth Amboy closed today, 7 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Traffic will use Route 9. 5.
INTERSTATE 287 Bridgewater, between Route 22 and Foothill Road.
Work zone setup.
Various lanes closed until further notice. 6.
EAST DUKES PARKWAY Hillsborough.
Road closed for bridge replacement through December. 7.
PLAINSBORO ROAD Plainsboro.
The bridge over Amtrak railroad is closed for repairs through January. 8.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Northbound shoulder is closed between Nassau Park Boulevard and Alexander Road, until 1996.
The northbound Duck Pond Run jughandle turn is permanently closed.


Caution Advised in Feeding the Houseplants
A PRIMER on the many kinds of water-soluble houseplant fertilizers might be a good thing to ponder now.
There are so many products on the shelves, it is hard  to know which one to choose.
Often a buyer just heads for a particular brand name because it has been highly praised in a commercial or splashed forth in a gardening magazine advertisement.
Sometimes sales clerks are eager to tout one product over another, adding to the confusion.
But decisions must be made.


Corrections
A map yesterday showing stores and restaurants on Columbus Avenue that have closed during construction on the street designated one store incorrectly.
Park  West Pharmacy at 463 Columbus Avenue has not closed.


Kara A. Newman, Robert Silverman
Kara Anne Newman, a stock market reporter in New York for Quick Nikkei News,  a financial news service based in Tokyo, is to be married today to Robert Altfas Silverman, a senior writer in New York for Inside Media, a trade magazine.
Rabbi David Rosenzweig is to perform the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride, 25, graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
She is a daughter of Eliott and Naomi Newman of New City, N.Y.


MARKET TIMING


Mumford and the Master
LEWIS MUMFORD AND PATRICK GEDDES The Correspondence.
Edited by Frank G. Novak Jr.
Illustrated. 383 pp.
New York: Routledge. $45.


WEDDINGS Robin Macdonald, Eileen Ruggiero
Eileen Marie Ruggiero, an accountant in Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Robin Forsyth Macdonald, a retired computer executive.
The Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Garden City Hotel.
Mrs.
Macdonald, 40, graduated from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Joseph F. Ruggiero of Garden City and the late Mr.
Ruggiero, who was a lawyer in Brooklyn.


Where Woman Was, There Gal Shall Be
We women are so fickle.
We just can't decide what we want to be called.
Back  in the pre-Cambrian era of the early feminist movement -- you know, two or three decades ago -- we renounced the use of the word "girl" to describe adult females.
Even worse was "lady," with its hint of class structure, petticoats and Emily Post.
Out went the silly Audubon argot, the "chicks" and the "birds"; out, too, went the Raymond Chandleresque "dames" and "broads." And use the nasty B word, buster, at the risk of a kick in the T's.
We are Woman. Hear us snore.


Killer Contracts
Two more down and only three to go.
Last week publishers signed up two of the last unspoken-for trial-related books.
Johnnie Cochran's book, "My Journey to Justice" went to Ballantine's One World imprint for what other publishers estimated at more than $2.5 million.
Robert Shapiro's book, "Search for Justice," went to Warner Books for about $1.5 million.
That leaves Judge Lance Ito, defense lawyer F. Lee Bailey and Mr.
Simpson as the only trial celebrities unsigned for a post-trial memoir.
For Mr.
Simpson, book talk has been overshadowed by his civil trial.
Last Wednesday, a Santa Monica Superior Court judge ruled that transcripts of Mr.
Simpson's upcoming depositions, including his explanation of what he was doing the night Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, were killed, would not be  kept secret, as Mr.
Simpson's lawyers had requested.
MARY B. W. TABOR


Women as Saints And Sinners
To the Editor:
In "Testing the Limits in a Culture of Excess" [Oct. 29], Vicki Goldberg mentions the female professor who objected to the presence of Goya's "Naked Maja" in the classroom.
As I recall the episode, the professor's objection didn't involve simply the arousal of male fantasy, as Ms.
Goldberg suggests, but the stereotype of woman as whore.


Gumshoe Collector
To the Editor:
In her article about Charles P. Limbert, the Arts and Crafts designer ["If Stickley Was Hertz, Then Limbert Was Avis," Oct. 29], Rita Reif mentions several films that showcased mission furniture.
But Kenneth Branagh's 1991 "Dead Again"  was not on her list.
This must be the only thriller in Hollywood history that features a gumshoe character (Mr. Branagh) who also collects Arts and Crafts pieces.
"Oh, that's a very handsome chair," purrs a villainous antiques dealer, "I'll give you $45."


Indiana Latest Victim As Buckeyes Hit 11-0
Ohio State 42, Indiana 3


Gunman, 16, Kills Woman And Is Slain By an Officer
An off-duty New York City correction officer shot and killed a 16-year-old yesterday, moments after the teen-ager shot a woman to death in an attempted robbery in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
The officer, Capt.
Isaiah Montgomery, 47, was grazed in the stomach in the shootout, the police said.
He was treated at Kings County Hospital and released.


New Goal for Giants' Owner: Hold That Team
On an October day in 1925, Wellington Mara first became involved with his family's business, the New York Giants, by working as a ball boy at training camp.
Decades later, he can look back in satisfaction on having built the Giants into one of the most successful and stable franchises in sports.
The 79-year-old Mara himself is a future Hall of Famer and one of the National Football League's few stabilizing forces.
But Mara and his family face  a daunting opponent in the future, one that could affect the very fabric of Giants ownership and thus the product the team puts on the field.


Books in Astoria
To the Editor: It was wonderful to see the attention paid to our much-loved neighborhood, Astoria, Queens ("The City in a Quiet Key," Sept. 10).
Though many of my neighbors would probably like to keep it a secret, most longtime Astorians know that this is one of the all-round best places to live in the city.
We have  truly wonderful restaurants and food shops, lovely two- and three-bedroom houses with trellised gardens, quick and easy access to Manhattan, a large lively park  with swimming pool and relatively safe streets for an evening stroll.
Your author, William Grimes, mentioned some of the most charming places in Astoria but we were surprised that he didn't include our best bookstore and bastion of cultural activity here: Stowell &amp; Sons (formerly Beatrix), a locally  owned and operated shop that holds regular free poetry readings and musical recitals.
It adds a vital component of culture and sophistication to our neighborhoods.


Pop Briefs
CACHAO: 'MASTER SESSIONS VOLUME 2' Epic/Descarga


The Man Some Wish Would Go Away
Bob Prunetti, the Mercer County Executive, was doing a little campaigning at  a Trenton women's club luncheon on the Saturday before Election Day, and he offered two pieces of advice.
One was, don't try to work the tables during the first course because everyone is eating salad at once and there's too much putting down of forks and hurrying to swallow when you stick your hand out to say, Hi, vote for me.
The second thing was, Watch out for Dick Du Haime.
Richard A. Du Haime is someone New Jersey Republicans would probably not like to have to watch out for, now or ever.
The 54-year-old Passaic County Freeholder is a hard-right Republican, a strict constructionist on the right to bear arms,  a successful businessman who believes that affirmative action discriminates against white people, a fierce critic of abortion rights.


Canadian Park Visitors May Pay for Rescues
Canada's park service, Parks Canada, is considering a policy to make tourists and tour groups pay for their own rescue operations when engaging in high-risk activities in Alberta, British Columbia and the Yukon.
The park service could begin recovering costs from guide companies in 1996, and from individuals by 1997, said Ron Hooper, superintendent of the Pacific Rim National Park Reserve.
Though the term "high risk activities" has yet to be fully defined, it will likely run the gamut from hiking to kayaking, he said, adding that those rescued in areas easily accessible by road will be exempt.
The park service is exploring the option of allowing companies and individuals to buy insurance to cover the risks of their activities, a practice common in Europe, he said.
Rescues of injured or lost tourists are a drain on the park service's resources, he said.
In 1994, taxpayers paid about $581,395, based on 1.24 Canadian dollars  to the United States dollar, for rescues in the Yukon, British Columbia and Alberta national parks, he said.
Average cost of each rescue was $375, not including staff training, helicopter time and equipment.
Rescues that last for days can drive the cost into the thousands of dollars, Mr.
Hooper said.


Desperate Hours


Deal Is Likely On Cars Run By Electricity
California is backing away from a requirement that, within two years, 2 percent of all cars sold in the state be electrically powered.
The chairman of the California Air Resources Board, the rule-setting agency,  said that instead of enforcing a quota for the 1998 model year, the state would  negotiate with auto makers to begin getting electric cars on the market by next  year.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
RED, RED ROBIN By Stephen Gallagher. Ballantine, $18.


A Tale of Two Christopher Streets
IT'S lunchtime at Smil'in Jacks, a cafe at Christopher and Washington Streets, but George Tassone, the owner, is wearing an unmistakable frown.
"Where is everybody?" he asks as he surveys empty tables at the restaurant he christened this month.
"If I had known it was going to be this bad, I wouldn't have opened."
Most of Mr.
Tassone's neighbors are also having a hard time making ends meet, and vacant storefronts litter this western spur of Christopher Street like broken teeth in an otherwise healthy mouth.
But a few blocks east, on the other  side of Hudson Street, things at the Espresso Bar couldn't be better.
"Business  is great," says the owner, Hugo Cory, as a dozen customers wait in a line.
"We're busy morning, noon and night."


What They Look Like to the Rest of Us
Fran Lebowitz, the author of "Metropolitan Life" and a well-known anthropologist of the upper reaches of New York society, sat down one recent afternoon on a banquette at 44, the fashionable restaurant in the Royalton Hotel, and addressed herself to a set of searching inquiries about the rich.
Are the rich different from you and me?


Panel to Examine Causes of School Violence
TWO 16-year-olds at Longwood High School in Middle Island were charged last week with setting off a pipe bomb at a nearby elementary school.
Another 16-year-old is accused of having stabbed a student in the back with a hunting knife in the lobby of Westbury High School a week earlier.


Civil Service Union Sues Over Loss of Jobs
THE County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, acted unilaterally and without the  requisite approval of the Board of Legislators when he privatized some housekeeping services at the Westchester County Medical Center and eliminated county jobs, according to a lawsuit filed here by the 6,000-member Civil Service Employees Association, the largest public employees union in Westchester.
The suit, filed earlier this month in State Supreme Court here, may be joined by the 17-member Board of Legislators, said Richard G. Wishnie, a Democrat and Independent Legislator from Briarcliff Manor.


Media-Wise Walesa Foe Copies Style Of Clinton
On an election swing into the Polish countryside imitating Bill Clinton's 1992 campaign bus trip, Aleksander Kwasniewski's arm gestures seemed remarkably  Clintonesque.
It turned out that Mr.
Kwasniewski, the Polish presidential contender and former Communist, not only borrowed the idea of the bus but also copied President Clinton's body language.


Calcutta's Better Side
To the Editor:
Charles Murray (Op-Ed, Nov. 14) refers to Calcutta as an epitome of economic  disparity, filth and hopelessness.
Notwithstanding the poverty, it is a city with a unique philology, philosophy and history.
It was in Calcutta that Ronald  Ross discovered the organism that causes malaria and where Robert Koch isolated  the bacillus that causes typhoid.


The Blue Note Chronicles
Of the many independent jazz labels that flourished in the two decades after  World War II, Blue Note was perhaps the most independent of all.
Created in 1939 by Alfred Lion and Francis Wolff, Blue Note advanced by fits and starts into the mid-1950's, when it developed an utterly distinct style -- in sound engineering  and album cover graphics as well as in music.
Until it was sold in 1967, the label commanded the loyalty of a generation of jazz lovers.
Lion was the producer, the one who signed artists and supervised recordings.
Wolff apparently administered the business end, but he was also a photographer, and he chronicled the Blue Note sessions for 28 years, chiefly for the album jackets.
Although a few Wolff portraits became instant classics, many were reduced to postage-stamp  size by his art director, and the reputation of his work suffered.
THE BLUE NOTE YEARS: The Jazz Photography of Francis Wolff (Rizzoli, $65), with text by the veteran record executives Michael Cuscuna and Charlie Lourie, is an opulent tribute to a photographer whose style was as individual as the music he illustrated.
Roaming the studio during rehearsals, Wolff caught his subjects in  meditation and in action, during performance and playback -- but always in a harsh light that freezes every hair with icy clarity.
Wolff unites them all in his light-out-of-dark vision, as though the act of recording for his record company were an act of reverence.
GARY GIDDINS


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 For over three decades, Diane Dee has been a savior for Columbia University students and faculty.
She types.


Town Built on Steel Industry Resigns Itself to End of an Era
There is not much fire-and-tongs fight left in Local 2599 anymore.
Old steelmen like Rebel, Chico and the union boss Danny Mills know they have lost their battle to preserve a livelihood, and with it a way of life.
"There was a time when we were unbeatable," said Mr.
Mills, pointing to framed black-and-white photos of steelworkers toppling police cars and hurling bricks during their first walkout, in 1941.


A Ribband, Not a Ribbon For the Fastest of the Fleet
To the Editor:
In your article about the great old ocean liners ("A Miniature Armada Cruises Into the Maritime Museum," Oct. 15) you refer to the "blue ribbon" pennant that  the fastest trans-Atlantic liner was entitled to fly from its mainmast.
In fact, the pennant is called the "blue ribband."


Algeria Election Results Seen as Blow to Militants
The victory of President Liamine Zeroual, Algeria's military-backed leader, in presidential election on Thursday was a severe blow to Muslim militants, who  had threatened violence against those who voted, Algerian newspapers said today.
According to the Government, Mr.
Zeroual won with more than 61 percent of nearly 12 million votes cast.
Official figures put voter turnout at 74.92 percent.
The opposition said it was between 30 and 33 percent.


Psalms and Anthems, Verdi Arias and Ravel
IT is another of those crowded Sundays with concerts for a variety of tastes.
At 10 this morning Richard Donohue leads the South Congregational Church Choir in Hartford in a set of Thanksgiving psalms, anthems and hymns.
More esoteric vocal music is scheduled at a 3 o'clock recital in the Yale Center for British Art, as Sarah Pillow sings 18th-century music from the Republic of Georgia with to the harp accompaniment of Jan Walters.
At 3:15, the  West Point Cadet Glee Club gives a performance in Ives Hall, on the midtown campus of Western Connecticut State University in Danbury.
The 90-voice mixed choir has a repertory of traditional and contemporary vocal music including folk and popular songs.


Aqueduct Cheers Miller
MacKENZIE MILLER returned to the winner's circle at Aqueduct race track yesterday for a valedictory appearance as his 45-year career as a horse trainer  came to an end.
The 74-year-old Kentuckian trained four national champions and one Kentucky Derby winner, Sea Hero, in 1993.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Tracy Rosenblatt, Richard G. Lubin
Tracy Lyn Rosenblatt, a daughter of Judith and Martin Rosenblatt of Greenlawn, L.I., is to be married today to Richard Gene Lubin, a son of Judy and Arthur Lubin of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan is to perform the ceremony at the Woodcrest Club in Syosset, L.I.
The couple graduated from the University of Maryland.


For Seniors, Airport Bus Discounts in N.Y.
Carey buses that serve La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports offer sharply reduced fares for travelers over 65, but the discounts are available only to those leaving from the East Side departure point, at Vanderbilt Avenue and 42d Street, not from the Port Authority Bus Terminal on West 42d Street.
The reduced rates are $4 to Kennedy and $3 to La Guardia; regular rates are $13 and  $10 respectively.
Lorraine Defino in the Carey office said senior tickets were sold only at the East Side office because a Carey supervisor there checks the validity of the senior's credentials.
New Jersey Transit sells the Carey tickets at the Port Authority Terminal and does not sell discounted tickets for  Carey.
The spokeswoman said that those who paid the full fare could receive refunds by sending their receipts, plus a photocopy of a Medicare card, to Carey, Building 199, John F. Kennedy Airport, Jamaica, Queens 11430.


DUSTY RIDES AGAIN
Is Dusty Springfield's "Dusty in Memphis," which was reissued on CD in 1992,  still available?
If so, on what label?
I'm certainly not the only reader whose curiosity was piqued.
A brief editors' note would be appreciated by many folks.
BRIAN J. BAILEY Litchfield, Conn.


Too Clever Too Often By Half
IF the airline coupons were good for $75 in discounts, how come I wound up paying $67.50 more to fly my family to California than if I hadn't used them?
Welcome to the Great Airscrip Fiasco of 1995 and other pitched battles that I have waged, with mixed results, along the ever-narrowing divide separating my wallet from those who would empty it.


THE GOOD RAT
Michael Lewis's "The Good Rat" (The Capitalist, Oct. 29) will further discourage potential whistle blowers.
Lewis expressed no praise for John Swanson and Mark Whitacre.
Instead, he emphasized that their disclosures terminated their careers and rendered them virtually unemployable.
Dow Corning and Archer-Daniels-Midland could post Lewis's article on their corporate bulletin boards as a warning to other employees who might consider telling the truth.
At a dinner party recently, I characterized Whitacre as a true American hero.
My assessment was criticized by one guest as "stupid, naive and idiotic." Curiously, my critic was a person who blames all of America's problems on the deterioration of family values.
Apparently, corporate loyalty in the face of corporate criminality is a family value and personal integrity is not.


Sports of The Times;The Coach Must Control Everything
IT sounds a little -- shall we say -- drastic to make the Jets line up in numerical order for the national anthem.
But that's what Rich Kotite has done, and may even do again this afternoon when the Jets play the Bills.
Does it seem compulsive when Pat Riley fines his players for helping an opponent up from the court?
Riley wants civility curbed before it gets contagious.
Even chew-and-spit baseball managers are closing the clubhouse doors before games to go over the fine points.
And surely Mike Milbury of the Islanders wishes he had maintained control for one second longer during a galling loss in Anaheim on Friday night.


Giving Small Businesses Keys to Success
THERE are those who work from 9 to 5 and there are those who work from 5 to 9 and the difference between them, Lloyd Shefsky said, is that those in the 5 to 9 category are working for themselves.
"Only they get to decide if 5 to 9 means 4 hours of work or 16 or anything in between," Mr.
Shefsky said.
"I know entrepreneurs who have succeeded by working  four hours a day and made a fortune. But when they worked, they were so passionate about what they were doing that no matter what it took them to do, they'd do it."


Neiman Defies the Critics and Keeps On Painting
His signature cigar cocked, the Court Painter posed before his latest work, a life-size charcoal of Mike Tyson and George Foreman, whose fists were cocked.
They seemed to be posing, too, perhaps for the poster of their fantasy fight.
"Did someone commission this?" I asked, entering the studio.


Pop Briefs
GARTH BROOKS: 'FRESH HORSES' Capitol Nashville


Lions Win With Trick And Snowplow Offense
On this wintry afternoon, the most impressive flurries came from the sky instead of from Penn State's offense, and the most accurate throwing was often done by students armed with snowballs.
The Nittany Lions lost two fumbles inside the Michigan 10-yard line and fumbled again but recovered at the 12.
Quarterback Wally Richardson was wild high with his passing, was sacked three times and was sometimes hurt by receivers with uncertain hands.
The pass defense was porous, too, repeatedly letting the Wolverines out of trouble on third and fourth down.


In a Move to Open Its Markets, China Pledges to Cut Tariffs on 4,000Items Next Year
In one of its most substantial efforts to open its markets, China said today  that it would cut tariffs next year on more than 4,000 items by an average of at least 30 percent.
China's promise captured the spotlight on a day in which leaders of 18 Pacific Rim nations endorsed a blueprint to achieve free trade in their vast region by the year 2020 using what they described as a new and unique voluntary  approach.


Fox Opens Its Checkbook in a Search for Hit Comedies
Can money buy laughter?
Rupert Murdoch certainly seems to think so.
Twentieth Century Fox Television  -- trying to improve its poor record of comedy hits -- has paid an estimated $60 million in the last month to sign a handful of established comedy writers and producers to develop new half-hour comedies.


Models Join Together to Make Unionism a Thing of Beauty
Blonde and statuesque with chiseled cheekbones, Donna Eller does not fit the  stereotypical image of a union activist.
But active she is in struggling to build a new labor union, one that Samuel Gompers probably never dreamed of: a union for fashion models.


Equity Issues To Be Offered During Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alpha Industries Inc., Woburn, Mass., 2 million shares. Montgomery Securities.


Losses From Computer Breaches Are on the Rise, a Study Finds
Financial losses from computer break-ins and other security breaches are on the rise, according to a survey of corporate computer-security managers, with nearly half of all companies reporting losses as a result of hackers, viruses, sabotage, corporate spies and incompetent employees.
At least 20 of the 1,290 companies responding to the annual security survey,  from Information Week magazine and the consulting firm Ernst &amp; Young, reported losses of more than $1 million last year.


3 Are Held in Slayings of Mother and Children
Three people were charged today in a triple slaying here in which a full-term infant was cut alive from the womb while his mother was stabbed and shot to death, the police said.
The authorities said the infant, a boy who they said was found later with one of the suspects, was in good health.
Deborah Evans, 28, was killed by a former boyfriend, the boyfriend's cousin and the cousin's girlfriend, the Addison police and prosecutors in the State's Attorney's Office for DuPage County said.


Debating Legality of Plan For Cruise-Ship Gambling
For more than two weeks, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has been considering whether to allow gambling cruise ships to sail out of New York City, and he has  pledged to make a decision by the end of the year.
If approved, the plan would revive legal casino gambling for the first time since gambling halls were banned by New York State in the 1840's, potentially bringing to New York City the tourism, jobs and tax revenues that cities and states across the country have increasingly viewed as economic jackpots.


Welfare Reform That Can Work
To the Editor:
In "Welfare Hysteria" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14), Charles Murray misses the point on why President Clinton needs to veto the "welfare reform" legislation now in House-Senate conference.


Inspired Becker Adds The Winning Touches
It has been several years since Boris Becker was the world's best tennis player.
His convincing victory today in the I.B.M./ATP Tour World Championship does not change that.
Despite the grandiose word "weltmeister" flashing on the electronic scoreboard and despite the $1,225,000 winner's check, this tennis year clearly belonged to the three men who will finish ahead of Becker in Monday's final ranking: Pete Sampras, Andre Agassi and Thomas Muster.


Bombing at Egypt's Embassy in Pakistan Kills 15


UConn's Title Defense Starts With a Defeat
Connecticut's women's basketball team now has a clean slate.
No Rebecca Lobo, the star who led them to last season's National Collegiate Athletic Association  championship, and no 35-game winning streak.
The No. 1 Huskies were upset today by No. 4 Louisiana Tech, 83-81, in overtime in the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic.
Tennessee beat  Virginia in the second game by 78-51.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the Pentagon's selection of Gen.
Joseph W. Ralston to be Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff misstated his age.
He is 52, not 50.


Islamic Militants' War on Egypt: Going International
Today's bombing in Pakistan serves as the clearest warning yet that Islamic militants may be turning their three-year-old war against the Egyptian Government to the international front.
The attack on the Egyptian Embassy in Islamabad was the single deadliest strike against an Egyptian Government target since 1992, when the militant Islamic Group began its violent quest to overthrow secular authority in Egypt and impose an Islamic state.


Sri Lankan Troops Close In on Rebel Base
Sri Lankan troops moved in on the rebel stronghold of Jaffna today, marching  to within 800 yards of the northern city's center.
The ethnic Tamil guerrillas struck back in eastern Sri Lanka, killing 38 Government soldiers in an ambush as the troops patrolled a railway track at Shanthiveli.
Reports said that as many as 160 rebels and Government soldiers were killed in the fighting in both locations today.


F.A.A. Lets Airports Ease Some Security Measures
The Federal Aviation Administration authorized airports across the nation yesterday to ease parking bans and vehicle inspections imposed last month to guard against terrorist attacks.
But New York's major metropolitan airports did not immediately do so, and other measures in the tightest airport security since the 1991 Persian Gulf War  remained in effect across the country.


A Bitter Feud Fouls Lines at the F.C.C.
Few people have approached the job of running the Federal Communications Commission with loftier goals than Reed E. Hundt.
A protege and soulmate of Vice President Al Gore, Mr.
Hundt, the F.C.C. chairman since December 1993, has campaigned tirelessly to expand children's television.
He wants the Government to help connect schools to the Internet.
And he wants to extend the reach of advanced communications to the poor and disadvantaged.


Take Wigs and Lace And Add Silly Names
The white lace handkerchiefs are flapping furiously at the Lyceum Theater these days.
Little fingers are crooked into right angles; eyebrows are arched to the hairlines and epigrams, couched in plummier-than-thou English accents, are being shot into the balcony like cannonballs.
The symptoms are unmistakable: someone is reviving Richard Brinsley Sheridan's "School for Scandal," and in the time-honored manner so well known to audiences of high-school assembly productions and touring repertory companies.


INSIDE
Israel Seeking Answers


Essay;Investigate Gambling
The public's gorge has begun to rise at the morally corrupting spread of gambling in America.
Connecticut's Senate firmly rejected the bid by a phony aboriginal tribe to extend its glitzy casino empire beyond the confines of its "reservation." And in referendums from Massachusetts to Washington State, voters turned down get-rich-quick schemes of the gambling lobby.


School Districts Explore Change
Bernardsville schools have linked up with the local library to save $60,000 and to triple the books available to students.
Six school districts in Salem, Cumberland and Cape May Counties share business services.
Those were two examples of how school districts are saving money -- without the more drastic step of regionalization -- that were cited in a new report from the state's School Boards Association.
In a unanimous vote at a weekend meeting, 178 delegates from local school boards approved drafting legislation and providing other help to make it easier  for districts to share services.
"It shows that the districts consider this a viable option and an alternative to regionalization," said Frank Belluscio, an association spokesman.


Executives Are Vacating City Hospitals
Facing a cold shoulder from City Hall and hot competition from managed care,  high-level executives are deserting New York City's public hospital system in large numbers, leaving a leadership vacuum when the system is struggling with a  25 percent budget cut and a fast-changing marketplace.
While the vast majority of those who have departed -- doctors, nurses and administrators among them -- have retired or taken new jobs for personal reasons, many said in interviews that they left, at least in part, because they  felt the city had abandoned the hospitals corporation, leaving their future uncertain.


Man Shot to Death in Camden
Because someone wanted Anthony Wiley's van, he became Camden's 54th homicide  victim this year.
The victim, a 32-year-old Glassboro man, was shot on Saturday  after he tried to drive away from an attacker who demanded the van as it idled by the roadside, the County Prosecutor's office said yesterday.
Last week, Camden broke its old record of 50 homicides in a single year.


One Glorious Moment, Then One More Jets Loss
With a dramatic 99-yard dash to the finish, the Jets almost turned today into a glorious Sunday.
Imagine the Jets, the team that has been victimized by big play after big play without ever coming up with one of its own, marching from one end of the Meadowlands to the other in the final seconds of their game against the first-place Bills.


Canadian Ex-Prime Minister to Sue Ottawa Over Graft Charges
In a replay of old political wars, former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, a Conservative, says he will sue the Liberal Government of Prime Minister Jean Chretien over Justice Department accusations linking Mr.
Mulroney with kickbacks related to the biggest purchase of aircraft in Canadian airline history.
Air Canada acquired 34 Airbus passenger jets for over $1 billion in 1988 after a bidding contest between the Airbus consortium of French, German and British interests and the Boeing Company of Seattle.


Time Inc.'s Bosses Want Success on Paper
When Don Logan and Norman Pearlstine announced a wholesale reorganizing of Time Inc. last week, they also took the wraps off a formidable new partnership.
Although Mr.
Logan has been the chief executive of Time Warner's publishing division for 15 months and Mr.
Pearlstine is approaching his first anniversary as editor in chief, last week's shake-up was their first coordinated effort to remake the world's largest magazine company.
They named top editors at Time and Sports Illustrated; disbanded Time Inc.
Ventures, the Los Angeles-based magazine development division, and consolidated  international operations under Mr.
Pearlstine.


2 American Students Die On Ski Trip in France
Two American students died and four others were in serious condition today after being stranded in a storm on a ski slope.
The six were among seven juniors at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, studying in Luxembourg, who went to the ski slope in Tignes, near the Italian border, for a weekend trip.
They got lost and spent the night stranded in the storm.


Graf's Year Is Difficult One Till the End, but Successful
As befits her personality, which has always steered clear of the lighter side of life, Steffi Graf closed the door on 1995 the hard way yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
But it was the right way.
Crippled by blisters, pounded without mercy by Anke Huber but unwilling to submit to either of those antagonists, Graf ended her tennis year, one fraught with personal trauma and framed by professional triumph, by capturing the WTA Tour Championships in a tense five-set final that pushed both players to the outer limits of their ability.


Book Venture For Clancy
Big Entertainment Inc. has reached an agreement for a joint venture with the  author Tom Clancy, according to Mitchell Rubenstein, the chairman and chief executive.
He said the transaction would be the biggest in the young company's history.
Mr.
Rubenstein said the 50-50 venture, called Netco Partners, would publish  a line of paperback books aimed at the youth and teen-age markets.
The venture will publish "Tom Clancy's Net Force" next year and will license the property and its characters for film, television, toys and video games.
Mr.
Clancy will not necessarily write the story but will oversee the book's production.


Company' In Limbo On Plans To Move
It is the show that will not die.
The plans to move "Company" to a commercial Broadway theater after a sold-out three-month run at the nonprofit Roundabout Theater dissolved in bitterness on Thursday as the musical's would-be producer and its creative team traded angry accusations over who was responsible for the deal's having fallen through.
The confrontation grew so heated that the musical's composer, Stephen Sondheim, took the extraordinary step of issuing a public statement denouncing the producer who was to have moved the show.


PRESIDENT AND G.O.P. AGREE TO END FEDERAL SHUTDOWN AND TO NEGOTIATE A BUDGET
The White House and the Republican-controlled Congress agreed tonight on a stopgap spending measure to reopen Government operations after a six-day shutdown, with President Clinton accepting the Republicans' goal of balancing the Federal budget in seven years but insisting on language intended to protect  his priorities in long-term negotiations.
After a weekend of intense talks, counteroffers and intermittent standoffs, the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, walked onto the floor about 6:40 P.M. and flashed a thumbs-up sign.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Praise for a Union City School
Until three months ago, Union City schools were one step away from a state takeover like those in Newark, Paterson and neighboring Jersey City.
But the state has backed off because the schools are getting better.
Now someone else is recognizing Union City for academic innovation: William H. Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, has chosen Christopher Columbus School as a leader in the use of technology in education.
With the help of Bell Atlantic, the middle school has set up a computer network that links its students and teachers in class and at home.


Wounded and Angry, But a Victim No More


Italy Rebuked By Vatican Over Migrants
Never shy to express its views on political matters in its own backyard, the  Roman Catholic Church has spoken out forcefully against moves to crack down on illegal immigrants in Italy, chastising those it says have used the issue for political "blackmail."
In an editorial on Thursday, L'Osservatore Romano, the semi-official newspaper of the Vatican, attacked the "arrogance and intolerance" of the anti-immigration lobby, which it said has advocated methods "not worthy of a democratic system."


Viking rolls out the big guns to promote Gates's book.
FOR its lead title this fall, Viking is spending $1 million, one of its largest promotional budgets ever, to tell the world about Bill Gates.
That's right.
The same Bill Gates of Microsoft whose name is itself a marketing strategy.
The same Bill Gates whose preppy face appears regularly on the covers of publications around the world.
The same Bill Gates who has spent $150 million to market Windows 95, his latest software product.


O.J. Prosecutor Takes the Stage
From her seat, second-row center, Patricia Keane scribbled on a white index card the question she was burning to ask Christopher Darden.
It had nothing to do with bloody gloves or Mark Fuhrman or DNA.


Cities Too Suffer Billboard Blight
To the Editor:
Re "Billboard Blight" (editorial, Nov. 14): The problem of billboard blight affects more than just rural and suburban highways.
In Brooklyn and elsewhere in New York City, scores of billboards have illegally intruded into the urban environment.


Perot Tells Details of What He Wants in a President: 'GeorgeWashington 2d'
With his new Reform Party pushing hard to establish itself in six more states before Jan. 1, Ross Perot held out the possibility today -- and the challenge -- that the party would not run its own Presidential candidate next year if either  the Democrats or Republicans nominated "George Washington 2d."
The new party, he said, was interested only in bringing the American electorate together, not further dividing it, and therefore would swing its support behind another party's candidate so long as that candidate met Reform Party standards.


Art Theft Is Booming, Bringing an Effort to Respond
Every time a museum or a private collection has a major art theft, the ghost  of Dr.
No seems to stir, as if the only credible reason for stealing an instantly recognizable painting were to satisfy the passion of some manic millionaire to view a masterpiece in the privacy of his castle.
As it happens, international art crime is far less romantic.
Last year, Norway's National Gallery recovered Edvard Munch's "Scream" after thieves tried  to sell it to undercover agents for one-hundreth of its estimated worth.
A year  earlier, priceless paintings by Vermeer and Goya, stolen in Ireland in 1986, were found in a car in Belgium.


Left and Right in Spain Recall Franco's Death
About 6,000 admirers of Spain's former dictator, Gen.
Francisco Franco, today marked the 20th anniversary of his death at Madrid's only monument to him.
Elsewhere in Madrid, 3,000 people marched to protest the "intolerance and racism" they say characterized Franco's 36-year regime.


Voting Yields G.O.P. Rarity In Louisiana
In an election marked by voting along strict racial lines, State Senator Mike Foster, a conservative white Republican, easily defeated United States Representative Cleo Fields, a liberal black Democrat, to become only the second  Republican since Reconstruction elected Governor of Louisiana.
After a largely suspenseless campaign, Mr.
Foster outpolled Mr.
Fields in Saturday's voting, 64 percent to 36 percent.
The wealthy 65-year-old businessman, who switched parties from Democrat to Republican in the middle of the campaign, took 84 percent of the white vote, while Mr.
Fields took 96 percent of the black vote, according to a survey of voters leaving the polls that was conducted for The Times-Picayune and WDSU-TV, both of New Orleans.


Latest Bowl Outlook? Haze Followed by Fog
A college football bowl system designed to replace political maneuvering with rewards for on-the-field performance will soon reveal whether it values a team's 1995 achievements more than its traditional appeal.
As potential bowl bids come  into focus, with a Notre Dame-Miami matchup in the Orange Bowl a growing possibility, public politicking has begun with no guarantees of satisfaction for conference champs.
The outlook for the alliance's attempt at a championship game, the Fiesta Bowl on Jan. 2, remains clear.
Nebraska, No. 1 in the New York Times computer ranking and in the two major polls, can secure a spot by defeating Oklahoma Friday.
Florida, by beating Florida State Saturday and Arkansas in the Southeastern Conference championship game Dec. 2, would get the other spot.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about alterations to a "60 Minutes" report on the tobacco industry misspelled the name of the general counsel for CBS.
She is Ellen Oran Kaden, not Caden.


Slovakia Uses Language in Ethnic War
To the Editor:
The curbing of the Hungarian language in Slovakia (news article, Nov. 16) is  more than an administrative formality directed against Hungarians.
The law that  was approved Nov. 15 authorizes the use of the "language police" in Slovakia.


The Appeal of Powell
To the Editor:
Re "Powell and the Press" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16): Dan Quayle, not for the first time, has missed the point.
Many members of the press and public were hoping for Gen.
Colin Powell's candidacy because they thought he would be a good President.


St. John's Makes Its Annual Early Exit
Once again, St.
John's has gone nowhere in the Division I soccer tournament.
For the fourth year in a row, the Red Storm was eliminated in the first round, this time with a 3-2 loss to Hartwick College yesterday.
St.
John's, which captured the Big East tournament and was the lone representative from the conference in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, had a 2-1 lead at intermission on goals by Joenal Castma and Medufia Kulego.
But Hartwick, playing on its home field at Oneonta, rallied  on goals by Orest Grechka and Gerald Lagasse in the second half.


Two Promotions At Omnicom Unit
Goodbye, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco, a unit of the Omnicom Group, said that it had promoted Steve Simpson and Steve Luker, associate creative directors, to new positions as creative directors.
They join the co-chairmen, Jeff Goodby and Rich Silverstein, who are the other two creative directors.
"It gives us more horsepower in growing the company," Mr.
Silverstein said,  adding, "Now we can take on more accounts." Mr.
Silverstein said that Mr.
Simpson, 36, who was also named a partner, and Mr.
Luker, 31, would now oversee  one-third of the agency's accounts, including the Chevy's Mexican Restaurants, Norwegian Cruise Line and Pacific Bell.


With Prayer and a Dictionary, Congress Moves Past the Tumult
After a week in which part of the Federal Government shut down on Tuesday, two members of Congress brawled on Friday and Democrats spent the better part of an afternoon staging a noisy sit-in on the floor of the House of Representatives, the Senate opened a rare Sunday session today with its chaplain praying for divine intervention to resolve the political impasse.
"A house divided against itself cannot stand," the Rev.
Lloyd John Ogilvie said.
"We acknowledge that presently we are a divided Government."


Accounts
Ai Network Auto Insurance, Atlanta, a division of American International Group,  to O'Keefe Marketing, Richmond, to handle its account, previously handled by Archer/ Malmo, Memphis.
The billings were estimated at $4.5 million.


Knicks Barely Fend Off Anthony and Grizzlies
It was a strange game, including a decision by Coach Don Nelson to use a four-guard lineup during a key stretch of the fourth quarter.
If the Knicks had  lost to the expansion Vancouver Grizzlies, the night would have been even more bizarre.
However, a controversial call that went against against the Grizzlies' Greg Anthony with 10.3 seconds to play helped the Knicks hold on for a 98-93 victory  last night at Madison Square Garden.
Patrick Ewing (13 points, 16 rebounds) had  a key tip-in with 30.5 seconds left that gave New York the lead for good.


Some new English-language magazines are aimed at Hispanic readers earning more than $30,000.
UPWARDLY mobile, college-educated Hispanic readers used to have a limited choice of national magazines that spoke directly to them in English.
But two new magazines aimed at middle-class and affluent Hispanic men and women have hit newsstands and mail boxes this year, and more are on the way.


Author's Heirs Challenge Hollywood's Accounting
Rhe estate of an author has sued the seven major Hollywood movie studios, charging that their arcane accounting methods amount to collusion and price-fixing.
The class-action antitrust lawsuit was filed on Friday by the heirs of Jim Garrison, whose book "On the Trail of the Assassin" was the foundation of the 1991 Oliver Stone film "J.F.K." According to the suit in Superior Court here, Warner Brothers, a unit of Time Warner Inc., says that the movie has not earned  any money under the studio's "net profits" accounting formula.


Market Place;Have Investors Lost Appetite For Chips?
The stock market is setting records, and so are personal computer sales.
Why, then, are the shares of chip makers falling?
Last week, the semiconductor stocks retreated across the board.
Investors paid little attention to various companies' market niches, to recent strong profits or to anything else.
They were selling silicon, from the memory-chip specialist Micron Technology, down nearly 15 percent for the week, to the microprocessor champ Intel, down 8 percent.


Gore Says U.S. Will Keep Troop Strength in Japan at 47,000
Vice President Al Gore, filling in for President Clinton, reiterated today that the United States would maintain its troop level in Japan at 47,000, but he said Washington would consider moving some of them from Okinawa to other parts of the country.
"The American people strongly support continued U.S. presence here in Asia,"  Mr.
Gore said at a news conference after a 50-minute meeting with Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama.
The Vice President said he and Mr.
Murayama had reaffirmed the importance of the troops to peace and stability in Asia.


World Court Weighs Legality of Atomic War
The International Court of Justice has completed three weeks of hearings on a question that some view as purely theoretical and others say could determine the future of humanity: Are there any circumstances under which the use of nuclear weapons is legal?
Several governments presented powerful arguments citing the devastating effects of nuclear weapons and saying that they must be considered illegal under existing environmental and human rights treaties even though they have not been  explicitly banned.


New York City Agencies Should Bear Liability
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 15 front-page article on unlicensed taxi drivers and the news article on accident-prone bus drivers show all too well how New Yorkers are not  safe walking our streets or riding in cabs and Transit Authority buses.


Palestinian Militants Planning To Enter West Bank Elections
As Yasir Arafat formally extended Palestinian self-rule to this city today, his Muslim opponents said they would form a political party to run in planned Palestinian elections.
The news was warmly welcomed by the Palestinian Authority as a significant step toward an accord with Hamas, under which the militant Islamic group would suspend violent attacks and join the political process.


Russia's Barren Politics
It is disheartening, if not unsurprising, to learn that frivolous political campaigning is now among the primary American exports to Russia.
As Russians move gingerly toward democracy and capitalism, the arrival of vacuous political  campaigns was probably inevitable.
The growth of inflation and violent crime was a warning that the transition from Communism would not be painless.
Still, it seems a pity that these early years of Russian democracy should now be cursed by the kind of superficial politics that has made Americans despair about their own political process.
As Alessandra Stanley reported last week in The Times, next month's parliamentary elections have brought a wave of slick television advertising and  Hollywood campaign stunts that might make even Madison Avenue image makers blanch.


A City Ballet Benefit
The New York City Ballet will open its season tomorrow night with a benefit that includes the premiere of "Dvorak Bagatelles," a ballet by Kevin O'Day.
The  program, at the New York State Theater, also has works of George Balanchine: "Theme and Variations," "Diamonds Pas de Deux," "Allegro Brillante" and the snow scene from "The Nutcracker." The performance, beginning at 7:30 P.M., will be followed by a dinner-dance with a Russian theme.


CHRONICLE
RITA DOVE, a former Poet Laureate of the United States, is making her stage debut tonight, and the words in rhyme she will be saying are her own.
Ms.
Dove is the author of a verse play, "The Darker Face of the Earth," which is based on "Oedipus Rex" and set on a Southern plantation before the Civil War.
A staged reading, directed by DEREK WALCOTT, the Nobel Prize-winning poet, and starring BARBARA FELDON, will be performed at the 92d Street Y's Unterberg Poetry Center.
"I had to shorten the play for this reading, and I decided to write in an ancient version of my own real role, that of poet troubadour," Ms.
Dove said the other day.
"I am not exactly the narrator but an all-seeing chorus who comments  on the action."


How the Earlier Media Achieved Critical Mass: World Wide Web;If Medium Is the Message, the Message Is the Web
The Associated Press was formed in the mid-19th century when a group of newspapers decided to invest jointly in a newfangled medium -- the telegraph --  to speed the collection and dissemination of information.
Last week, A.P. announced that it would adopt a newer-fangled medium -- the World Wide Web -- to begin distributing its articles and photographs over the global Internet.
It was simply the latest, but perhaps most historically significant, move yet by an old-line media organization into the World Wide Web, the Internet multimedia information-retrieval system that appears on the verge of becoming a mass medium itself.


Rig Count Up by 10
The number of rigs exploring for oil and natural gas rose to 779 last week, up 10 from the previous week but below the total of 839 a year earlier, according to Baker Hughes Inc.
The number of rigs drilling on land fell by 1, to 649, while rigs working offshore rose by 7, to 107, the oilfield services company reported.
The number of rigs active in inland waters rose by 4, to 23.
The weekly count reflects the number of rigs exploring for, not those producing, oil and gas.


Excerpts From President's Comments on Budget Deal
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's remarks yesterday on the agreement to end the partial shutdown of the Federal Government, delivered in the White House press briefing room:
I have made clear from the beginning my principles in this budget debate.
We  must balance the budget, but we must do it in a way that is good for our economy and that maintains our values.
That means we have to do it without devastating cuts in Medicare and Medicaid, in education and the environment.
And we have to  do it without raising taxes on working families.


Princess of Wales Talks (on the Record)
ABC News will broadcast the Princess of Wales's first solo, on-the-record interview on Friday.
In the interview by the British Broadcasting Corporation, which is being broadcast today in Britain, the estranged wife of Britain's Prince Charles speaks frankly about her life, her marriage and her plans for the future.


Efforts to End Job Preferences Are Faltering
The drive to outlaw California's affirmative action programs has run into serious political and financial difficulties, and similar efforts elsewhere in the country, most inspired by the one in California, have also lost momentum.
Though polls show that a majority of Americans have strong reservations about the fairness of employment, contracting and college-admission programs that reach out to women and minorities, the push to kill such programs outright has failed thus far to stir much definitive legislative action or to draw the large  amounts of money and manpower needed to conduct petition drives.


Cities Too Suffer Billboard Blight;Bud Shuster's Byway
To the Editor:
"Billboard Blight" (editorial, Nov. 14) states that less than 1 percent of American roads are designated "scenic" highways.
In the transportation spending  bill, Representative Bud Shuster of Pennsylvania, House Transportation Committee chairman, allowed states complete discretion in exemptions for billboards in commercial or industrial sections.
He refused to drop this in negotiations with  the Senate.


Abroad at Home;No Peace Without Justice
Judge Richard Goldstone, the chief war crimes prosecutor, has asked that any  peace agreement for Bosnia call for surrender of the indicted Bosnian Serb leaders, Radovan Karadzic and Gen.
Ratko Mladic.
I asked Judge Goldstone whether that was a practical idea.
Could the Americans guiding the Dayton negotiations make it the price of peace?
"If they don't," Judge Goldstone said, "I don't think there will be peace. Any agreement will break down.


Kean Returned to Surgery
Former Gov.
Thomas Kean was back in the operating room yesterday for repair of an artery that was punctured last week during an operation to unclog a blocked artery near his heart.
Betty Mills, a spokeswoman for Morristown Memorial Hospital, said last night that Mr.
Kean was "resting comfortably" and in stable condition after the one-hour operation.
Mr.
Kean, the 60-year-old president of Drew University, was admitted to the  hospital on Thursday because of chest pains.
To clear the blocked artery that showed up in tests, doctors inserted a device carrying a balloon into his femoral artery, in the groin area, and threaded it through the artery to the heart.
Ms.
Mills said doctors expected Mr.
Kean to be able to go home on Thursday.


Stewart Is the Hero In Steeler Comeback
Steelers 49, Bengals 31


Japanese Stocks Higher
Japanese stocks rallied here today after the White House and Congressional Republicans agreed to end the partial shutdown of the United States Government.
The dollar rose against the yen and United States bond prices increased here.
The Nikkei index of 226 issues closed up 232.66 points, or 1.28 percent, at 18,383.82.
On Friday, the Nikkei was up 211.64 points.


Back to School for Judges
Most criminal and civil matters around the state will be put on hold today, tomorrow and Wednesday, while Superior, Appellate, Tax and Supreme Court judges  attend the state's annual Judicial College.


1,000 Honor Kunstler, Defender of Their Faith
Mordechai Levy shouted across Amsterdam Avenue, "William Kunstler is where he belongs!" setting off a heated exchange between Mr.
Levy, a leader of the Jewish Defense Organization, and a few of the people filing into the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine for a Kunstler tribute.
A few feet away stood a friend and frequent ally of the late Mr.
Kunstler, Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, who had come to defend Mr.
Levy's right to speak.
Aboard a double-decker sightseeing bus, two Spanish women gaped at the confrontation.
One turned to the other and said in Spanish, "That's how it is in America."


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of bills and notes,  beginning with today's auctions of new three- and six-month bills and three-year notes.
On Tuesday, the Treasury will auction a 10-year note.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.33 percent and on a six-month bill, 5.24 percent.
In when-issued trading, the three-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 5.52 percent, and a 10-year note at a rate to yield 5.87 percent.


An Ugly Loss Has the Giants Feuding
When quarterback Dave Brown and running back Tyrone Wheatley fumbled an exchange on a handoff near the Giants' goal line this afternoon, Brown came off  the field and Giants Coach Dan Reeves approached him.
Soon the two men were engaged in a heated shouting match, with Reeves jabbing his finger into the shoulder pads of Brown and Brown not backing down but yelling back.
"Well, they fumbled the exchange," Reeves said after the game.
"I don't know  if Tyrone didn't have control or what. It was just on the exchange. You never know. I wasn't blaming Dave on the sidelines. Those things happen. It just hurt  us at a crucial time."


A Good Start Toward Medical Privacy
Americans have a right to expect that their medical records will be private,  but that legitimate expectation is often unwarranted.
Careless health providers, medical workers improperly peddling data to outsiders, commercial and government databanks and even well-intentioned but inadequately regulated researchers may compromise patient rights.
The nation needs comprehensive Federal legal rules both to protect individuals and to encourage leakproof communication of health data.
Bipartisan supporters of a new Medical Records Confidentiality Act have made  a strong start.
The bill, endorsed by the Senate's Republican and Democratic leaders, would declare the privacy right and create safeguards.
It needs strengthening, especially when health care reform is adding to the new demands for medical information.


Ex-Communist Appears to Best Walesa for President of Poland
In the most stunning result since the end of Communism in Eastern Europe, a telegenic, 41-year-old former Communist appeared set to defeat Lech Walesa, the  icon of democracy and anti-Communism, in Poland's presidential election today, early results showed.
The outcome of the election, the second democratic ballot for President since the fall of the Communists, teetered all night and would probably be decided by  as few as several thousand votes, analysts said.


A Day of Grace


Nuremberg Journal;War's Crimes and Punishments, Then and Now
Courtroom 600 in the Palace of Justice here has not changed much over the years.


Fender Buys Guitar Maker
The Fender Musical Instruments Corporation, one of the most famous names in guitars, has acquired the Guild guitar unit of the U.S.
Music Corporation.
The two closely held companies did not disclose the terms of the transaction.
Guild, based in Westerly, R.I., makes acoustic guitars.
Fender, based here, is one of the largest makers of electric guitars and amplifiers.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Evolution of Anton Webern, Romantic, Serialist and Distiller The Parisii Quartet Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Sports of The Times;A Five-Set Match States Women's Case
FIRST came the news from Frankfurt, where Boris Becker had taken out Michael  Chang to win the men's season-ending title.
Steffi Graf had not yet hit a warm-up serve, and already she was the second-ranked tennis story in her own land.
Then came Graf's first set against her compatriot Anke Huber.
Graf won 18 of  the first 24 points.
She needed 26 minutes -- four for an injury timeout -- for  an unwatchable 6-1 romp.


Controlled Recklessness And Frida Kahlo Images
The two new works that the Limon Dance Company presented on Friday night have little in common, and their choreographers, Ralph Lemon and Donald McKayle, seem at first glance unrelated to the company's family tree.
Mr.
Lemon uses a brilliant commissioned score by Anthony Davis to create a pure-dance piece in which the dancers spill across the stage like paint on canvas.
The work's title, which sounds like a sound bite from E. E. Cummings, is "Pale Grass and Blue, and Then Red."


Assembly Weighs Tobacco Bill
Just in case young people cannot just say no to nicotine and alcohol, the Legislature is trying to help.
Today an Assembly committee will review a bill that would give the state health commissioner the power to enforce state law prohibiting tobacco sales to anyone under 18.
Right now it is up to local police departments.
The Judiciary, Law and Public Safety Committee will also take up a  bill that would bar anyone under 21 from consuming alcohol on private property.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Softly, a Mahler Farewell; Not So Softly, an Audience's Boston Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Open Alaska's Wildlife Refuge
As President Clinton and Congressional leaders sort out their differences on  the budget reconciliation bill, there's one provision on which both sides can be a winner: environmentally responsible development in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
Oil and gas likely hidden under this remote sliver of land along Alaska's far northeast corner could make a major dent in the nation's budget and trade deficits and create hundreds of thousands of jobs, most in the continental United States.
Despite predictions by some environmentalists, developing the refuge can be done right.


Premier Urges Irish to Vote For Legalizing Of Divorce
Five days before a national referendum on whether to remove Ireland's constitutional ban on divorce, Prime Minister John Bruton, in a calm but impassioned appeal, today urged this overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country to vote yes.
To vote against the change, he said, would tarnish Ireland's image as a friendly, tolerant place and would impede his efforts toward a peace settlement  in Northern Ireland, the predominantly Protestant British province where a majority fears the influence of the Catholic Church on the Catholic minority.


Florida Vote Has Created 3-Man Race, Rivals Say
After a bitterly contested straw poll in Florida that affirmed Senator Bob Dole as the front-runner for the Republican Presidential nomination, the two runners-up arrived today at a convention of Republican Governors here to argue that the contest had narrowed the field.
Mr.
Dole beat back his rivals in the nonbinding poll of 3,325 delegates at a  state party convention in Orlando, Fla., on Saturday, capturing 33 percent of the vote.
Mr.
Dole preserved his status as the leader of the field, but barely:  His aides had invested more time and money in the event than any other this year, hoping he would capture more than 40 percent, and hoping to put to rest the perception that his lead is precarious.


Governors In G.O.P. Urge Stand On Budget
Twenty-one of the nation's 30 Republican governors today urged the Republican-run Congress to insist on balancing the Federal budget in seven years, advising Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, not to blink in their showdown with President Clinton over the future direction of American Government.
In letters addressed to Mr.
Gingrich and Mr.
Dole, the members of the Republican Governors Association meeting here said that "the Republican-controlled Congress must stand firm, balance the budget and avoid the impending disaster that larger and larger deficit spending portends."


Welfare Reform That Can Work;For a New W.P.A.
To the Editor:
Intense disagreement over what to do about Government assistance to the poor  is a major cause of the budget crisis.
Eddy currents from this debate appear in  the comments by Charles Murray (Op-Ed, Nov. 14) and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (letter, Nov. 16), but nowhere is there a credible solution to the problems of poverty, crime and the wasted potential of the unemployed.


Sports of The Times;With N.Y., N.Y. at 5-17, Turn Down the Volume
THE Jets were 2 yards from a tie and overtime.
But when Adrian Murrell turned for Boomer Esiason's pass on the 2-point conversion attempt after time had expired, Bills cornerback Thomas Smith batted the ball away.
Another loss, 28-26.
Leon Hess had asked for "results now" when he hired Rick Kotite as coach.
But with those results at 2-9, with all the frustration of other recent seasons, has the Jets' 81-year-old oil-baron owner given any thought to selling the franchise?


The Multimedia Beatles
Repurpose: v.t. 1) To take a creative work originally intended for use in one medium and alter it to suit the needs of another medium. 2) To take works of art or their component parts and rearrange them to fulfill a new objective. "I decided to repurpose my 'Wired' columns into a book." -- Nicholas Negroponte. cf. CONTENT, CONTENT PROVIDER, SAMPLING.


CBS News Defends Killing of Interview
CBS News yesterday defended its decision not to run a "60 Minutes" interview  about the tobacco industry, saying the piece posed enough legal risks to justify blocking its broadcast.
In a memo to company employees, Eric Ober, the president of CBS News, said some of the reaction to management's decision had been "highly inappropriate," and he urged staff members to put the controversy behind them.


Clinton in Political Quandary on Welfare
Moments after the Senate overwhelmingly voted in September to end 60 years of Federal social policy and impose a five-year limit on welfare benefits, the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, exchanged a triumphant high-five slap with Rahm I. Emanuel, a Presidential aide.
The Clinton Administration had been bitterly divided over whether the President should support this bill, but on this day, the closest aides to the President saw the Senate action as a victory.


No Headline
What we've agreed to in a very bipartisan, non-partisan way is a very satisfactory conclusion to what has been a very tense situation the last several days. -- BOB DOLE, Senate Majority Leader. [B8:1.]
Tomorrow the government will go back to work and now the debate will begin in earnest on how to balance the budget in a way that is consistent with the interests and the values of the American people. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON. [B8:1.]


Corrections
An article on Nov. 11 about lobbying in the drug industry misspelled the surname of a lobbyist and named his organization incorrectly.
He is Martin Machowsky, not Machovsky; the group is Issue Analysis Inc.


Cabby's Every Trip Was Too Bountiful
The cab fare was $3, and the woman paid with a $5 bill.
The driver, Raymond Colucci, his voice full of hushed innocence, turned from the wheel and told the  woman she had given him only a single, which he handed over.
The woman, skeptical but rushed, handed back a $10 bill.
Mr.
Colucci gave her $6 in change  after the woman told him he could keep a dollar for a tip.
The back-seat math worked out this way: a $3 taxi ride had cost the woman $8.


Militants Don't Live In Borough Park
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick (column, Nov. 13) brings out in her interview with Colette Avital, the Israeli Consul General, the stereotyping and invective that have been leveled at the Orthodox Jewish communities in New York and Israel since the peace process began in 1993.


Taking In the Sites;Browsing The Web Toys At Comdex
Comdex, the giant annual computer show, came to Las Vegas, Nev., last week decked out in the latest Internet fashions: an entire section was set aside just for Internet-related products and services.
And World Wide Web browsers were the centerpiece of the exhibits.
While the  Netscape Communications Corporation's Navigator was clearly the star of the show, a number of other Web browsers drew large crowds of gawkers and tire kickers.


It's More Like Wake Than Game For Browns
Even for the victorious Green Bay Packers, Cleveland Stadium was a dreary place to be.
"It was an eerie feeling," Packers Coach Mike Holmgren said today after Brett Favre passed for three touchdowns and ran for another to beat the Browns, 31-20.
"It was kind of a gray day. There was a sense there like you were almost sleepwalking."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Charles Gordone, the first black playwright to win the Pulitzer Prize, omitted a survivor.
She is his sister Shirley Gordon Jackson of Duarte, Calif.


Little Help for the Homeless
Advocates for the homeless accuse the Giuliani administration of keeping people out of shelters, then chasing them from one public place to another.
A recent story in The Times seemed to reinforce their argument that many of the homeless are on a forced march to nowhere.
City officials deny the charge.
But new rules that will govern many of New York's homeless suggest that the city may be more interested in minimizing the shelter population than in providing the services necessary to help people back to normal lives.
Imposed by the state at Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's request, the new rules permit the city to charge modest rent for many shelter-dwellers and require them to participate in drug and alcohol addiction programs as well as programs that will help them find housing and jobs.
Those who fail to cooperate can be excluded from city shelters.
The rules make good sense on paper.
What makes no sense is the rush to enforce them before the necessary social services have been put in place.


Corrections
A map on Saturday showing stores and restaurants on Columbus Avenue that have closed during construction on the steet designated one store incorrectly.
Hero's Journey is a gift shop, not a restaurant.
It moved to 2440 Broadway at 90th Street; it did not go out of business.


A Kidnapping Suspect Foiled a Hijacking
A woman who was charged with kidnapping Saturday in the temporary disappearance of a 4-year-old boy is the same person who helped foil a bus hijacking in the Bronx last August, the police said.
In the latest incident, the woman, Milagros Colon, was caring for Antonio Sosa, on Friday morning, said Doram Tamari, a police spokesman.


Patents;Data base software that analyzes molecules for potential applications and learns from the process.
IN the hunt for new drugs, scientists examine millions of molecules, hoping to find one with the right cell receptor or the right electrical charge to tackle a disease or disorder.
In the last couple of years, computers have eased this task considerably, and researchers have embraced new methods of simulating the molecules to avoid wasting time with the real thing until they believe they have one with potential.
Now a small Pennsylvania pharmaceutical company has won a patent for software that creates a digital data base of simulated molecules, analyzes them for leads to new drugs and then feeds those analyses back into the computer to help create even more molecules.
The patent is based on a technique called combinatorial chemistry and could give the company broad rights to a method already used in the pharmaceutical and biochemical industries.


How the Earlier Media Achieved Critical Mass: Printing Press;Yelling 'Stop the Presses!' Didn't Happen Overnight
Though the Chinese invented printing, in the West the printing press dates to around 1450.
But it took two inventions of the Industrial Revolution -- the steam engine and the telegraph -- to turn it into what we would now define as a  mass medium: one that can reach all segments of a population quickly and at a relatively low cost.
All these elements did not come together until about 100 years ago.
Until the 19th century, books were printed on hand-operated presses.
So were  newspapers.
All those famous early journalists -- Daniel Defoe, Jonathan Swift,  Samuel Johnson, Benjamin Franklin -- saw their work coming off flat presses, slowly.


Marguerite Young, 87, Author and Icon, Dies
Marguerite Young, the Indiana-born writer who became a darling of the avant-garde and inspired a devoted cult following even as she infuriated and confounded mainstream critics with a single gargantuan novel, died on Friday at  the home of a niece in Indianapolis.
She was 87.
Miss Young, a longtime New School writing teacher who began her literary career as an award-winning poet and ended it as a critic, essayist and biographer, was a respected literary figure and cherished Greenwich Village eccentric well before Scribners published her one and only novel, "Miss MacIntosh, My Darling," in 1965.


Philip Bernstein, 84, Jewish Civic Leader
Philip Bernstein, a leader in virtually every facet of American Jewish cultural, civic and philanthropic life as chief executive of the Council of Jewish Federations from 1955 to 1979, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
A native of Cleveland who graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree from Case Western Reserve University, Mr.
Bernstein spent his entire career working with Jewish organizations, initially in Cleveland and after 1943 in New York with the national council.
The organization coordinates the activities of about 200 central community groups, which raise $750 million a year for a range of charities in the United States and abroad.


News Reports Of Informer On Far Right Jolt Israel
Reports that the leader of the far-right group to which Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assassin belonged was an informer for the Israeli secret service set off fresh shock waves today, including demands from rightists for a full accounting of what exactly the supposed agent did.
There was no comment from the Cabinet or the General Security Service, the domestic secret service better known as the Shin Bet.


Cramer-Krasselt Wins Account
The Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. in Lebanon, Tenn., which operates more than 230 restaurants in 26 states, selected Cramer-Krasselt in Chicago to handle its account, which had been at the Buntin Group in Nashville for the last six years.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.
Cramer-Krasselt was awarded the account last week after a month-and-a-half review that also included Buntin, Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis and Tucker Wayne Luckie in Atlanta.


2 of Brazil's Big Banks Combine Operations
Brazil's central bank said this weekend that Banco Nacional had been taken over by Unibanco, ending speculation about a possible merger and creating one of the country's largest privately owned banks.
Banco Nacional said it paid about 1 billion reals, or $1.04 billion.
Unibanco had been Brazil's sixth-largest bank and Nacional was seventh.
Each  had total assets of about $13 billion at the end of 1994.
The new Unibanco will  be one of Brazil's three largest private banks.


CHRONICLE
Sister WENDY BECKETT is a Carmelite nun who has lived in solitude for 23 years in England, praying seven hours a day.
But she is also a popular figure on British television, one whose commentaries on art, seen on the BBC, have elevated her to cult status.
She is currently touring museums on the East Coast, taping two segments of a  10-part television series titled "The Story of Painting," which the BBC is producing with WGBH/ Boston.


Kean Requires Minor Surgery On an Artery
Former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean underwent minor surgery today to repair an artery  damaged during an emergency procedure last week to unclog a blocked artery near  his heart, hospital officials said.
Betty Mills, a spokeswoman for Morristown Memorial Hospital, said last night  that the former Governor was "resting comfortably" and in stable condition after the one-hour operation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-11


Paine Webber Ousts Broker Over Remarks
Paine Webber Inc. has dismissed a broker, Whitney Boucher, after he was quoted in a magazine article making disparaging remarks about his clients, Paine Webber brokers and the firm's mutual funds and research.
The unit of Paine Webber Group Inc. dismissed Mr.
Boucher last week from his  job in the firm's office in Providence, R.I., because of remarks that appeared in the December issue of Smart Money magazine, a spokeswoman for the firm said.


Brooklyn Union


No Headline
A suicide bomber rammed a pickup truck packed with explosives into the gate of the Egyptian Embassy in Islamabad today, killing 15 people and wounding 59 others.
Islamic militants claimed responsibility.
Most of the dead were Pakistani security guards and people applying for visas.
One Egyptian diplomat was also killed, hospital officials said.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Banshee, a Coiled Spring And a Choreographic Debut Miki Orihara Space Unlimited


Cowboys Get Healthy in a Hurry Against Raiders
The Dallas Cowboys' offense opened against the Raiders today with Troy Aikman tossing a pass in the flat to Emmitt Smith.
Smith dropped it.
Then Dallas opted  for a pitch to Smith.
He lost 5 yards.
And then Aikman tried a deep pass down the right sideline to Michael Irvin.
Raiders cornerback Terry McDaniel said "get real" and quickly broke that up.
The Raiders' offense opened frigidly, too.
This looked as if it would be a defensive masterpiece.
It looked as if it would be one of those 6-3 games in which first downs are silver and field goals are gold.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Learning From a Cheat And Using the Lessons 'A Family Affair' Theater for a New City


Giants Are Falling Apart, on the Field and on the Sideline
Losing seasons tend to produce sideshows.
That may explain why the Giants, getting worse by the week, have now turned into something resembling the bearded lady at the circus.
Yes, the Giants lost today to the Philadelphia Eagles, 28-19, to drop their record to a dismal 3-8.
But the real news was provided by Coach Dan Reeves, who  let it be known that he would not remain with the Giants when his contract expires two years from now if the team's current management structure remains intact.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW FOSTER-CARE PLAN STIRS CONCERN


RESULTS PLUS
PRO FOOTBALL


P.S.E.&amp; G. Plans to Trim Payroll
One of New Jersey's biggest employers is getting smaller.
Public Service Electric &amp; Gas Company wants to shed at least 1,000 middle managers and maybe other employees.


For Rollins, The Swing Is Gentle
A concert by the tenor saxophonist Sonny Rollins is one of the great American adventures: no one knows where it is going, but it usually involves some sense of newness, exploration and humor.
Mr.
Rollins is one of jazz's most generous performers, and the audience at the Beacon Theater on Saturday night received him and his band as if they were from on high, even if the music, for the most part, was only mortal.
Mr.
Rollins isn't known for his consistency, and he had a subdued night.
But  even on an off night, he is better than the rest of us.
Mr.
Rollins's time -- where he placed phrases -- generated rhythmic tension without his resorting to riffs.
Phrases slid, only to dig in, deeply.
He constructed complicated arabesques that always resolved to a fine, swinging note.
But his improvisations never crested, rarely reaching a level of euphoria that he has virtually trademarked.


Bridge
The first two major championships were decided here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
The Life Master Open Pair title was won, narrowly, by Bart Bramley of Chicago and John Sutherlin of Dallas, two veterans who have won many titles but had never before played together in a national event.
The leaders were: 1st Bramley and Sutherlin 1644.97 match points; 2d Mark Itabashi of Murrietta, Calif., and Gene Simpson of Redlands, Calif., 1637.69; 3d Phyllis Rye of Jamaica Plain, Mass., and Charles Coon of Gloucester, Mass., 1624.9, and 4th Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and Richard Freeman of Atlanta 1618.75
In the Life Master Women's Pairs the victory went to Susan Miller of Boca Raton, Fla., and Flo Rotman of Aventura, Fla.
They both have husbands, Bernie Miller and Dan Rotman, who are even better known on the national scene.
The standings were: 1st Miller and Rotman 857.47; 2d Lila Perlstein of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y. 818.47; 3d Diana Schuld of Glen Head, L.I.; and Cyn Hinckley of Guayanobo, P.R. 784.2; 4th Pam Wittes of Los Alamitos, Calif., and Stasha Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J. 760.44.


Lovable Grotesques at the Soap for Life Company
THE MULCHING OF AMERICA By Harry Crews 268 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


A Smooth Operator Takes His Last Fare
Raymond Colucci goes against the image of the New York cabdriver: ever polite, he lives in a nice house on Long Island and was always ready with a smile.
But he has also been declared one of the city's 10 worst cabbies, a master at relieving passengers of their money.
Now, he has been permanently banned from driving a cab on city streets.
Article, page B2.


Information Democracy
A recent survey of what the Department of Commerce calls the "information have nots" revealed that about 20 percent of America's poorest families do not have telephones -- and that only a fraction of those who do have phones can afford the computers and peripherals needed to participate fully in the information age.
The New York Public Library struck a blow for equal access last week when it  introduced Leo -- Library Entrance On Line -- a new computer system in local libraries that will allow visitors to keep track of the library's 50 million holdings and search the Internet, free of charge, for the gigabytes of information held there.


U.S. TELLS LEADERS OF BALKAN STATES TO WIND UP TALKS
In a high-stakes gamble to end nearly four years of war and terror in Bosnia, the United States said on Sunday that it would shut down the peace talks near here today whether or not the parties resolve their remaining differences.
As the talks continued into the early morning hours at the Wright-Patterson Air Base outside the city, senior Administration officals said the partiesd appeared to be edging toward an agreement.
"This is the ultimate psycho-drama, but we're getting there," an American negotiator said.


Carjacking Suspect Arrested in Chase
A Brooklyn woman sitting in a car in Greenwich Village found herself in the middle of a police chase early yesterday after a man jumped into the car and drove off, the police said.
Her companion, a 32-year-old Brooklyn man, was inside a store about midnight  when he saw the car take off, said Officer Valerie St.
Rose, a police spokeswoman.


Wolfgang Puck To a Deutsch Unit
The Wolfgang Puck Food Company in Santa Monica, Calif., named Deutsch Los Angeles in Santa Monica to handle its account, which had been at Kresser Stein Robaire in Santa Monica for the last two years.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.


Public School Enrollment
Public school enrollment in the region has risen sharply as a baby boom that  peaked at the start of the decade continues to fill kindergarten classes.
The number of kindergartners in the region for the last school year was up almost 20 percent from 10 years ago.
In the suburbs, new residential development and immigration also helped to increase total public school enrollment.
In New York  City the increase is largely a result of immigration.


When Murdoch Moves, Fleet Street Follows
When Rupert Murdoch moves, the British newspaper industry shakes, a lesson that was pounded home here again last week.
News International, the British subsidiary of Mr.
Murdoch's Australia-based company the News Corporation, said on Thursday that it had decided to cease publication of Today, a 10-year-old tabloid that had rung up losses throughout its existence.


Saharan Rebel Peace Move
The Polisario Front, a rebel group fighting for the independence of Western Sahara, said today that it had handed over 185 Moroccan prisoners of war to the  Red Cross.
The group said it had been willing to release the Moroccans in 1989, but that Morocco had refused to take them at the time.
Western Sahara is a former Spanish colony claimed by Morocco, and Morocco and the Polisario have been fighting for  control of the area for two decades.


For Bosnia's President, An Agonizing Choice
Twice before, Alija Izetbegovic, the President of Bosnia, has signed agreements on the division of his country, only to fight on for the unitary state of which he dreams.
Today, after 43 months of conflict, he faced the same  agonizing choice between an imperfect peace and an uphill war.
The American-brokered peace he is now being offered falls far short of the "liberation" of Bosnia of which he has often spoken.
It would involve a de facto division of Bosnia with almost the half the country going to the Serbs and the deployment of about 60,000 NATO troops along the dividing line.


A Complaint Board Chief Will Face Many Hurdles
When the Civilian Complaint Review Board was re-created in New York City more than two years ago amid bitter protests from police officers, many of the civil  rights advocates who fought for it thought they had at last found a way to hold  officers accountable for their actions.
But since then, the agency has been plagued by a backlog of misconduct allegations that now number more than 3,000, by reports that fail to analyze the incidents thoroughly and by a staff shortage that has left almost a third of the agency's positions vacant.


Boeing and Striking Union Reach Tentative Pact
The Boeing Company and its largest union reached a tentative agreement today  to end a strike that began six and a half weeks ago.
Leaders of the union, the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, were recommending that members approve the agreement in a vote set for Tuesday.
Workers could be back on the job at Boeing, the world's largest commercial jet maker, on Wednesday.


How the Earlier Media Achieved Critical Mass: Television;Lucy Sure Didn't Start It, But She Has Stuck to It
Milton Berle may have been its first big star, but television's "killer app"  was the coast-to-coast network broadcast.
The capability of beaming a single program into every city, town and rural hamlet in America changed the very nature of the medium -- from a quirky, eclectic, mainly urban phenomenon to a coolly efficient entertainment-delivery system aimed at the widest possible audience.
For better or for worse, it turned television into the unstoppable financial and cultural force that it is today.


As His Team Sinks, a Coach Talks of Jumping Ship
Given the opportunity to lash out at his coach, Giants quarterback Dave Brown took the high road.
After another emotionally draining loss, in which Brown and  Giants Coach Dan Reeves got into a heated argument on the sideline, Brown was asked what his relationship with Reeves was like.
"I'm a player and he's the coach," Brown said.
"I think he's a good man. We have a good working relationship."


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Thursday about the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation's takeover of a pension fund covering employees at United Press International misidentified the legal entity that was $5 million short of  the money needed to provide coverage.
It was the fund itself, not U.P.I.


BUSINESS DIGEST
For the World Wide Web, Move Up to a Mass Medium Three years ago, the World Wide Web was little more than a research tool for physicists and computer hobbyists.
Today, corporations are rushing to stake out  its prime real estate, even reserving addresses like flu.com and toiletpaper.com.
But a more serious measure of the Web's emergence as possibly the next mass medium was the announcement that The Associated Press would use it to distribute articles and photographs on the Internet.
The plan represents a significant move onto the Web by an old-line news organization. [Page A1.] For print, film, radio and television, the transition from mere technological marvel to mass medium came in a few defining moments -- from the appearance of the Gutenberg Bible to the first coast-to-coast network broadcast. [D5.]


Japan Pays for Defense, to Advantage of U.S.
To the Editor:
Re "Japan's State Symbols: Now You See Them . . ." (Week in Review, Nov. 12): To state, as you do, that "Japan does not have its own full-fledged army," and "it still relies on America for its defense" is inaccurate and misleading.


The Web draws more magazines despite drawbacks (like a lack of profits).
THE recent announcement that Michael Kinsley, the former New Republic editor, had agreed to create an Internet-based magazine for Microsoft started the media  industry's beehive humming over the future of the World Wide Web as a medium for a new generation of magazine publishers.
The magazine industry, like all parts of the media, is eager to digitize its  offerings and display them on line.
But despite the buzz over Mr.
Kinsley's move to Microsoft, print magazines for a general readership will not make a smooth transition to the Web.


Tomba's Plan Is to Conquer World
Alberto Tomba has entered that blissful state in his mercurial ski-racing career where there is not much left to accomplish.
Yet there is a direction to his vision this season as never before.
It is pointed toward Sierra Nevada, Spain, where prospects for a world championship last season dissolved under a dearth of snow.
The event is rescheduled for Feb. 11-25.


Corrections
The lottery report in some copies yesterday included incorrect Friday numbers for New York's Pick 10 and Connecticut's Daily and Play 4.
The correct numbers appear today on page B2.


In Queens, the Spotlight as a Tool;Brown Keeps a High Profile With a Hands-On Approach
Richard A. Brown, the District Attorney for Queens, stood at a lectern before a throng of reporters, expressing outrage but clearly reveling in the spotlight  of his latest catch: 21 gang members accused of selling drugs on the streets of  Jamaica.
Several weeks later, Mr.
Brown was there again, voicing the same outrage.
Only now, the criminals were smaller time: drag racers wreaking havoc on the residential serenity of Fresh Meadows.


Foster Care Model Attracts New York -- But Only in Part
This summer, 4-year-old Richard telephoned his biological mother from the chaotic halls of Family Court to announce that he was no longer her son.
After a lifetime spent in the limbo of foster care, Richard had been adopted by his foster mother.
He had gained a permanent home.
It was a bittersweet moment for all involved, not the least of them Nancy Wright, the biological mother, who gave her blessing to the adoption.
She had only recently resurfaced in Richard's life, after years lost to drugs.
By most standards, Mrs.
Wright had forfeited her parental rights long ago.
By most standards, Richard, who tested positive for crack exposure at birth, should have been adopted long before he was.


These Workers Did Win Raises, But the Money Never Came
THERE is a good argument for giving Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and other top city officials the raises they want, unpopular as that may be.
The Mayor has made the case -- about being competitive and retaining good people and all that  -- about as effectively as he can in a city suffering through forced "downsizing."


Chess
Every year since his 80th birthday, Argentina's greatest player, Miguel Najdorf, has sponsored a tournament in his honor.
Last April, retired now except as an intrepid spectator who still travels the world, he turned 86.
Accordingly, he held the Sixth Miguel Najdorf Tournament, in Buenos Aires in late July.
Once again the field brought together the best Argentinian players and a selection of prominent foreigners.
And the guests made their presence known.
First place went to the 23-year-old Dutch grandmaster Loek Van Wely and the 25-year-old Spanish international master Pablo San Segundo after they both scored 7 1/2-3 1/2.
In addition, San Segundo achieved a grandmaster norm.


XPEDITE TO ACQUIRE FAX-SERVICE COMPANIES
Xpedite Systems Inc. said yesterday that it would acquire three fax-service companies for $73 million and expected to record a $53 million charge related to the deal.
Xpedite, also a fax-service provider, said it would acquire the Vitel  International Holding Company, Swift Global Communications Inc. and Comwave Communications A.G. from private investor groups for $50.5 million in cash, $5 million in notes and 1.25 million of Xpedite's common shares.
For the first nine months of this year, the acquired companies had total sales of about $41 million, Xpedite said, while it had revenues of about $36 million.


Executive Changes
CARILLON IMPORTERS LTD., Teaneck, N.J., a subsidiary of the International Distillers and Vintners Ltd. unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., promoted Jerry Ciraulo, senior vice president for finance and administration, to executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Even Before It Is Counted, Shutdown's Price Seems Big
While many returning Federal workers today rejoiced at resuming tasks they had left behind and others denounced Congress and the White House for playing politics with the Federal budget, Government accountants began trying to measure the costs of idling 800,000 people who, under the spending agreement, will not lose pay for the time they missed.
While an overall assessment of the shutdown is perhaps weeks away, the Office of Management and Budget today asked each Government agency to review of all costs associated with the shutdown.
A budget office spokesman said that material would have to be analyzed before a final price tag was determined.


Romania Begins Stock Trading
Shares traded today on the floor of the Bucharest stock exchange for the first time since the bourse was shut down by the Communists in 1948.
Stock worth about $6,000 changed hands today on the Bursa de Valori Bucuresti.
Most of the shares were in seven companies that are still largely state owned.


Toyota Is Offering Used-Car Warranty
The Toyota Motor Corporation said today that it would offer buyer-protection  warranties on used vehicles.
Toyota will join the Nissan Motor Company and General Motors Corporation's Saturn division as manufacturers offering warranties on used vehicles that are not luxury models.


Prosecution in the Menendez Retrial Rests
After 30 witnesses and 300 exhibits, the prosecution rested today in trying to prove to a jury that Erik and Lyle Menendez murdered their wealthy parents.
The brothers say they killed their parents, Jose and Kitty Menendez, in self-defense on Aug. 20, 1989.
The prosecution asserts that the brothers were after the family fortune.
Two juries, one for each man, deadlocked in the brothers' first trial last year.


Spun Mercury Is Eye of Telescope
SINCE Sir Isaac Newton invented the reflecting telescope three centuries ago, astronomical observatories have been largely dependent on huge and increasingly  costly light-collecting mirrors made of aluminum-coated glass.
But a new generation of mirrors based on silvery liquid mercury promises to drastically reduce the cost of cutting-edge astronomy.
The new mirrors are little more than rotating dishes containing small quantities of liquid mercury metal.
As the mirror dish at the base of a telescope rotates, centrifugal force counters the force of gravity on the heavy  fluid, pushing some of the mercury outward and upward toward the edge, curving its shiny surface into a perfect paraboloid.
By adjusting the speed of rotation, and hence the curvature of the mercury's surface, the focal length of the mirror can be adjusted.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


INTERCO AGREES TO BUY THOMASVILLE FURNITURE
Interco Inc. agreed to buy the Thomasville Furniture Industries unit of Armstrong World Industries for $331 million, the companies said yesterday.
As part of the transaction, expected to close by the end of the year, Interco will  also assume $8 million of the unit's debt.
Thomasville, based in Thomasville, N.C., and its subsidiaries had sales of $527 million and operating income of nearly $39 million in 1994.
Interco, a St.
Louis-based furniture maker and retailer, had sales of $1.07 billion and earnings of $38.3 million in 1994.
Armstrong World Industries, a Lancaster, Pa., maker of interior furnishings, has been streamlining its operations.
The company announced in September that it was also considering selling its textile products segment.


Giuliani Sues City Comptroller Over Sale of Water System
Making good on an earlier threat, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council have filed suit against City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, seeking to force him to approve their plans to sell the city's water system to a quasi-public agency.
The suit, filed on Friday and announced yesterday, represents an unusual alliance between the Giuliani administration and the Council, who have twice gone to court against each other, battling over their powers.
In this case, however, both want to spend the money that would come from the sale, and they assert that the Comptroller exceeded his authority in blocking it.


Man in the News: Aleksander Kwasniewski;Walesa's Nemesis
When Poland imposed martial law in 1981, which sent the strike leader Lech Walesa and thousands of others to jail, an ambitious young Communist Party newspaper editor wrote an editorial neither approving nor condemning what the Government had just done.
"It seems important right now for Poles to reject emotions and myths and concentrate on genuine social and state interests," suggested Aleksander Kwasniewski after one of the most traumatic periods in Polish history.


Chelsea Piers Offer High-Price Amenities
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger (Weekend, Nov. 17) calls the new Chelsea Piers a compromise between those who wanted a public park on the waterfront and those who wanted development.
Some compromise.


SMITH CORONA CALLS OFF SALE TO EMPIRE CAPITAL
The Smith Corona Corporation said yesterday that it had terminated the agreeement reached on Oct. 24 to sell its business to a group led by the Empire  Capital Corporation.
The company said Empire, based in Southport, Conn., did not fulfill requirements for the sale.
Smith Corona's chief executive, Ronald F. Stengel, said the company, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on July 5, was continuing talks with other parties.
Smith Corona, based in New Canaan, Conn., is a leading maker of word processors, electric typewriters, fax  machines, label printers and other office products.


The Senate's Highway Cave-In
The National Highway System bill that Congress passed last weekend was called a compromise between the Senate and House.
It was less compromise than cave-in by the Senate, which acquiesced on highway billboard blight, safety and the distribution of precious dollars.
There was no contest over the bill's original purpose, to designate 161,000 miles of roads as the nation's prime routes, freeing more than $6 billion in Federal construction funds.
The two bodies also never disagreed about letting states set their own speed limits and decide whether to require motorcyclists to wear helmets.


Nassau Cautiously Optimistic As Deficit Drops 3d Year in Row
Despite a $9 million shortfall in sales tax revenues and $21 million in cuts  in state aid, Nassau County closed out fiscal 1995 with a deficit of only $2.4 million, a small fraction of its record $120 million deficit in 1992, officials  reported today.
"Nassau has shown steady and measurable fiscal improvement for the third successive year," said Fred Parola, the County Comptroller.
He said the deficit  was less than one-quarter of 1 percent of Nassau's 1995 budget of $1.142 billion.


Two Large Banks Announce Reviews
Two large banks said yesterday that they had placed their accounts in review.
The European American Bank and Trust unit of ABN Amro Bank of Amsterdam is talking to agencies on its account, which has been handled by Christopher Thomas Associates in Garden City, L.I., for almost four years.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $8 million to $10 million.


By Design;Topping It Off With a Hat
In winter, hats become a necessity.
This year, they also serve as a lively counterpoint to fashionably understated classic coats.
Bloomingdale's has an oversize leopard-print structured hat with a black peak, from Two Girls New York City ($45).
Henri Bendel's delightful hat shop has a red satin Chinese-print modified pillbox with fake fur trim and strings at the back tied into a bow, by Deborah Rhodes ($150).


CHRONICLE
FRANK SINATRA joined a stage crowded with entertainers for a chorus of "New York, New York" during the taping Sunday of a tribute for his 80th birthday, The Associated Press reported.
The birthday is Dec. 12.
Artists from rap performers to opera stars came to the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles for the two-hour ABC special that will be shown Dec. 14.


Limited Engagement For Jets' Odd Couple
Boomer Esiason and Johnny Mitchell had a dramatic reunion on Sunday, but their time together may be limited.
Mitchell, who started the season as the only big-play performer in the Jets'  offense, officially lost his starting tight end job today to the rookie Kyle Brady.
Coach Rich Kotite, who made Brady the starter in Sunday's game against the Bills, put Brady's name again ahead of Mitchell's on the depth chart for next Sunday's game in Seattle.
More significant, Kotite's decision could mean the Jets have reservations about keeping Mitchell, whose contract expires after  the season.


Red Sox Extend Kennedy's Contract
KEVIN KENNEDY, who guided the Boston Red Sox to the American League East title in his first season as their manager, has patched up his differences with  the club and accepted a one-year contract extension through the 1997 season.
Yesterday's announcement by General Manager DAN DUQUETTE came 11 days after Kennedy rejected an offer that "shocked" the manager.
Duquette said the terms of Kennedy's 1996 contract were not renegotiated, and he did not disclose terms for the extra year.
Kennedy's original contract had salaries of $300,000 for 1995 and $350,000 for 1996.


Making the Best of the League's Worst Team
During the momentous Simms-Parcells Epoch, Giants games on TV usually meant accompaniment by John Madden and Pat Summerall.
Made sense.
The best games demanded the top TV duo.
But what about this equation: Jets' games bring us NBC's Marv Albert and Cris Collinsworth.
How odd.
NBC's No. 2 team -- and perhaps its most candid and amusing -- mired with calling games of the league's  worst club.
So far this year, Collinsworth and Albert have called four Jets games together.
Collinsworth called two more when Albert escaped to other assignments.


Sitter Confesses to Murder
A baby sitter who the authorities said drowned his 4-year-old neighbor after  she walked in on him as he showered was arrested on Saturday after he led the police to the girl's body.
The man, Jeremy Lipscomb Skocz, 18, said he wanted to stop the girl, Shelby Cox, from crying after she refused to leave the bathroom last Monday, the authorities said.


Around the Impasse, And On to the War
President Clinton and Republican Congressional leaders have got the Government back to work with an agreement on a temporary spending bill, but the  much larger issue of how to balance the budget lies ahead.
And on that, the potential for disagreement is vast.
How the larger debate plays out will depend in part on each side's willingness to compromise, a temperament that will be shaped by opinion polls as much as political convictions.
It will also depend on what the Congressional Budget Office concludes when it updates its calculations of the economic future.
Those calculations will determine how much cutting has to be done.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Rhythm and Soulfulness From an Able Rossinian 'Il Barbiere di Siviglia' Metropolitan Opera


A Rite of Passage, Even in Midlife;To Many, Age No Longer Matters in a Bar or Bas Mitzvah
Edging reluctantly toward her 60th birthday, Bettijane Eisenpreis set her sights on a most unusual gift.
It required no great sum of money, but her own time and heart.
The return was not material, but emotional and spiritual.
Ms. Eisenpreis, more than anything, wanted a bas mitzvah.


True North Acquires Sales Promotion Unit
True North Communications in Chicago, which owns agencies including Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, said yesterday that it would expand its sales promotion operations by acquiring Market Growth Resources Inc. in Wilton, Conn.
The terms  were not disclosed.
Market Growth, which will become an independent, wholly owned subsidiary of  True North, has 60 employees and billings estimated at $55 million from clients  like the Campbell Soup Company.
True North's other sales promotion unit, Impact  in Chicago, has billings estimated at $96.5 million from clients like Kraft Foods.
John Block, Wes Bray, Mickey Goodman and Mickey Jardon, all managing partners at Market Growth, will continue heading the company in those positions.


Heart Disease and Cell Breakdown
Scientists have linked cardiovascular disease to an age-related breakdown of  cells, according to a study released Monday.
The study, by the Geron Corporation of Menlo Park, Calif., suggests that identifying aging cells that have lost the ability to divide could predict the build-up of fatty plaque on a person's inner arterial walls.


Federal Helium Plant Stays Above the Fray
The Grand Canyon was closed.
Passport offices were cordoned off.
But here in  the pancake plains of the Panhandle, rows of battleship gray compressors clanked along at full tilt today, processing helium from the Federal Helium Reserve.
Last month, the helium program was lampooned in Congress as "the poster child of Government waste" for forcing Federal agencies to buy the gas at above-market prices.
But during the Federal budget impasse, the program, which is run by the  Interior Department's Bureau of Mines, illustrated a strange distinction between "essential" and "nonessential" Government activities.
A perennial target of budget cutters, it became for critics the emblematic Federal program that would  not die.


Simplicity and Also Crunch
Songs about a blind spider driving a dune buggy, a kitty that doesn't want to be petted and a lazy boll weevil that won't leave its house were the order of the night when the Presidents of the United States of America performed a sold-out show on Friday at Tramps.
Sounds awful, doesn't it?
But the Presidents  are the most popular band to have emerged from Seattle this year, an antidote to the misery and self-absorption of grunge.
They have a Top 40 album, "The Presidents of the United States of America" (Columbia), and a hit single and video for "Lump," a song that's either complete nonsense or about a brain tumor.
At Tramps, the Presidents proved they were more than a one-dimensional novelty band.
The music was built for a good time, with one-line choruses, stop-and-start verses and instrumental noises that imitated song lyrics about scratching kittens and bad drum solos.
With Chris Ballew playing a two-string bass and Dave Dederer on three-string guitar, the band merged the simplicity of  punk rock with the dense, low-end crunch of the disposable hard rock of the 70's and 80's.


World News Briefs;Sri Lanka Army Marches Into Rebel Stronghold
After a month-long offensive that has left thousands dead and wounded, Government troops marched into the Tamil rebel stronghold of Jaffna today for the first time in five years.


Key Developer Seeks a Role In Times Sq.
After years of leading the fight against the huge redevelopment project in Times Square, the Durst Organization, a local real estate developer, may be close to gaining the right to be a part of it -- with the public subsidies it had long opposed.
The Prudential Insurance Corporation of America, which in 1981 was selected to build four huge office towers at the crossroads of 42d Street, Broadway and Seventh Avenue, is expected next month to approve the sale of the development rights for one tower to Durst, according to real estate executives involved in the negotiations.


Revlon Makes Initial Stock Offering, Again
Revlon Inc. said today that it planned to raise $150 million in an initial stock sale.
It is the second time in three years that Revlon, the cosmetics maker that is led by Ronald O. Perelman, is trying to sell shares.
Revlon's filing comes amid one of the best markets ever for initial public offerings, which have raised $24 billion this year.
Shares in another cosmetics  maker, the Estee Lauder Companies, jumped a third on their first day last week.


Hot California With a Cool, Cool Look
Before William Claxton began photographing West Coast jazz musicians, in the  1950's, album covers were shot in New York, in dark, dank places.
"There was lots of smoke, it was sweaty and hazy, with harsh lighting, and that was considered jazz photography," he recalled, just after the Fire and Ice Ball on Nov. 13, which he attended with his wife, the former model Peggy Moffitt.
Mr.
Claxton, whose book of album cover art, "Cailfornia Cool" (Chronicle Books, $24.95), served as an inspiration for Anna Sui this season, revolutionized jazz photography by bringing it out of those dark dank East Coast confines.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a visit by Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres to the West Bank misstated the birthplace of Nahum Rabinovich, a rabbi in the West Bank.
It was Canada, not the United States.


Who Assumes the Risk on the Slopes?
The ski season is just around the corner.
Millions of skiers who love the sport are assembling equipment and booking resorts for a thrill-packed winter.
If you are one of the group, next time you are waiting on the lift line, turn to the fine print on the back of your ski-lift ticket.
In most ski states, the ticket says that you accept and voluntarily assume the risks of injury and that  you release the ski resort from all liability.
Is it fair for skiers to assume all the risks of injury even if the resort might be negligent in how it operates the lift?
Should skiers be responsible for the maintenance of ski trails?
If the equipment fails or is improperly maintained, who is responsible?


Mayors Seek Residency Bill
About $100 million, or a third of Jersey City's annual budget, ends up in the paychecks of police officers and firefighters, two-thirds of whom live outside the city, according to Mayor Bret Schundler's office.
In Paterson, the situation is similar, according to Mayor William J. Pascrell Jr., who said, "What we're missing is that they're on the spot, they're available, and they're in the neighborhoods spending dollars." Besides being Mayor, Mr.
Pascrell is a State Assemblyman and has introduced legislation to change the situation.


LuPone Show to Close
Patti LuPone on Broadway," conceived and directed by Scott Wittman, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219  West 48th Street, Manhattan. It was to have run until Dec. 31. Saturday's will be the show's 46th regular performance; it had seven previews.


World News Briefs;Kashmiri Kidnappers Make Offer to India
A Kashmiri separatist group offered today to release two ailing Western hostages in the Himalayas in return for freedom for a jailed comrade, an Indian  Government spokesman said.
India has refused previous demands for a swap, but this time asked the kidnappers to get back in touch with their negotiator on Tuesday to hear the Government's response, said the spokesman, Abdul Rasheed.


Arkansas Takes Its 8th N.C.A.A. Crown
John McDonnell, the Arkansas men's track and cross-country coach, wasn't sure about his team's chances in the National Collegiate Athletic Association cross-country championships here.
"They're young," he said.
"Four freshmen, two sophomores and a junior. We have the talent, but we may not have the experience. But if the other teams want to beat us, they'd better do it this year."


Business Week's Case Isn't Like CBS's
To the Editor:
I must take strong exception to some conclusions in the Nov. 17 article about the "60 Minutes" case as it concerns Business Week.
It is factually wrong and unfair to lump Business Week with CBS as part of a trend toward "capitulation" by the media.


INSIDE
Fabled Capital Is Found


In Land of the Peso, the Dollar Is Common Coin
Despite the drubbing it has taken this year, the peso remains the official currency of Mexico.
Sometimes, though, it is hard to be sure because, increasingly, companies that have been hurt by the gyrations of the peso are switching to doing business in dollars.
Executives and managers are seeking to protect themselves from further peso losses.
This unofficial dollarization of the Mexican economy means that it is now common to see computer manufacturers and real estate agents advertise their prices in dollars, even when the transaction takes place purely within Mexico.
Although it is technically illegal to use anything but the peso, the businesses  get around that restriction by saying in tiny footnotes that they will accept pesos at the current exchange rate.


People
*
Jim Haag was named to the new position of senior partner and management director on the De Beers account at J. Walter Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group.
He was previously a senior partner and management director on the DeBeers account while it was at N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners, New York.
Also, Ellen Hyde was named to the new position of senior partner and management director on the Boston Market account.
She was previously senior vice president and director for operations and strategy on the Procter &amp; Gamble oral care business  at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.


The Next Budget Battle
President Clinton swallowed hard over the weekend before agreeing to the Republicans' key budget demand -- a balanced budget within seven years according to estimates made by the Congressional Budget Office.
That was a high price to pay for signing a temporary spending bill that reopened Government offices yesterday.
But Mr.
Clinton built into the deal enough maybe's so that he will have no trouble finding grounds to reject the budget reconciliation bill that will shortly land on his desk.
Mr.
Clinton prefers, with justification, to spread out budget cuts over a longer interval.
But the Government shutdown was producing an increasingly surly public, and 48 Democrats had already voted with Republicans to pass a stopgap spending bill.
In a week or two the President would likely face a humiliating override of his veto.
Also, he could ill afford a partisan squabble in Congress  during the week he might announce a peace accord in Bosnia requiring American troops abroad.


PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE TO SELL LAVA TO BLOCK DRUG
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company has agreed to sell its Lava soap brand to the Block Drug Company, the maker of Polident denture cleaner, Sensodyne toothpaste  and Nytol sleep tablets, the companies said yesterday.
Block Drug is based in Jersey City.
Procter &amp; Gamble, which is based in Cincinnati, said the sale would not noticeably affect its financial results.
Procter &amp; Gamble has sold some product lines -- the Bain de Soleil sun-care brand, the Fisher nuts brand and two margarine brands in the Philippines, Star and Dari Creme -- to concentrate on brands that offer a better financial return.


Nazis Had No Use For Heidegger
To the Editor:
In reporting reactions to Elzbieta Ettinger's book about the personal relationship of Hannah Arendt and Martin Heidegger (news article, Nov. 5), you quote my description of Heidegger as "an ordinary German," a characterization with which Steven B. Smith (letter, Nov. 14) takes issue.
You present Heidegger  not merely as a Nazi party member from 1933 to 1945 (which he was) but as the philosophical mouthpiece of National Socialism.
This is an error.


Market Place;Hot Internet Stocks Soar: Stampede or A Squeeze?
Internet stocks -- already among the market leaders -- shot higher yesterday  and have soared 20 percent or more in just the last few trading days.
To some, it looks like the greatest bull stampede ever.
To others, it appears that short-sellers are being squeezed like never before.
"The Internet stocks remind me of the riverboat gambling stocks of a few years ago," said Emanuel Geduld, the president of Herzog Heine Geduld, a major market maker in the Nasdaq market.
"The public loves these stocks."


Sam Bailey, 80, Civil Rights Leader in Mississippi
Sam Bailey, a civil rights advocate who worked with Medgar Evers in the quest for racial equality in Mississippi, died on Saturday at his home in Jackson.
He  was 80.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Observer;How Cozy Our World
A majority of Americans say they now get most of their news from television.
To see how the world looks to this majority, your correspondent spent six months glued to his TV screen.
Following is the typical American view of the world today:
The two most important people on earth are Newt Gingrich and President Clinton.
O.
J.
Simpson, who used to be Number Three, has slipped badly and is not even in the top 20 anymore.
The new Number Three is Deion Sanders.


The Mirage of Peace
For exactly 37 minutes early today, American officials here thought they had  finally clinched an agreement to end 43 months of war in Bosnia.
They raised glasses of wine and toasted the success.
Then, in the words of one person who was present, "there was an eruption and peace went out the window."
The eruption came in the form of an objection from the Muslim-led Bosnian Government to the accord the American officials believed they had just reached on the width of a strategic Serbian-held corridor in northern Bosnia.
This issue had been the single largest stumbling block to a peace agreement during the last two days.


Stocks Flat in Tokyo
Stock prices were flat here today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index  of 225 issues was up 0.50 point, to 18,384.32.
On Monday, the Nikkei rose 232.66 points.


AT&amp;T Denies a Cable Deal With Time Warner Is Near
Executives at the AT&amp;T Corporation discounted a report yesterday that the company was close to any deal on acquiring a big stake in Time Warner Inc.'s cable-television systems.
But they again acknowledged that the two companies had been discussing possible alliances.
Yesterday, an article in The Wall Street Journal, citing unidentified sources, reported that AT&amp;T was in talks about the possibility of investing $2 billion to $4 billion in Time Warner's cable systems.


U.S. Studying Charges of Excessive Force at Rikers
Federal prosecutors are investigating allegations that correction officers have used excessive force on inmates held in a special punitive section of a jail on Rikers Island, Federal and city officials said yesterday.
A city correction official said the allegations centered on the conduct of officers in the Central Punitive Segregation Unit, where prisoners are held in solitary confinement as punishment for misbehaving while incarcerated.
The official said the Federal criminal inquiry grew out of accusations in a 1993 civil suit that inmates were routinely and severely beaten by officers.


Where Will the Witch Hunt in Israel End?;Jewish Survival
To the Editor:
As the head of Chicago's Jewish Defense League for 10 of its 10 1/2-year existence, I am no stranger to violence.
A police commander warned me that the Anti-Defamation League, a Jewish group, asked him to arrest the J.D.L. people who were protecting desecrated synagogues with baseball bats.


Bolivian Reveals Site Of Guevara's Grave
When Ernesto Che Guevara was captured as he led a small column of leftist guerrillas through the Bolivian mountains in 1967, the army that had hunted him  down quickly resolved to wipe away the evidence.
Guevara, already a legendary figure, and other prisoners were summarily executed, and their bodies taken to a secret burial place.


Reeves's Remarks Ruffle Owners
Dan Reeves was not exactly apologetic today but he called his comments over the weekend "dumb." Wellington Mara, a team co-owner, met for 10 minutes with Reeves and General Manager George Young and said it did not alleviate his concerns about Reeves.
When you throw Bob Tisch, the other owner, into the mix, you get a very uncertain picture of Reeves's future as Giants coach.
Even his players, whom Reeves addressed in a closed-door meeting today, aren't exactly jumping to the aid of their coach.


Praising Lewis Carroll, Despite a Creepy Side
LEWIS CARROLL A Biography By Morton N. Cohen Illustrated. 577 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Nassau Is Maligned on Crime Rate, Study Says
If people in Nassau County are inordinately afraid of crime, blame Joel Rifkin and Colin Ferguson, a professor of criminology said in a study on crime released today.
The professor, Harvey Kushner, said crime in Nassau is at its lowest level in 20 years, and much lower, on a per capita basis, than in either New York City or Suffolk County.


Living Rooms Replace Polling Booths in Oregon's Mail-In SenateElection
Election Day ritual for Mike Dewey has always been as Norman Rockwellian as it gets.
He goes down to the local grange hall here, buys a bake-sale brownie or two and then performs the most powerful act of a democracy behind the curtains of a voting booth.
Not this time though.


Giuliani's Chief Budget Officer Is Considered for M.T.A. Post
Marc V. Shaw, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget director, is a leading contender for the job of chief executive of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, New York City and M.T.A. officials said.
Mr.
Shaw has discussed the job with the M.T.A. chairman, E. Virgil Conway, who has the authority to fill the position, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Giuliani is aware of those talks and met with Mr.
Conway yesterday, the officials said.


On Violence in America, With Lots of Examples
The beauty part of a television program deploring violence is the opportunity to show pictures of gunplay, sluggings, injuries and corpses while the narrator  preaches; the audience is thus entertained even as it is edified.


Weiss Is Returning to the Rockies
Shortstop WALT WEISS returned to the Colorado Rockies yesterday, agreeing to  a $4.1 million, two-year contract with a player option for 1998.
Weiss, 31, hit  .260 for the Rockies last season, when he had a $1.6 million base as part of a $2.2 million, two-year deal.
Under the new deal, Weiss will get $1.5 million in  1996 and $2.6 million in 1997.
He has an option for 1998 at $1.5 million.
Weiss  can also earn $575,000 in performance bonuses.
(AP)


An AT&amp;T Spinoff Names Executives
The telecommunications equipment company that the AT&amp;T Corporation plans to spin off next year will be based at its historic Bell Laboratories site in Murray Hill, N.J., and led by many of the same executives who now manage its subsidiaries, AT&amp;T said yesterday.


Long Haymes Carr Promotes Executive
The Long Haymes Carr division of Lintas Worldwide in Winston-Salem, N.C., said yesterday that it had promoted Steve Zades, executive vice president and general manager, to chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Zades, 38, succeeds Don Adams, 58, who will retire at the end of the year, after 24 years at the agency.
Mr.
Zades joined Long Haymes, which is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, in February from its sibling agency, Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, where he was a senior vice president and account director.
Mr.
Adams joined Long Haymes in 1971 as an account executive, rising through the ranks to  become chairman in 1987.


Exoticism and Eerie Effects From Orchestra and Quartet
The dynamic Kronos Quartet tends to snag most of the attention whenever it collaborates with other performers.
But that did not happen on Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, when the Kronos joined the Brooklyn Philharmonic  Orchestra, with the conductor Dennis Russell Davies, for a program that, among other things, acknowledged Bartok on the 50th anniversary of his death.
The quartet was featured in two new works commissioned for this occasion: one by the orchestra, one by the Kronos.
Each piece integrated the quartet into the  orchestral textures, rather than deploying it in a soloistic way.


CHRONICLE
The Citymeals-on-Wheels annual Power Lunch has become a staple on the New York social calendar, and yesterday, 280 women and 11 men filled the Rainbow Room to help the organization that feeds 13,000 elderly on weekends and holidays.
Though long on movers and shakers (Diane Sawyer, Lieut. Gov. Betsy McCaughey  of New York, Carol Channing, Donna Hanover Giuliani, Colette Avital and Mary Higgins Clark), there was no room to move or shake.


Nelson Leaves the Knicks Guessing
Asked about Don Nelson's tendency to experiment with different lineups, Charles Oakley responded as only he can.
"If it ain't broke, don't break it," Oakley said.


3 Die as Plane Crashes Into Apartments


Ogden Plans to Buy Stake
The Ogden Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a 25 percent stake in Apollo Leisure Group P.L.C., an operator of theaters in Britain.
Terms were not disclosed.
Ogden, a diversified company whose interests  include entertainment, aviation and waste treatment services, is based in New York.
It said the acquisition would provide the opportunity for joint ventures in Europe and the United States.


SEQUA CHIEF WITHDRAWS $185 MILLION BUYOUT BID
The Sequa Corporation, based in New York, said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Norman E. Alexander, had withdrawn his offer of $185.4 million for the shares of the manufacturing company that he does not own.
He already owns 52 percent of the company's voting stock.
Mr.
Alexander, 81, offered $30 last week for each of the company's class A shares and $36 for each  class B share.
Each class B share has 10 votes.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Sequa's class A stock fell $1.50, to $30.50, and the class B stock dropped 87.5 cents, to $37.75.
Several lawsuits had been filed challenging the proposal, the company said.


College Athletes, Still Exploited
With post-season college football on the horizon and basketball just under way, college sports are now in their prime revenue-raising phase.
Fans and commentators need to look beyond the pompoms and excitement to the fact that many of the athletes who earn millions for their colleges leave school with few  skills and without degrees, washed up and utterly exploited.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association has remedied the problem somewhat by stiffening entry requirements for college freshmen with athletic scholarships.
An N.C.A.A. survey over the summer of graduation rates, including 302 Division I schools, found that 58 percent of scholarship athletes  who enrolled between 1985 and 1988 had graduated within six years, compared with 57 percent of the overall student body.
But the rate varied widely, with some institutions graduating scandalously few athletes.
The performance was worst in  men's basketball, a major source of both scandal and television revenue in college sports.


With Nod to Harmony, It's Back to Trenches
Peering into the House of Representatives from the tourist gallery, Thomas Lockwood, a Federal worker locked out of his job last week during the budget impasse, pronounced the compromise settlement being debated just below him stronger on face-saving than heavy lifting.
"This has been about a strategy for both parties to save face," said Mr.
Lockwood, a 36-year-old civilian systems manager with the Navy.
"Now the true agreement must be reached over the next month."


Corruption Inquiry Ended in Germany
German prosecutors said today that they had dropped their investigation of the former production chief at Adam Opel A.G., Peter Enderle, who resigned in July in connection with an inquiry into corruption at the car maker.
"The criminal act charged against the accused cannot be proved because of the contradictions in the reports of the witnesses, which were not corroborated by objective evidence," the Darmstadt prosecutor's office said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALPHAREL INC., San Diego, , which makes document-management computer software, agreed to buy Trimco Group P.L.C.
Britain, a management software company, for almost $14.7 million in cash and stock.


Who Blinked? They Did. No, They Did.
When the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, took his latest offers  for ending a Government shutdown to Republican leaders of the budget committees  at midafternoon on Sunday, his negotiating team was not especially optimistic.
They made two modest proposals that would commit President Clinton to the Republicans' goal of balancing the budget in seven years.
But, they recalled today, each offer also included an escape clause big enough to seem a sucker punch.
The first would have cloaked such a commitment in a nonbinding "sense of Congress" resolution that would not require the President's signature.


Revenue Rises 14% At Ernst &amp; Young
Ernst &amp; Young, the world's second-biggest accounting and consulting firm, said yesterday that strong performance in the United States and in emerging markets helped it post worldwide revenue of $6.87 billion in 1995, up 14 percent from 1994.
The firm said its United States branch grew about 17 percent, to $2.97 billion, helped by fast-growing management and health care consulting businesses and by the mid-summer acquisition of Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company, a Los Angeles-based firm specializing in real estate.


Tacos and ice cream for Christmas? More companies are sporting red and green.
SANTA CLAUS, reindeer, snowflakes and ribbons are fast becoming the shock troops in a seasonal marketing war.
While many advertisers traditionally rewrap their prosaic products in colorful, eye-catching holiday dress, this year's seasonal push is already showing signs of being more aggressive and more broad based than in Christmases past.


Police Say Ex-Employee Killed 4 in Hunt for Former Co-Workers
A man distraught over being dismissed from his job at a bank fatally shot four people and wounded two others in homes he broke into on Sunday night, the police said.
Two of the dead and two of the wounded were bank employees.
When the man, Jerry Hessler, burst in on his former girlfriend -- the fourth stop on the shooting rampage -- her husband shot him, the police said.
But Mr.
Hessler was wearing a bulletproof vest and the authorities said he was not seriously injured.
Officers later caught him as he was trying to flee.


Shuttle Ends 8-Day Mission
The space shuttle Atlantis, descending through blue skies with scattered clouds, landed today at Kennedy Space Center after an eight-day mission in which it docked with the Russian space station Mir.
The mission "accomplished all we wanted to accomplish," Tommy Hollaway, the  space shuttle program manager, said at a news conference.


Heads or Tails? How Embryos Get It Right
THE early decisions are always the hardest.
Should I sleep a little longer, or piously go running?
Should I get out of bed at all?
Which shampoo will leave  my hair the least flat?
Read the paper and be depressed, or skip the paper and risk sounding stupid later on?
Yet as difficult as the average adult morning may be, it is a lazy Sunday compared with the dawn of life for embryos.
Theirs is the ultimate wake-up call, for the first thing that any embryo must figure out before it rouses itself and  gets to work is, which way is up?
Whether destined to become a fly or a worm or  a person or a tulip, the embryo must learn its top from its bottom, its front from its rear.
Scientists call this initial stage of development "establishing early polarity," which essentially means the embryo must make heads or tails of  itself.


MICROSOFT TO ACCEPT MORE ON-LINE USERS
The Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that it had reconsidered a plan to cap enrollment for its Microsoft Network on-line service at its current level of 525,000 subscribers and would continue to look for more business.
Microsoft's service is offered to people who buy the Windows 95 program.
Keeping the service open to new customers is important for Microsoft as the holiday period arrives,  said Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst with Arlen Communications Inc., a consulting firm in Bethesda, Md.
"To blow the opportunity to sell to hundreds of thousands of new users of Windows 95 in the Christmas stocking would have been a major problem," he said.


Dr. Harold Kirshner, Ophthalmologist, 82
Dr.
Harold Kirshner, an ophthalmologist who was chief of clinic at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary in Manhattan for some 50 years, died on Thursday at his home in West Hempstead, L.I.
He was 82.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Murdoch and 3 OthersSet Latin Satellite-TV Effort
Seeking to dominate the satellite television market in Latin America, the News Corporation said yesterday that it would form a direct-broadcast satellite  service with three powerful partners: Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator; Globo, the leading media company in Brazil, and Grupo Televisa, the giant Mexican broadcaster.
Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of the News Corporation, said at a news conference in New York that the partners planned an initial total investment of  $500 million in the service, which is to begin operations in May.
It will transmit 150 channels of entertainment, news and sports programming to homes equipped with satellite dishes and digital receivers.


MCA Fills a Powerful Position, Head of Motion Picture Group
Casey Silver, a low-keyed 40-year-old studio executive popular with actors and writers, was named today as chairman of the MCA Motion Picture Group.
The job, one of the most powerful in the movie business, includes overseeing Universal Pictures.
In announcing the appointment, Ron Meyer, president and chief operating officer of MCA Inc., cited Mr.
Silver's years working as a film executive at Universal Pictures.


Mourning for Blast Victims in Pakistan


Long Bond Price Slips After Budget Deal
Despite an agreement on Federal budget negotiations, long-term Treasury prices ended lower yesterday.
While concerns about an impasse over the budget weighed down the market last  week, Sunday's announcement on the budget failed to encourage much buying "because everyone knows they haven't increased the debt ceiling, and have not yet hammered out a budget agreement," said Kenneth J. McCarthy of the Economic Intelligence Company, a New York-based economic consulting and forecasting firm.


Where Will the Witch Hunt in Israel End?
To the Editor:
When are they coming after me?


Agreement Is Only the First Step Toward Balancing the Budget
President Clinton and Congressional Republicans got over their first big hurdle when they reached an agreement on Sunday on a temporary spending bill to  reopen the Government.
But on the much larger issue ahead -- how to balance the  budget -- they may only have agreed to disagree.
Whether it is one or the other may ultimately depend not just on the will to  compromise, which is conditioned by polls, focus groups and whichever side makes the latest political blunder and feels weak.


Memory Issue Prompts Retrial In Murder Case
A Federal appeals court today refused to reinstate the murder conviction of George Franklin, who had been charged with a 20-year-old killing based on his daughter's repressed memory.
The 3-to-0 ruling entitles Mr. Franklin to a new trial. He is serving a life  sentence.


Anne E. Sullivan, Publishing Executive, 53
Anne E. Sullivan, a vice president at Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, the New York publishing house, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 53 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She died from internal injuries after being struck by a private bus on Friday afternoon at 23d Street and 10th Avenue, according to the publishing house.


U.S. Keeps Balkan Talks Alive Despite Impasse on Peace Maps
Frustrated and exhausted after 20 days of negotiations to end the war in Bosnia, United States diplomats struggled today to keep alive peace talks that seemed on the verge of collapse.
Despite a decision by American envoys on Sunday to shut down the talks this morning no matter what the outcome, the United States backed down from its pledge and plunged ahead with more negotiations all day today and through the night to break the impasse among the three parties.


Daiwa Bank Ordered To Cut Back Overseas
Under a disciplinary order from the Finance Ministry, Daiwa Bank of Japan said yesterday that it would reduce its overseas assets by half within a year and curtail overseas bond trading.
The order was punishment for submitting false reports to the ministry covering up $97 million in losses incurred by Daiwa's United States trust banking subsidiary in the late 1980's.
The case is unrelated to the $1.1 billion bond trading loss at the bank's New York branch.
In the trust bank case, Daiwa is being punished for transferring losses to a Cayman Islands entity.
Under the plan, Daiwa Bank will cut its overseas assets by 50.5 percent, or $26.7 billion, by the end of next October.
The figure includes the United States operations, which have about $10 billion in assets.
(AP)


Natural Gas at 16-Month High As Utilities React to Cold Spell
Prices for natural gas surged to a 16-month high yesterday as utility companies scrambled for supplies after weather forecasts called for continued cold in the Midwest and Northern Plains.
Speculators who had bet on lower prices had to buy back contracts to stem their losses in panicky, high-volume trading.


Crew Names Top Official, And Giuliani Approves
During his rocky 26 months as New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines clashed with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani primarily over two issues: the school system's $8 billion budget, and security in the system's 1,100 schools.
Yesterday, Mr.
Cortines' successor, Dr.
Rudy Crew, made key management decisions in both areas, with the approval of the Mayor.
He appointed a new chief operations officer who will oversee all aspects of the school system except instruction, and he removed four managers of the Division of School Safety and named an interim director with extensive law enforcement and school experience.


Dell Computer Earnings Climb by 81.7%
The Dell Computer Corporation reported today that its earnings surged 81.7 percent in the third quarter, exceeding Wall Street's forecasts, driven by strong sales in North America and tight expense controls.
Dell, the world's largest mail-order computer company, said its net income rose to $75.4 million, or 75 cents a share, in the quarter ended Oct. 29, from $41.4 million, or 47 cents a share, in the 1994 period.
Wall Street had been expecting earnings of about 70 cents a share.


Realignment at Volvo
Volvo A.B., the Swedish car and truck maker, said yesterday that it had realigned its global car market groups.
With the changes, Japan will become a separate market; previously, it was part of the international operation.
Sweden  and Britain, which were once separate markets, will now be part of the European  marketing group.
Volvo now has four market areas -- North America, Europe, Japan and international -- and three product divisions, which focus on its 900, 800 and 400 car series.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Accounts
*
TV Guide, New York, owned by the News Corp., to Ziccardi &amp; Partners, New York, to handle the creative portion of its account, previously handled on a project basis by Charron, Schwartz &amp; Partners, New York.
The billings were estimated at  $15 million. *
Clopay Building Products, Cincinnati, to Media That Works, Cincinnati, to handle its national media planning and buying account, previously handled by Northlich Stolley LaWarre, Cincinnati.
The billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Martha Hill, Dance Educator, Is Dead at 94
Martha Hill, a pioneer in American dance education who founded the American Dance Festival in addition to dance departments at Bennington College and the Juilliard School, died on Sunday at her home in Brooklyn.
She was 94.
A tall, big-boned woman with an irreverent sense of humor and a no-nonsense approach to training modern dancers, Ms.
Hill was of incalculable importance in  the development of modern dance in America.
She came of age in the field when the art was taught, if at all, as an adjunct to college physical education courses.
By the 1980's, when she retired from teaching, universities throughout  the nation offered undergraduate and graduate degrees in dance.


World News Briefs;Greek Prime Minister In Stable Condition
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou was taken to the hospital today with pneumonia but his condition is stable, a hospital spokesman said.
Mr.
Papandreou, 76, was taken to the Onassis Heart Hospital after complaining of stomach pains and breathing problems.
He had open-heart surgery in London in  September 1988.


Yanks Acquire Girardi to Fill Stanley's Spot Behind Plate
General Manager Bob Watson and Manager Joe Torre began remaking the Yankees in their desired image yesterday, sacrificing the offense of Mike Stanley for the catching defense of Joe Girardi.
Stanley is a free agent and, as Torre said, the Yankees had no guarantee they could re-sign him, but they obviously didn't care to.
Instead, they acquired Girardi from the Colorado Rockies for two minor league pitchers.


Business Week's Case Isn't Like CBS's;Paley's Cigars
To the Editor:
The connection between CBS and Lorillard Tobacco in the person of Laurence A. Tisch (letter, Nov. 17) serves as a reminder of the connection with tobacco that existed at the birth of CBS -- in the person of William S. Paley, for 60 years its guiding genius.


Transactions
Hockey


State Refineries Get High Marks
New Jersey and its refineries have been the butt of jokes over the years.
But a national environmental group says people should take them seriously, giving the state top marks on a scorecard for pollution prevention.
A study released yesterday by the Environmental Defense Fund said New Jersey's standards are stricter than Federal guidelines, because the state requires reports on chemicals brought into refineries in addition to those that  are released.
The need to gather all that data forces refineries to examine their operations more carefully, said Lois Epstein, the principal author of the  study.


Giuliani to Curtail AIDS Services, Despite Growing Caseload
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to announce an overhaul of the city's Division of AIDS Services today, sharply reducing the number and scope of services provided by the city even as AIDS caseloads continue to grow rapidly.
The move comes just 18 months after Mr.
Giuliani had considered either eliminating or sharply cutting back the agency.
But faced with heavy criticism over that plan, the administration instead decided to keep the agency.


Lights, Camera, Action and Tuition Bills
Edward Burns is living his dream.
Last month he completed production on his second film, which he wrote, directed and starred in.
He made it on a $3 million budget and with the support of 20th Century Fox.
This follows "The Brothers McMullen," his first film, which he made for only $25,000, and which became one  of the year's Cinderella stories, winning the grand jury prize at the Sundance Film Festival and then enjoying a successful commercial and critical run that is still continuing.
The 27-year-old Mr.
Burns is the wave of the future: the film-school-trained  director.
Over the last two decades, film degrees have increased nearly 300 percent: 10 times as much as college degrees overall.
In 1980, 35 percent of all first-time directors had attended film school.
By 1992, the figure had more than doubled, to 72 percent.
At least 120 schools now offer film or cinema-studies degrees, and Gilbert Cates, dean of the film school at the University of California at Los Angeles, has predicted that by the year 2000 almost 90 percent of new directors will have film-school backgrounds.


Former Ayer Officer Joins Euro RSCG
Steve Dworin, who previously held top positions at the New York agencies N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners and Deutsch Inc., will join Euro RSCG in Paris in the new position of vice chairman of its international network.
Mr.
Dworin, 42, whose appointment had been expected, will divide his time between the United States and Europe, and will report to Jean-Michel Goudard, the chief executive of Euro RSCG International.
Euro RSCG has billings estimated at $6.2 billion from clients like L'Oreal and Procter &amp; Gamble, which are handled by 110 offices in 34 countries.
Its American holdings include Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in  Chicago.


On Fox, Stepping Back From the Bizarre
Rupert Murdoch wants a little respect to cushion his awesome power as media mogul.
His Fox Broadcasting, the notorious purveyor of tabloid news and shlock sitcoms, is undergoing some image adjustments.
One of the more earnest efforts comes under the banner of "Hallmark Entertainment Presents," which tonight at 8  makes its Fox debut with "Blue River," a two-hour movie adapted from a novel by  Ethan Canin.
It's a somewhat sluggish start for the project but nonetheless a relief from the steady Fox diet of alien visits and pointless biographies of Madonna or O. J. Simpson.
Edward Sellers (Nick Stahl) is an eye surgeon with a nice home, a nice wife and a nice young son.
Then one day, his elder brother, Lawrence (Jerry O'Connell), a seedy derelict, knocks on the door.
The brothers haven't seen each other in 15 years, and Edward is only too eager to get rid of Lawrence.
The bulk of the story is a flashback that tells why.


World News Briefs;German Petition Raises New Challenge to Pope
Two days after the Vatican strengthened its ban on the ordination of women as priests, Roman Catholic dissidents here raised a new challenge to Pope John Paul II today with a petition signed by more than a million German Catholics opposed  to his views on a celibate, male-only priesthood and traditional sexual morality.
The petition was immediately dismissed by Bishop Karl Lehmann of Mainz, chairman of the German Bishops Conference, as divisive.
But, coming so soon after a similar display of restiveness among Catholics in Austria, the petition  highlighted a growing rift between the Pope and Catholics in some of Europe's most affluent centers.


Canadian Pacific Says It Will Split Up Rail Unit
Canadian Pacific Ltd. said today that it would cut 1,450 jobs from its railroad unit in a sweeping reorganization.
The company said it would split CP Rail System -- Canada's No. 2 railroad after the Canadian National Railway -- into six businesses.
CP Rail's five executive offices would be consolidated into one in Calgary, Alberta, and one in Montreal.


Illinois County Leads Rail-Crossing Deaths
Cook County, Ill., historically the nation's center for train traffic, has more fatal accidents at railroad crossings than any other county in the country, Federal records show.


New Drug to Fight AIDS Is Approved by F.D.A.
The Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved a new anti-AIDS drug, 3TC, developed by Biochem Pharma Inc. of Canada.
The treatment will be manufactured and marketed under the brand name Epivir by Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C.
The new drug was initially approved for use in combination with AZT, the anti-AIDS drug which was approved in 1987 and is also produced by Glaxo Wellcome.
While 3TC, like AZT, is in the class of drugs known as reverse transcriptase inhibitors, the new drug has less severe side effects.


Four Arrested in Killings of Cabdrivers in Newark
In an announcement that calmed jittery cabbies here, the Essex County Prosecutor's office said today that four men had been arrested in the slayings of four taxi drivers in Newark.
The suspects, residents of Newark and nearby Orange, had preyed on taxi drivers in the middle of the night, calling dispatchers for rides and then pouncing after the cabbies arrived, said Peter J. Francese, the first assistant  prosecutor in Essex County.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-9


Some Whatchamacallits at Comdex
LAST week more than 200,000 well-connected souls joined the annual pilgrimage to the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas.
They were searching for what they rarely  find on their monitors: hands-on experience, inside information and personal reassurance.
A tiny company may look brilliant on its home page, but in person you may discover it is run by dolts or scoundrels.
Teleconferences in most cases are dim substitutes for pressing the flesh.
And when it comes to products like keyboards and displays, there is no virtual replacement for kicking the tires.


For Twice Victorious Dole, the Main Thing Isn't Winning, but Not Losing
Senator Bob Dole's victories this weekend were hardly resounding.
He won a plurality in a straw poll in Florida, but it was a relatively meaningless vote.
As majority leader in the Senate, he helped forge an agreement with the White House to end the partial shutdown of the Federal Government, but the agreement did little to bring about a future compromise on the overall budget.
Still, as front-runner for his party's Presidential nomination, it made little difference to him if the triumphs were big or long-lasting.
The main thing was that they were victories, not losses.


Dow Passes 5,000 Level, but Drops Back
The Dow Jones industrial average twice surpassed the 5,000-point level yesterday, but the market could not keep up the momentum and the Dow wound up closing lower.
When the Dow first crossed the 5,000 mark in the morning, a chorus of cheers  erupted on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange.
But by the end of the session, this widely watched indicator retreated 6.86 points, to 4,983.09.


Europeans Punish Nigeria
The European Union placed an embargo on arms and aid to Nigeria today to punish it for the execution of nine human rights activists.
But the European foreign ministers meeting here stopped short of imposing a ban on Nigerian oil sales or freezing the assets held abroad by Nigerian military leaders, despite calls from some countries to do so.


Growth Slows in Britain
Britain's economy slowed in the third quarter to its most sluggish growth pace in nearly three years, the Central Statistical Office said yesterday.
The rise in gross domestic product was revised down to four-tenths of 1 percent for  the three months that ended on Sept. 30 from initial estimates of five-tenths of 1 percent.
The latest figure means the economy has grown just 2.1 percent from a year ago.
This compares with a 2.8 percent pace in the second quarter and was well below Britain's long-term growth rate of 2.25 to 2.5 percent.
(Reuters)


As Trash Proliferates, Improvement Districts Pitch In
On a recent Friday afternoon, at the intersection of 18th Street and Broadway, city wastebaskets were overflowing into the streets, as the wind swirled trash like urban tumbleweeds around the feet of passers-by.
But just a block south on Broadway, the cans were empty, the trash was neatly bagged and the corners were swept clean.


Daimler Aerospace Says Cost-Cut Plan Is Ready
Daimler-Benz Aerospace A.G. said yesterday that it had completed a revamping  plan but refused to release details until its parent, Daimler-Benz, gives its consent, which is expected today.
The cost-cutting plan is called "Dolores," which stands for "dollar low rescue." Its goal is to make the unit profitable even with the dollar as low as 1.35 against the mark.
The dollar currently trades at about 1.40 marks.
Daimler Aerospace, Germany's largest aircraft maker, said in October that it would cut 5,000 jobs as part of the plan and that another 3,800 jobs would be cut under earlier plans.
Since then, employees at all eight of the unit's Airbus plants have held warning strikes and demonstrations against the plan.
(Reuters)


On My Mind;Landing in Bosnian Snows
President Clinton is preparing to send American troops to Bosnia whether Congress and the American people like it or not.
They don't.
The decision to commit the troops was made by the President long before Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke put his excellent mind and his patented, muscular negotiating style to creating a peace agreement.


State Board Seeks to Alter Commuters' Fuel of Choice
Thousands of commuters in the suburbs around New York City own a good car and a "station car" -- the aging, high-mileage clunker that they would like to scrap but that can still make the short trip from the driveway to the train.
At the Metro-North station here this morning, the phrase "station car" took on a new meaning when two men who had arrived by train ducked into a shiny new Solectria, a $40,500 battery-powered car and, without so much as a sputter or even a hum, silently drove off to work.


The Late Mr. Rosenberg Left a Mystery Behind
UNTIL the killing, residents of the Chelsea Ridge Apartments did their best to ignore the mansion in their midst.
It was relatively easy.
While L. Richard Rosenberg built his private retreat  smack in the middle of his apartment complex, the house was well camouflaged.
It stands behind thick woods, on an island in a small artificial lake.


Zampese Serves Cowboys as a Calming Influence
There is this feeling around the Dallas Cowboys that controversy is the standard, that distractions serve as an appetizer, that the goose will simply not cook in a basic oven but only in a red-hot furnace.
The Cowboys routinely give it an aw-shucks smile when they hear this.
And their owner, Jerry Jones, laughs without an apology in sight.
"We've won two Super Bowls doing it that way," he says gleefully.
"Some of our best days have come full with distractions."


A Huge Hole in Hackensack
By pure luck, no one was hurt when a sinkhole big enough to swallow a truck opened on Main Street at the start of rush hour yesterday evening, officials said.


Sports of The Times;Mattingly: No Ring, No Matter
ONCE upon a time there was actually a winning Yankee tradition, with the Yankees going about their winning ways confidently and quietly.
Now they don't win, and, led by their eggbeater owner, go about it noisily and chaotically.
Don Mattingly, however, is probably the best day-to-day Yankee -- or, if current speculation is correct, the best former Yankee -- who has never won a championship or played in a World Series.
He is in the Yankee tradition of champions.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Strips of Tape as Boundaries And Ophelia on Prozac Neo Labos Dancetheater Ohio Theater


A Bombing That Went Wrong, Almost Inevitably
This is not appropriate," a woman, obviously up on her politically correct defenses, repeats urgently in Lynn Nottage's "Por'knockers," a short, ambitious  and very muddled new play at the Vineyard Theater.
The character, who has the meticulously groomed look of a corporate lawyer, does have a point, although her language is, to say the least, inadequate.
The revolutionary sect she belongs to has just destroyed a Federal building in Manhattan that was supposed to be empty but wasn't.
The children who were playing there are dead.
"Not appropriate" is one very inappropriate reaction.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about a Celebrations Brass concert tonight at 8 o'clock, at the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, misstated the admission policy.
The concert is not free; admission is $12.


Mexican Economy Shrinks 9.6% in Quarter
Mexico's economy shrank 9.6 percent in the third quarter, the worst performance for a third quarter in more than a decade.
The results, released late last week, only confirmed the brutal and deepening recession that has gripped the nation throughout 1995.


Garden Signs a Jones vs. Sosa 12-Rounder
It's not a pay-per-view fight, there's no title at stake and it won't even take place at an official weight class, but Madison Square Garden has undeniably taken another important step in its return to boxing prominence by signing Roy Jones Jr., considered one of the best pound-for-pound fighters in the world, to  fight the North American Boxing Federation light-heavyweight champion, Merqui Sosa, on Jan. 12.
The 12-round bout, announced at a Garden news conference yesterday, will be televised by HBO, the Garden's new-found promotional partner.


Many in Salt Lake City Doubt Politician's Shifting of Blame
Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz's assertions that she is the innocent victim of a duplicitous husband are not convincing the voters back home.
Recent polls conducted by her hometown newspapers in Utah show that those surveyed in Salt Lake City believe overwhelmingly that Mrs.
Waldholtz, a former  corporate lawyer, was fully aware of the financial problems for which she is now blaming her husband.


Kean Improves After Surgery
An update on former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean: The 60-year-old president of Drew University was reported in excellent condition yesterday at Morristown Memorial  Hospital where he has had two operations since being admitted with chest pains last week.
On Sunday, doctors applied a stitch to Mr.
Kean's femoral artery at the point where cardiologists inserted a tube for a balloon angioplasty to clear a clogged heart artery last Thursday.
His doctor, Dr.
William Tansey, said that blood thinners prescribed after the angioplasty impeded formation of a durable clot.
"This is a very commonplace complication," Dr.
Tansey said.


Patterns
The Right to Versace's Name


Corrections
An article yesterday about high-level defections from New York City's Health  and Hospitals Corporations misspelled the surname of the agency's former inspector general in some editions.
She is Barbara Dixon, not Dixson.


Player's Condition Is Upgraded
The condition of Rhode Island wide receiver BOBBY APGAR, who was severely injured last month in a car crash that killed two others, has been upgraded from critical to serious.
He has been moved from the intensive care unit at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan, a hospital spokesman said yesterday.
Apgar, 22, of Easton, Pa., injured his head and neck when the car in which he was riding smashed into a utility pole and a tree in Manhattan at about 4 A.M. on Oct. 28.
A Rhode Island senior, Curtis Whiting of Hackensack, N.J., and another man died in the crash.
The driver, BRIAN FERRILL, 23, of Hackensack, sustained head and chest injuries.
He was charged with drunken driving and other counts.


Officer Convicted of Perjury in a Drug Case
A second New York City police officer from the scandal-ridden 30th Precinct was convicted yesterday of perjury -- false testimony that led to the drug conviction of a man who served more than three years of a 15-years-to-life sentence.
The conviction yesterday of Officer Steven L. Pataki, 32, 1 of 17 officers from the 30th Precinct charged with perjury, comes at a time of heightened concern about police perjury across the country and a week after Police Commissioner William J. Bratton acknowledged that false testifying by officers remains a persistent problem in the 38,000-member New York Police Department.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Thoughts Of Intimacy In Evening Of Intensity
Concertos public and private took up much of the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra's  evening at Carnegie Hall on Saturday.
Backed by gorgeous string sound from this  conductorless ensemble, supported by a Steinway piano and listened to by well in excess of 2,500 people, Peter Serkin offered a performance of Bach's E-major Concerto, beautiful in itself but several light-years removed from the coffee-house intimacy and grainier, quieter instruments for which it was written.
When we use the modern concert format as a reliquary -- as most concert givers have decided to do -- we hit snags like this.
Much of this music's truth  is irrevocably lost when we put it inside a theater and in front of an audience.
As a result, we either shun it or, as in this case, transcribe it into a new and shiny composition all its own.
Purcell's theater pieces and anthems suffer similarly; so does some of Schubert's greatest hausmusik.


Nets Hit The Road, Lose Their Direction
At the rate this season is going, the Nets might as well not bother showing up for road games.
Even if their bodies are in the arena, they seem to leave their game in New Jersey.
They continued their woeful play on the road tonight, when they were routed by the Utah Jazz, 105-79, at the Delta Center.
In losing for the fifth straight  time away from Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Nets (4-0 at home) lost an early first-quarter lead and trailed by 22 points at halftime.
They embarrassed themselves in the second half by trailing by as many as 37 points in the third quarter, minutes before Rick Mahorn was ejected from the game for elbowing a former teammate, Chris Morris, in the face.


F.D.A. Backs Combined Hormone Pill
The Food and Drug Administration has approved the first tablet combining estrogen and progestin for women taking hormone replacement medication during menopause.
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories said today that it had won clearance to market the combination tablets, which will be sold under the brand names Prempro and Premphase.
Physicians prescribe hormone replacement therapy to help women avoid  bone loss and to treat symptoms of menopause like hot flashes and night sweats.


Patriots Release Hurst
The New England Patriots cut cornerback Maurice Hurst yesterday, a day after  he was burned on two 40-yard passes in a 24-10 loss to the Indianapolis Colts.
The seven-year veteran cleared out his locker before practice.
Coach Bill Parcells made no mention of it in his morning news conference and neither he nor the players were available for comment after Hurst was told.


At Work in City Hall


CHRONICLE
Add another name to the list of princesses.
ALEXANDRA CHRISTINE MANLEY, 31, a former executive with an investment firm in Hong Kong, became Princess Alexandra on Saturday when she was married to PRINCE JOACHIM, 26, the younger of the two sons of Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik of Denmark.
The ceremony was performed in the Royal Castle of Frederiksborg, outside Copenhagen.
A dinner for 200 guests followed at Fredensborg Castle, the royal summer home.


Lemieux Will Play Consecutive Nights
Mario Lemieux is one of those tourists who enjoys New York.
In his first trip to the metropolitan area this season, with suburban stops in Long Island and New Jersey, Lemieux scored consecutive hat tricks to pass the 500-goal milestone and lead his team to victories on Oct. 26 and 28.
This week, he is playing Broadway, appearing against the Rangers tonight in Madison Square Garden.
When the teams travel to Pittsburgh for a rematch tomorrow night, Lemieux plans to play again, his first consecutive appearances -- two games in two nights -- this season.


California Dismisses Gilbertson
KEITH GILBERTSON, who led California to one winning season during four years  as head coach, was dismissed yesterday, just two days after the Bears ended their season with a loss to archrival Stanford.
Athletic Director JOHN KASSER met with Gilbertson yesterday, and the two reached a financial settlement for the final three years of Gilbertson's contract.
The Bears were 3-8 this season and 20-26 over all under Gilbertson.
(AP)


Century 21 Magazine
Century 21, the real estate company owned by HFS Inc.,, and Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, a unit of the Lagardere Group of France, will jointly develop a magazine for recent home buyers called Century 21 House and Home, the  companies said yesterday.
The partners plan to publish the magazine six times a  year and to sell it through newsstands, subscriptions and Century 21 offices.
The first issue is scheduled for March.
Century 21's current magazine, Twenty-one, will be discontinued, and its 550,000 subscribers will automatically receive subscriptions to the new magazine.


Harry A. Scarr, 61, Sociologist And Deputy Director of Census
Harry A. Scarr, a sociologist who served as the deputy director of the Bureau of the Census in Washington for the past three years, died on Nov. 12 at his home in Leesburg, Va.
He was 61.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, the bureau said.


Goldman Raises Staff Bonuses
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company is more than doubling staff bonuses as earnings surge with this year's market rallies and the record pace of corporate mergers.
Goldman, the nation's biggest and richest investment banking partnership, said Friday in an internal memo that it would pay such employees as secretaries  and clerks year-end bonuses equal to 20 percent of their base salaries.
Last year, the firm paid 8 percent.


KEYCORP TO SELL FLORIDA BANK UNIT TO FIRST UNION
Keycorp said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Society First Federal Savings Bank affiliate in Fort Myers, Fla., to the First Union Corporation, based in Charlotte, N.C., for about $188 million in cash.
Society First Federal  has 24 offices in five Florida counties: Lee, Charlotte, Collier, Polk and Sarasota, with $1.47 billion in assets, $1 billion in loans and $1.1 billion in  deposits.
Keycorp said it expects a modest profit from the sale, when it is completed in its 1996 second quarter.


Scope System Also Offers a Tool For Submarines and Soldiers
ALTHOUGH astronomy and upper-atmosphere research are the immediate beneficiaries of a new liquid-mirror telescope in Alaska, experiments using the  telescope may eventually lead to new military techniques for signaling submarines and probing battlefields for secret tunnels and bunkers.
As part of what is being called the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program, the Office of Naval Research and the Phillips Laboratory at Hanscom Air Force Base in Massachusetts jointly sponsor the new liquid-mirror telescope  in Alaska.
Observers at the telescope will spend part of their time looking for  faint flashes of light or infrared radiation stimulated in the ionosphere some 60 miles high by intense pulses of radio beams transmitted from the ground.
Such emissions from the ionosphere may offer ways of peering deep into the ocean and  the ground.


Berlin Wall Trial Delayed
The manlaughter trial of the former East German leader, Egon Krenz, which prosecutors have billed as a historic effort to fix legal responsibility for killings at the Berlin wall, was delayed for a second time today.


London Journal;As 15 Million Watch, Diana Relives Painful Years
The failed marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales has finally reached the modern celebrity age: both parties have gone on television to give their side of the story.
Tonight, in an extraordinarily candid interview that the British Broadcasting Corporation estimated had been watched by 15 million people in Britain, Diana, the estranged wife of Prince Charles, the heir to the British throne, described  herself as being so beaten down by her loveless marriage that she sought refuge  in self-mutilation and "rampant bulimia."


The Helms Mandate
To the Editor:
James W. Nance, Senate Foreign Relations Committee staff director, writes (letter, Nov. 17) that Senator Jesse Helms "was elected to fulfill a mandate from the people to downsize government and help balance the Federal budget."


BAKER, FENTRESS TO BUY LEVIN INVESTMENT FIRM
Baker, Fentress &amp; Company plans to acquire John A. Levin &amp; Company, a closely held investment firm based in New York, for about $116 million in stock and cash, the company said yesterday.
Under Baker, Fentress management, the purchase is expected to increase assets tenfold to about $5.5 billion.
Levin, founded in  1982, manages more than $5 billion in assets for institutional investors and individuals.
Baker, Fentress will issue five million shares and pay $35 million in cash to acquire Levin.
Baker, Fentress's stock rose 12.5 cents yesterday, to $16.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Under Stress, Immune Cells Rush To Skin to Repel Microbe Invaders
EVERYONE knows stress is bad for you.
It weakens the immune system.
It increases your susceptibility to infections and diseases like cancer.
Drugs that exert their effects on the body's natural stress hormones are medicinal sledgehammers: they may help your arthritis, but they make you feel like Wile E. Coyote after a bad day with the Roadrunner.
But it now turns out that stress has been handed a bum rap, mostly by scientists who study diseases, death genes and other aspects of biological doom.
As with most complex systems, there is another side to the story.
Under certain  conditions, say two neuroscientists from Rockefeller University in New York, a stressful experience can marshal immune cells to travel to distant parts of the  body, ready to do battle with any foreign agent trying to breach the defenses.


AS STANDOFF ENDS, CLINTON IS SEEKING THE HIGH GROUND
With the budget standoff suspended and Government offices reopened, President Clinton went to the Capitol this evening and urged his fellow Democrats to present the budget fight with Republicans as an issue of principle and not politics.
"I have some advice for you guys," Mr.
Clinton said, according to a Congressman who took notes at a private meeting the President had with Democratic lawmakers.
"We have to exercise a high degree of humility. We're going to make some very complicated demands, and the American people are going to judge us on how we handle this debate."


Fighting The Death Sentence
There is a moment toward the end of Albert Camus's novel "The Plague" when, against all expectations, signs emerge of a slight abatement in the horror.
The  season slowly changes, but not everyone can adapt.
Camus writes: "Plague had imbued some of them with a skepticism so thorough that it was now a second nature; they had become allergic to hope in any form. Thus even when the plague  had run its course, they went on living by its standards. They were, in short, behind the times."
Is it possible, in the case of the AIDS epidemic, that we too are "behind the times"?
The thought has been creeping up on me as I've watched the progress in treatments for H.I.V. and AIDS over the last few years, even over the last few months.
Just two weeks ago, a Food and Drug Administration panel recommended for approval three new anti-H.I.V. drugs, the most powerful yet made.


Kerkorian Aims to Oust a Chrysler Director
Kirk Kerkorian said today that he would try to oust a director of the Chrysler Corporation and replace him with Jerome B. York, a former Chrysler executive and Mr.
Kerkorian's chief strategist.
Mr.
Kerkorian, who holds a 14 percent stake in Chrysler, has been pushing the board for nearly a year to take steps that he believes will increase the company's shareholder value.
A meeting today with the chairman of Chrysler, Robert J. Eaton, apparently did not satisfy Mr.
Kerkorian.
The two men had not met since December.


Two Worlds of Trash
While sanitation cutbacks have left many New York City streets much dirtier,  other streets are as clean as ever, thanks to cleanup efforts by business improvement districts.
The situation has made for some startling contrasts in many areas.
Article, page B3.


Algerian Militants Now Ready to Negotiate
Appearing to acknowledge a serious setback after Algeria's presidential elections, the outlawed Islamic Salvation Front called today for negotiations with President Liamine Zeroual to end the country's civil strife, which has taken tens of thousands of lives.
Mr.
Zeroual, a former army general who was appointed President by the military Government in January 1994, emerged from last week's election with 61 percent of the vote, which was taken by most analysts to be a strong mandate despite a boycott of the election by major opposition groups.


Q&amp;A
Out of the Pool


Senator Kassebaum Says She'll Retire in '96
Senator Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas said today that she would leave the Senate  when her term expires next year, after three terms in which she won respect as an independent and thoughtful legislator.
Mrs.
Kassebaum, one of a shrinking number of Republican moderates in Congress, will depart as chairman of the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, with jurisdiction over job training, health, the arts and other issues.
She is the only woman to head a Senate committee.


Conviction in Extortion Case
Pay up or else, callers told the owners of the D. J. Noodle Restaurant.
The owners notified the police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation instead.
Yesterday, a Federal jury in Newark convicted Ei-Hua Lin in an extortion scheme involving a demand for "medical fees" for a former worker who was supposedly injured while working in the Jersey City restaurant.


New Beatles Album Offers the Debut Of a 1977 Ballad
There's a new Beatles song, "Free as a Bird," 25 years after the band came apart.
Among some fans, it has been anticipated as something like an 11th commandment or a new Shakespeare sonnet, and as soon as it was broadcast on Sunday night, radio stations began playing "Free as a Bird" repeatedly.
For Capitol Records, which will release the song today as the linchpin of "The Beatles Anthology 1," a two-CD set with two hours of previously unreleased Beatles material, it should help rekindle Beatlemania one more time.
Last year, "Live at the BBC" sold eight million copies worldwide, and this time, Capitol's marketing will tie in with ABC's six-hour television special, which continues tomorrow and Thursday at 9 P.M.
A second volume of the anthology, to include another new song, "Real Love," is expected in March, though the song will be broadcast on Wednesday; a collection of rare film and video clips is also in the works.
Now that years of legal entanglements have ended, the Beatles archives are being thoroughly ransacked.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about an embrace between Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, and John R. Kasich, Republican of Ohio, after the budget compromise, misstated Mr.
Kasich's role.
He is chairman of the House Budget Committee, not the Senate's.


Health Cost of Meat Diet Is Billions, Study Says
A GROUP of doctors, after reviewing earlier studies of meat consumption and disease, has published a report arguing that the yearly national health care costs of eating meat are comparable to the estimated $50 billion spent each year to treat illnesses related to smoking.
A spokesman for the American Medical Association, however, said he had "very  serious reservations" about the methods used to come to those conclusions.


Corrections
The main article in Weekend on Friday, about the rejuvenation of Chelsea, misidentified a store listed among those that have moved into 19th-century buildings.
It is Today's Man, not Tomorrow's Man.


Rabin's Killer Says He Acted For Past Generations of Jews
Speaking out for a second time since he assassinated Yitzhak Rabin, the confessed killer, Yigal Amir, asserted in court today that generations of Jews stood with him when he fired the fatal shots.
"Maybe physically I acted alone, but what pulled the trigger was not only my  finger, but the finger of this whole nation, which for 2,000 years yearned for this land and dreamed of it," Mr.
Amir said during a hearing at the Tel Aviv Magistrate Court.


Boggs Wins Gold Glove
Yankee third baseman Wade Boggs was named a Gold Glove award winner today for the second straight season.
Angels pitcher Mark Langston and Toronto outfielder Devon White won their seventh Gold Glove awards; Seattle outfielder Ken Griffey Jr. won for the sixth  straight time.
Angels first baseman J. T. Snow was the only first-time winner among the American League selections.


L.P.G.A. Honors Sorenstam
Annika Sorenstam looked fresh, even after a grueling overnight itinerary that would get most travel agents fired.
She took a helicopter, a private plane and a jumbo jet, but less than 24 hours after winning the Australian Ladies Masters on that continent's Gold Coast, the 25-year-old Swedish golfer was in Manhattan yesterday to accept the L.P.G.A.'s player of the year award.
Sorenstam won three times in the United States, including the Open last summer, and three times on the European tour, becoming the first woman to lead both tours in earnings in the same year.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
A Late-Recognized Legend Who's as Rough as Ever Ruth Brown Rainbow and Stars


Thanksgiving Conundrum: Turkey Costs More, but It's a Bargain
This will tell you a little about why your turkey may cost more this year and why buying the bird in New York City can be a bargain, at least around Thanksgiving.
It may also tell you a little about the business of selling turkeys.
Hard information was hard to come by last night, in part because employees of one big supermarket chain thought they might be, um, putting their heads on the chopping block if they commented.


Russian Gold Medal Skater, 28, Dies in Practice
Sergei Grinkov, the classic Russian pairs skater who won two Olympic gold medals with his wife and partner, Yekaterina Gordeyeva, died suddenly yesterday  in Lake Placid, N.Y., where he was training for a tour and the world professional championships.
Grinkov, who was 28, apparently suffered a heart attack.
The couple were training yesterday morning with Coach Marina Zueva when Grinkov collapsed at a rink in the Lake Placid Olympic Center, according to a statement issued by the International Management Group, which represents the defending Olympic champions.


'Ambulance Chaser' Bill
Ambulance chasing" by lawyers and doctors would be prohibited under a bill headed to the Assembly for a vote. For 31 days after an accident or disaster, lawyers, chiropractors, physicians and other health care professionals would be prohibited from contacting victims or hiring someone else to get in touch with them. Under the bill discussed at a committee hearing yesterday, anyone violating the rules would be subject to up to three months in jail and a $7,500  fine.


Thyssen and BellSouth Join in a German Bid
Thyssen Telecom A.G., the telecommunications subsidiary of Thyssen A.G., said yesterday that in partnership with the BellSouth Corporation of Atlanta it was bidding for a 49.9 percent stake in the telecommunications unit of the railroad  Deutsche Bahn A.G.
The bid is part of a plan by Thyssen and BellSouth to form a  joint company to apply for a national telephone license in Germany and compete against the state monopoly, Deutsche Telekom A.G.
The telecommunications unit of Deutsche Bahn, DBKom G.m.b.H., owns the largest fixed-wire network in Germany that is not in the hands of Telekom.
Several other companies have indicated that they plan to bid for the DBKom stake.
(Reuters)


First Interstate Again Spurns Wells Fargo
First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles yesterday rejected a sweetened takeover bid from Wells Fargo &amp; Company, reiterating its support for First Bank  System Inc.'s $10.29 billion offer and setting the stage for a proxy fight.
The move marks a hardening of the battle lines in the takeover fight, analysts said.
Neither side is expected to increase its offer.


Desire to Have a Baby Is Called the Motive in a Triple Slaying
A man and woman, with the help of a friend, killed a mother in this Chicago suburb and ripped a live fetus from her womb because they were unable to conceive a baby and decided to take one, prosecutors said today.
Prosecutors offered the motive for the killing of Deborah Evans, 28, at a bond hearing for the three who are accused of murdering Ms.
Evans and two of her children late last week.
The newborn, a boy in good health, was found with the female who was charged and is now in the care of the state child welfare agency, officials said.


California Immigration Law Is Ruled to Be Partly Illegal
A Federal judge today ruled unconstitutional major sections of Proposition 187, the disputed California ballot initiative that denies education and health  benefits to illegal immigrants.
But the judge, Mariana R. Pfaelzer of United States District Court in Los Angeles, left standing enough of the measure to cause lingering concern among civil rights advocates.


Belgian Grocery Deal
GIB Group S.A., a Belgian retailer, said yesterday that it would sell a 20 percent stake in its Bigg hypermarket to Promodes of France for an undisclosed sum.
GIB said the sale was part of an agreement to join the companies in a purchasing cooperative aimed at reducing the costs of goods for GIB's food stores, which account for 59 percent of the company's annual sales of 232 billion Belgian francs ($8 billion).
Paul-Louis Halley, chief executive of Promodes, said the move would cut costs by "several percentage points."
(Bloomberg Business News)


The Fall of a Polish Patriot
Like Winston Churchill, who fell from power only months after the German surrender in World War II, Lech Walesa has discovered that heroic leadership does not necessarily guarantee permanent popularity.
But the defeat of Mr.
Walesa in Sunday's presidential election in Poland should not obscure his accomplishments or his place in history.
Whatever his failings as Polish chief executive and presidential candidate, Mr.
Walesa delivered his country from the  long Stalinist night.
His struggle as leader of the Solidarity trade union to restore democracy to Poland made possible one of the great victories of the cold war.
It is ironic, to say the least, that Mr.
Walesa lost the election to Aleksander Kwasniewski, a former Communist.
Mr.
Walesa proved more effective at  leading a revolution than running a government.
During an erratic five-year term, he sometimes seemed more intent on increasing the powers and privileges of his office than guiding Poland through difficult years.
His move into an opulent 17th-century palace was politically obtuse.


No Headline
There were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded."
THE PRINCESS OF WALES. [A4:3.]


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Briefly Passes 5,000, Then Closes With a Loss For the first time, the Dow Jones industrial average passed the 5,000-point level, doing so twice during the session.
But the market could not keep up its early momentum, and the Dow ended down 6.86 points, at 4,983.09.


2 Investors Start Proxy Struggle At RJR Nabisco
Bennett S. LeBow and Carl C. Icahn began their proxy battle yesterday to force the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation to spin off immediately its food business from its tobacco operations, submitting the names of nine people they hope would replace the company's current board.
In response, RJR Nabisco assailed the choices as a "hand-picked slate" and sued Mr.
LeBow and Mr.
Icahn in Federal court, accusing them of securities law violations.
The company, through a spokeswoman, said the two financiers had violated securities law "by secretly conspiring to form a group to acquire a controlling interest in RJR Nabisco common stock."


Boston Beer Goes to Market
The shares of the Boston Beer Company are poised to make their debut today on the New York Stock Exchange.
"I expect the first trade to be at least five points above where the stock is priced," said David Menlow of IPO Financial Market in Springfield, N.J.


Armed Men Rob Church
Four men carrying guns broke into a Korean church in Flushing, Queens, yesterday, interrupting a morning service to steal money and jewelry from parishioners, the police said.
The men entered the Sung Do Presbyterian Church at 144-23 34th Avenue about  11:30 A.M., the police said.
They took cash and jewelry from congregants and $8,000 from a church collection box, the police said.
No one was injured.
Detectives from the 109th Precinct are investigating.


Math of a Class-Action Suit: 'Winning' $2.19 Costs $91.33
Dexter J. Kamilewicz never wants to win a class-action lawsuit again -- at least not when it costs him more than he wins.
Mr.
Kamilewicz, a real estate broker in Portland, Me., found out this year that he was among the winners of a class-action suit against his mortgage bank,  the Bank of Boston.
He learned of his victory only when he spotted a $91.33 "miscellaneous deduction" from his escrow account that turned out to be his payment for lawyers he never knew he had hired.
His winnings were apparently just $2.19 in back interest.


Ex-Correction Officer Slain in Brooklyn Keno Bar
A retired city correction captain was killed in a Brooklyn bar last night when he confronted at least four robbers who may have been drawn by the bar's receipts from Quick Draw, New York State's popular new keno game, the authorities said.
Four other people -- all believed to be the robbers -- were also shot in the  wild gunfire at the Kings Korner Lounge and Bar, a modest establishment popular with correction officers who work at nearby Kings County Hospital in East Flatbush.


Michael Sterne, 63, a Reporter And Travel Editor at The Times
Michael Sterne, a former real estate editor and travel editor of The New York Times, died yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 63.
He died after a long illness, his wife, Geri, said.


A Chinese Wall Shows Cracks;Hollywood Scrambles as Film Barriers Start to Fall
Hollywood executives are itching to get into China.
And their day may finally have come, after years of waiting.
China's film industry looks like an untapped gold mine, overdue for an invasion by Hollywood producers.
Five billion movie tickets are expected to be sold this year, about four times the number sold in America.
There is an unmatched array of movie-shooting locations, and even a bevy of talented directors and actors.
But there is a little obstacle called Chinese bureaucracy, and how much it will eventually yield is uncertain.


Study of Cloud Patterns Points to Many Areas Exposed to Big Rises inUltraviolet Radiation
DEPLETION of the earth's protective ozone layer is exposing some areas of the world, including parts of the United States, to biologically harmful doses of ultraviolet radiation, but some other areas will not become vulnerable for another 20 to 50 years, according to a new study.
The reason for the variance, the authors of the study say, is that patterns of cloud cover vary from one area to another.
Clouds as well as ozone block ultraviolet radiation, and the actual pattern and amount of radiation reaching the ground cannot be calculated globally unless this is taken into account.


Cancers After Chernobyl
Thyroid cancer among children has increased up to 100-fold in the area most exposed to radiation from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, the United Nations' health agency said today.
A significant increase in leukemia has not been detected, but could still occur because it develops more slowly, said experts gathered for a conference sponsored by the agency, the World Health Organization.


Strategies Changing For Union
Altha Kennedy received a tip that a home care aide wanted to join the union,  so she drove to the prim gray clapboard house that the woman shares with a daughter and son-in-law.
The aide, Gertrude Martinez, recounted how the disabled woman whom she had bathed, shampooed and taken to doctors since May abruptly dismissed her from her $4.25-an-hour job.
Arriving for work a few days ago, Ms.
Martinez said, she found her patient interviewing a prospective replacement.


Budget-Deal Euphoria Fades; Dollar Loses Some of Its Gains
The dollar gave back some early gains yesterday as currency traders grew more skeptical about United States budget negotiations.
The dollar surged in Asian trading hours after President Clinton and Congress agreed late Sunday to try to balance the budget in seven years, and to reopen Government operations.


Pro-Russian Chechen Leader Survives Bombing in Capital
In the most brazen recent sign that war is again intensifying in Chechnya, an attempt was made here this morning to assassinate the Russian-appointed leader of the republic when two powerful bomb blasts rocked his heavily guarded motorcade as he traveled to work.
The explosions, which sent black plumes of smoke spiraling into the misty sky of the Chechen capital, could be heard throughout the city at exactly 8 A.M.
Six people -- including the head of the Moscow-backed government, Doku Zavgayev -- were wounded in the attack, but nobody was killed.


Scandal Over Plan for U.S. Company to Monitor Brazil's Amazon
Wiretaps of a top Brazilian official that were leaked as the Senate prepares  to vote on $1.4 billion in foreign loans for a controversial project to monitor  the Amazon have led to the dismissal of two presidential appointees and thrown the future of the project into doubt.
The project would use radar stations and satellites to monitor more than two  million square miles of Amazon territory for security, control of drug trafficking and other purposes.


You Can Still Do Some Good With a Penny
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 11 news article on the collecting of pennies by New York schoolchildren for charity underscores that the nation's oldest official coin still has value and utility.


CROWLEY, MILNER TO TAKE OVER STEINBACH CHAIN
Crowley, Milner &amp; Company, a department store chain, announced yesterday that it was taking over the Steinbach chain in the Northeast.
The deal is expected to more than double Crowley's sales to about $215 million a year and add more than  a dozen stores to the 10-store company.
Steinbach Inc. is owned by the Schottenstein family of Columbus, Ohio.
Under the deal, the family would receive new Crowley stock valued at as much as 45 percent of its current stock.
Crowley's stock jumped $1 yesterday, to $5.50, on the American Stock Exchange.
Crowley said it would sell 9 or 10 of Steinbach's 24 stores, which operate in Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, New Hampshire and Vermont.
The Crowley stores are in southeastern Michigan.


Marino Captures a Record, and Little More
Outside Joe Robbie Stadium tonight, street vendors were hawking T-shirts imploring the Miami Dolphins to hire Jimmy Johnson.
Inside, the San Francisco 49ers showed no mercy for the beleaguered Don Shula.
Before 73,080, the largest crowd ever to see a Dolphin game here, the 49ers battered Miami, 44-20.
The Dolphins, who began the season 4-0, suffered their fifth loss in the last seven games.
For a team that was picked by many to represent the American Football Conference in the Super Bowl, they are now 6-5,  two games behind division-leading Buffalo and in jeopardy of not even reaching the playoffs.


Florida to Resume Chain Gangs; Rules on Shackles Are Criticized
Florida is bringing back chain gangs on Tuesday, except in a version that some state lawmakers say subverts the intent of the law that reinstates the gangs.
Like Alabama and Arizona earlier this year, Florida is resurrecting the practice of putting prison inmates in leg irons to work on roadsides under armed guard.
But unlike Alabama, which chains the inmates together in lines of five, Florida's work crews will be shackled, but not in groups.
That is the way Arizona does it.
And it is the method that the Florida Corrections Secretary, Harry K. Singletary Jr., deemed would get the most work out of inmates.


A Misstep for Virginia's Trainer
Virginia's head athletic trainer was disciplined yesterday for sticking his leg onto the field in front of a Virginia Tech player during Saturday's game.
The trainer, JOE GIECK, extended his leg over the sideline in an apparent attempt to trip Virginia Tech's ANTONIO BANKS, who intercepted a pass and sprinted down the sideline for a touchdown on the final play of the game.
Gieck's leg did not make contact with Banks, and the Hokies won the game, 36-29.
Athletic Director TERRY HOLLAND said that Gieck will accompany Virginia if the team receives an anticipated bowl bid this season and will perform his regular duties of preparing players for the game, but he will not be allowed on  the sideline.
(AP)


Casino Executives to Las Vegas
Lured by the chance to build a bigger casino, three executives of the Sands Hotel and Casino are heading west.
The three -- Bradley H. Stone, the casino's president; Robert G. Goldstein,  executive vice president, and William S. Weidner, the president of the casino's  parent company -- all resigned their New Jersey jobs yesterday.
Their new Nevada assignment will include development of what Las Vegas Sands Inc. is touting as the world's largest casino, resort, entertainment and convention project, to be  built on 60 acres on the Las Vegas strip.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Lost Capital of a Fabled Kingdom Found in Syria
ONE of the vanished cities of antiquity, Urkesh in its heyday more than 4,000 years ago was an opulent oasis of commerce straddling a major trade route in what is now northeastern Syria, near the Turkish border.
It was reputed to be the capital of a fabled kingdom and the most sacred religious center of the Hurrians, an obscure people who were contemporaries of the Sumerians in the south and the Semites of Ebla in the west.
But history had long ago misplaced Urkesh and was left with but a dim memory  of the Hurrian civilization.
The Hurrians, or Horites, are mentioned briefly in  the Old Testament and on a clay tablet belonging to Pharaoh Amenemhet IV, Egypt's ruler in 2000 B.C.
The rest is mainly legend.
Some historians had even doubted that the city ever really existed.


New Jersey Teams To Seek State Title
There will be championship-caliber football at Giants Stadium this season, after all.
Twelve top high school football teams from New Jersey were selected yesterday to play their state championship games at Giants Stadium on Dec. 1 and 2.
For the second straight year, an agreement was reached between the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority and the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association that will enable the games to be played at the stadium in East Rutherford.


Magic Begins Collecting Vaughn Dividend
Magic 101, Warriors 95


Trees, Fallen Leaves, Growth and Decay
Ages seem to unfold in the haunting works of the choreographers and dancers who call themselves Eiko and Koma.
The flow of time is often their theme.
Time was again the subject of "Autumn Passage," which they presented on Thursday night.
The suite of four pieces included two premieres and two recent creations.
All concerned growth and decay.


Buchanan Criticizes G.O.P. Primary Rules
Patrick J. Buchanan, the Republican Presidential candidate, lashed out yesterday against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Gov.
George E. Pataki for keeping the New York State Republican Presidential primary all but closed to rivals of the contender they support, Senator Bob Dole.
Using unusually strong language, Mr.
Buchanan said New York's primary system  "stinks" because it set extremely high hurdles for candidates to get on the ballot if they were not supported by Republican Party leaders.


TIDEWATER TO ACQUIRE RIVAL HORNBECK OFFSHORE
Tidewater Inc. said yesterday that it would buy a competitor, Hornbeck Offshore Services Inc., in a stock swap valued at about $255.2 million.
Tidewater, based in New Orleans, owns 565 supply vessels, crew boats and tugboats, and a natural-gas compression business.
Hornbeck, of Galveston, Tex.,  has 61 vessels in the Gulf of Mexico and holds stakes in two ventures with 29 safety standby ships in the North Sea.
Tidewater agreed to exchange 0.667 of a share for each Hornbeck share.
Based on Tidewater's Friday close of $29 a share, the offer values Hornbeck shares at $19.34 each.
Hornbeck's stock rose $2.1875 yesterday, to $17.5625, in Nasdaq trading.
Tidewater's stock slipped 12.5 cents  yesterday, to $28.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Church as Business, Even Show Business
Early in "Racing Demon," David Hare's carefully researched, theatrical if schematic disquisition on the Church of England, the spiritually exhausted Rev.
Lionel Espy is being chastised by his old friend and superior, the Rt.
Rev.
Charlie Allen, Bishop of Southwark.
Word has reached the Bishop that Lionel seems to have lost interest in the administration of the sacrament.
Lionel doesn't deny the charge.
He admits that he's sometimes impatient with ritual, being weighed down by the unrelenting poverty and despair in his London parish.
"I wouldn't even say the church was a joke," Lionel tells the Bishop.
"In our area it's an irrelevance. It has no connection to most people's lives." He feels that his obligation is mainly to listen and learn, to understand and serve the ordinary working people.


Low-Price Plan For Software
Softkey International Inc. said today that it planned to release a line of low-priced educational software even as it pursues a hostile bid for the Learning Company, a developer of premium-priced educational software.
"Today we are declaring war on educational software prices out of parents' reach," said Softkey's president, Kevin O'Leary.


A Paper Is Back In Washington
The Los Angeles Times resumed publication today of its Washington edition, reversing a decision last summer to drop the edition to cut costs.
The Washington edition, a 24-page version of the Times Mirror Company's flagship newspaper, is published Monday through Friday in Bel Air, Md., and has a circulation of 3,000 copies in Washington and 500 in New York.


A Frustrated Brooks Takes It Out on a Coach
It is beginning to get bad for the Giants.
Really bad.
So bad that emotions run high and frustration shows in sometimes ugly forms.
That's what happened Sunday between the team's Pro Bowl linebacker, Michael Brooks, and the defensive line coach, Earl Leggett, who almost got into a fistfight on the sideline.
During the 28-19 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, Brooks approached Leggett and told him that he didn't think some members of the defensive line were doing  a very good job of stopping offensive linemen.
Leggett basically told Brooks to  mind his own business.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL


Leasing as One Means To Avert Obsolescence
TO buy, or not to buy: that is the question.
Personal computers are notorious for having a half-life of about two years.
In scientific terms, this means that two years after you buy the computer, half  of your friends will sneer at you for having an outdated machine.
In households  with children the half-life is closer to six months.


Site Is Set for Murder Trial
The man accused of kidnapping and killing Polly Klaas will be tried in Santa  Clara County, across the San Francisco Bay from where she died, a judge ruled today.
The ruling by Judge Lawrence Antolini of Sonoma County Superior Court pleased the victim's relatives, who did not want to travel far to watch the trial.
The defense wanted the trial moved from Sonoma County, where the widely publicized crime occurred, to San Diego County, 400 miles south.


An Escalator In Subway Partly Severs Girl's Toes
A 3-year-old girl had three toes partly severed yesterday when her right foot became caught in a subway station escalator at Lexington Avenue and 59th Street, transit officials said.
The girl, Catherine Sanchez, of Astoria, Queens, was riding up the escalator  with her mother, Mercedes Fuentes, shortly before 9 A.M., when her foot became caught at the top of the moving stairs.
A station manager heard screams and ran to the escalator, where Ms.
Fuentes was clutching her daughter.
The little girl's right foot was bleeding.


In Weary Bosnian Capital, Joy, and Tears for the Dead
For 20 days, Sarajevo had been waiting for this news.
And while the terms of  the agreement signed today did not satisfy everyone, it at least promised an end to the years of war.
Among the burnt-out cars and shell-holes of the besieged Bosnian capital, residents wept and talked of this respite from destruction and death.


L.I. Power Authority Quietly Sifts Proposals From Lilco's Suitors
Working largely behind closed doors, a public board appointed by Gov.
George  E. Pataki has begun weighing more than 30 proposals to revamp the Long Island Lighting Company, including offers from the State Power Authority, several independent power producers and two New York utilities -- Brooklyn Union and Consolidated Edison.
The board, the Long Island Power Authority, is trying to meet the Governor's  deadline to deliver a plan by mid-December that could cut electricity rates on Long Island by at least 10 percent.


OUT OF OFFICE WITH: Mario M. Cuomo;Keeping the Faith
I DON'T do lunch," Mario M. Cuomo grumbled into the telephone, as combative,  as incorrigible as he ever was at a news conference in Albany. "Lunch takes too  much time," he explained, punctuating each word as if engaged in a debate over a matter of public policy.
Was the former Governor of New York saying he was now so busy that he had no  time to eat?
"I just finished my lunch talking to you," he barked, by way of answering yes.
"Sorry."


CLASSICAL MUSIC


Rangers Beat Pittsburgh In a Surprising Rout
Few hockey games are won in the first two minutes, but sometimes the eventual result is clearly foreshadowed.
That happened in a dramatic way last night at Madison Square Garden, where the Rangers routed the Pittsburgh Penguins, 9-4, in a surprisingly one-sided affair before a celebrating throng of 18,200.
The first hint of what was to come happened just 70 seconds after the opening face-off when Pittsburgh's Mario Lemieux sailed in on a breakaway from center ice against Ranger goaltender Mike Richter.
Lemieux is simply hockey's best player and the leader of the league's hottest team, a team that had gone 9-1-1 in its previous 11 games.


With New Backing, Jazz Competition Plans New Riffs
Though the winners of the ninth annual Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition wouldn't agree, this year's event was more important because of what it said about jazz in general and the Monk Institute in particular than about the competition itself.
The institute, which is based here, is on its way to becoming a dominant player in the jazz world.
What started nine years ago in a small auditorium at the Smithsonian Institution, overlooked by the news media, and much of the jazz  world outside this city, now has the enthusiastic support of a Japanese car company, a film studio, a local gas company, several record labels, an airline,  the Hard Rock Cafe and more.
The last two days of competition, which spotlight a different instrument each year, are held at the Kennedy Center, and there is a pre-competition party at the Vice President's house.


For Milosevic, a Chance at a New Lease on Political Life
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, who presides over an economy in a shambles, a state that has been internationally branded as a pariah and a populace exhausted by war, will return to Belgrade carrying the one thing he hopes will keep him in power: a signed peace agreement.
"The war is finally over in Bosnia-Herzegovina," Mr.
Milosevic said in remarks broadcast from Dayton, Ohio.
"It is now time for all to turn to peace, reconstruction and economic recovery."


Dispute of Court Officers And Judges Escalates
With so many people and so many emotions jammed into such small spaces, it is no wonder New York City courts are raucous places where court officers and judges have to struggle to maintain the peace.
But these days some of them are failing to keep the peace among themselves.
In the last few months the relationship between a dozen or so judges throughout  the city and the union leader of the uniformed court officers has escalated into a high-volume clash laced with personal attacks and, at times, profanity.


CLINTON'S WORDS: 'THE PROMISE OF PEACE'
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference on the Balkans today, as recorded by the Federal Document Clearing House, a private transcription service:
OPENING STATEMENT


Class Notes
That's my job, to make people uneasy," the Charlotte Schools Superintendent, John Murphy, widely regarded as one of the most respected innovators in public education, said on his first day of work in 1991.
He succeeded.


From a Star's Lifetime of Collecting
Dozens of antiques collectors and ballet lovers gathered at Christie's today  to watch the last effects of Rudolf Nureyev being auctioned off.
Some of his possessions were worth a lot in their own right: a Russian Karelian-birch library table went for $116,475, for instance, and a double manual harpsichord,  made by Johannes Ruckers in 1627, sold for an impressive $59,014.


Clinton Neglected Promises on Economy;A Promise He Kept
To the Editor:
William Safire, my favorite conservative columnist, surely knows better.
In his Nov. 16 column he wrote: "On taking office in 1993, the previously centrist  Clinton made a surprise 'lurch to the left,' raising taxes and proposing new spending."


Lawyers for Oklahoma Bombing Suspects Want Trial Moved
In a courthouse still bandaged in plywood and plastic as a result of the April 19 bombing of the Federal building across the street, the two men charged  in the blast here asked today that the trial be moved out of Oklahoma.
In separate motions, lawyers for the suspects, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, argued that Oklahomans were too close to the case to give the defendants a fair trial.
The Government has voiced its determination to try the  case here.


Thousands Rally in Cairo For Victims of Bombing
Thousands of Egyptians shouted anti-terrorist slogans today as they marched in a funeral procession for victims of the suicide bombing of the country's embassy in Pakistan on Sunday.
The display included representatives from all of Egypt's opposition parties,  and it was intended to underscore the widespread revulsion felt here after the attack, which is believed to have been carried out by Muslim militants.


ResultsPlus
N.H.L.


Beijing Still Censors What Shanghai Reads
To the Editor:
I applaud Ding Fa Zhang, the editor of Shanghai's Xinmen Evening News, for his honesty in readily admitting that he would not ask reporters to investigate  police corruption in Shanghai in order not to "violate journalism standards set  in Beijing" (Editorial Notebook, "Chinese Schizophrenia," Nov. 19).


Corrections
A television review yesterday about "Lee Harvey Oswald: An American Tragedy," on A&amp;E, misstated the given name of the author of the book "Marina and Me." She  is Priscilla Johnson McMillan, not Patricia.


Marlins Sign Devon White
The Florida Marlins filled a crucial position yesterday by signing center fielder DEVON WHITE to a $9.9 million, three-year contract.
White, the first free agent to change teams this off season, will make $3 million next season, $3.4 million in 1997 and $3.5 million in 1998.
White, who spent the last five seasons with Toronto and turns 33 next month, won his seventh Gold Glove award Monday.
Among the Gold Glove winners announced yesterday, GREG MADDUX of the Atlanta Braves headed the National League list in winning for the sixth time, moving him into second place behind BOB GIBSON for the most by an N.L. pitcher since the award was instituted in 1957.
Gibson won nine times with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Atlanta's MARQUIS GRISSOM won his third consecutive Gold Glove and Chicago's MARK GRACE his third in four seasons.
The awards are voted on by major league managers and coaches and presented by Rawlings.
AP


ONE--NIGHT STAND
As New York humiliations go, closing on Broadway on opening night is near the top.
Such was the self-inflicted fate of Christopher Darden on Sunday -- only weeks after he had held millions spellbound in the trial that was supposed to make everyone who fell within its spotlight, Robert Kardashian possibly excepted, a star forever.
It was on Sunday that Mr.
Darden, in his first visit ever to New York City, was to give afternoon and evening lectures at $25 a ticket, with $100 buying a fan the chance to paw the man himself at a pre-lecture "catered reception." But  at the matinee I attended at Town Hall, a 1,500-seat theater off Times Square, Mr.
Darden's audience included a red-plush sea of roughly 900 empty seats.
After he finished, both the evening performance and a Monday night repeat in Philadelphia were canceled.


Solectria Says Car Passed Crash Test
An advanced electric car with a body made of composite materials has passed the Federal crash test for head-on collisions, according to its manufacturer.
The development is significant not only for the company, Solectria, of Wilmington, Mass., which hopes to mass-produce the cars, but also for the three major American car companies, which are cooperating to design a high-mileage, low-pollution car, one that is likely to be made of composites.


Tobacco Company Sues Former Executive Over CBS Interview
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation yesterday sued a former executive  of the company who was interviewed for a segment on the CBS News television program "60 Minutes" that was never broadcast.
CBS was not named as a defendant in the suit, which accuses the executive, Jeffrey Wigand, a former vice president of research for Brown &amp; Williamson, of theft, fraud and breach of contract in violating confidentiality agreements that he had struck with the company.
But the network said in a statement on Sunday that it would indemnify Mr.
Wigand against lawsuits arising from his agreement to be interviewed, and Richard Scruggs, Mr.
Wigand's lawyer, said yesterday that "CBS is standing good for it."


Debt
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of bonds due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
The bonds, which are callable once on Dec. 8, 1997, pay an interest rate of 6.155 percent twice a year and are priced at par.


Links to Piedmont By a Turin Group
Ensemble Astree was established in 1991 by the Istituto per i Beni Musicali in Piemonte to champion neglected composers from this northwestern region of Italy.
On Sunday at the Frick Collection, this Turin-based period-instrument group -- consisting of violin, viola, cello, flute, oboe and harpsichord -- gave bright, outgoing performances of mostly 18th-century works, including three by regional composers.


400 Militants Give Up Under Algerian Amnesty
The Algerian press reported today that about 400 armed Islamic militants had  turned themselves in to the authorities under an army offer of amnesty.
And in more fallout from the Algerian presidential election last week, another major opposition party that had boycotted the election, the Front for the Liberation of Algeria, called for negotiations with the winner, President Liamine Zeroual.


Real Estate;Many entertainment companies say goodbye to Hollywood and hello to West Los Angeles.
A DEVELOPER is refurbishing six former factories on the west side of Los Angeles in hopes of leasing the buildings to film studios or other entertainment companies.
The project, known as Olympic Studios, illustrates the continuing migration of entertainment companies from Hollywood into West Los Angeles.
That migration  has made a group of warehouses and former factories among the most sought-after  types of commercial real estate in the area.


A Great Leap Westward From Beijing
The Central Ballet of China is no stranger to local audiences.
The company from Beijing made its acclaimed New York debut in 1986 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music when it was introduced by none other than Mayor Edward I. Koch.
Now on a 10-week United States tour, the Central Ballet looks both the same and different.
The company dropped in for a New York appearance on Sunday night at Lehman Center for the Performing Arts at Lehman College in the Bronx.
Just as in 1986, the dancers, most of whom are new, moved easily from ballet's classical idiom to folk-dance styles and were beautifully schooled to project a  powerful theatrical presence.


Russian Skater Died After Heart Attack, Doctor Says
The sudden death Monday of the 28-year-old Sergei Grinkov, a two-time Olympic gold-medal-winning Russian pairs skater, resulted from a painless heart attack that occurred in the last 24 hours of his life, the pathologist who performed an autopsy disclosed here today.
The pathologist, Dr.
C.
Francis Varga, said Grinkov had an enlarged heart due to untreated high blood pressure and nearly complete blockage of two of the coronary arteries that nourish the heart.


BOSTON BEER SHARES JUMP ON FIRST DAY OF TRADING
Shares of the Boston Beer Company, the brewer of the Samuel Adams line of beers, surged yesterday on their first day of trading.
Nearly three million shares of Boston Beer were sold for $20 each late on Monday.
The stock opened at $26.875 on the New York Stock Exchange, reached $32.125, and closed at $28.
Almost 3.5 million shares changed hands, meaning some were traded more than once.
The company, based in Boston, decreased the size of the sale from the originally planned 4.32 million shares, which had been expected to be sold for $10 to $15 each.


Bedford Residents Defend Schools From a Satan Hunt
What began as criticism of a card game for children brought 1,000 people out  on Monday evening to defend their school system against charges that it is spreading Satanism.
The complaints were lodged by just two women.
But that did not lessen the rancor of residents in a town where many consider the public schools a point of  pride.
School officials said that they would not alter the curriculum or bow to  what Bruce Dennis, Bedford's School Superintendent, called in an interview today "rhetoric that is right out of the Christian Coalition's manifesto."


Tribune in Station Swap
The Tribune Broadcasting Company agreed today to swap its two radio stations  in Sacramento, Calif., for the Henry Broadcasting Company's station in Denver and an undisclosed amount of cash.
The agreement gives Tribune Broadcasting KVOD-FM, a classical-music radio station in Denver, and expands its presence in that city to three radio stations and one television station.
Tribune Broadcasting is a unit of the Chicago-based Tribune Company, which publishes newspapers and books.
The transaction gives Henry Broadcasting, which is based in San Francisco, the Sacramento stations KYMX-FM and KCTC-AM.


Channel One Names Merkley Newman
The Channel One Network, which broadcasts a daily sponsored newscast in classrooms around the country, said yesterday that it had named Merkley Newman Harty in New York to handle its account, which had previously been inactive.
The billings were estimated at under $2 million.
Merkley Newman, a unit of the


Don't Build Water Plant in a Park
To the Editor:
The accord between New York City and upstate communities that avoids the need for the city to filter water from the Catskill-Delaware watershed is a signal achievement.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Back to Square One At Columbus Circle
After more than a decade of neighborhood battles, environmental studies and court fights over the fate of the New York Coliseum, New York State and New York City have decided to turn the clock back to 1984 and look for a new buyer for the valuable Columbus Circle site.
Requests for new development proposals are to be issued before the end of the year.


Burst Main Caused Sinkhole
It was a ruptured 80-year-old sewer main that caused a sinkhole to open up on Main Street on Monday.
Public Works Superintendent Jesse D'Amore said yesterday  that the break was an "isolated incident," probably the result of vibrations from traffic.
A larger sinkhole about 10 blocks away was caused by a ruptured water main last year.


School District Spending Plan
For 25 years, in and out of court, New Jersey has tried to figure out how to  equalize spending between rich and poor school districts.
The latest plan, released yesterday by the Education Commissioner, proposed that the State Legislature -- rather than local voters -- set basic school budgets. [Page A1.]


George Prideaux, Composer, 75
George Prideaux, a composer of music for the theater, died on Nov. 6 at Hillhaven San Francisco, a nursing home.
He was 75.
The cause was heart failure, said Rayanna Simons, a friend.


Talking, Thinking, Cooking Turkey;When Menus Are Long and Time Is Short, Stress Is Served
For Barbara Anne Livingstone, the days before Thanksgiving have been filled with premonitions of disaster.
Her second-worst fear: that she will neglect her  24-pound turkey for mere seconds and burn it to ashes.
Her worst: that she will  not clean it properly, and sicken her husband and their seven guests.
"This is my first Thanksgiving," said Mrs.
Livingstone, 30, of Butler, N.J.,  a relatively new homeowner who has little experience with large poultry.
"I want it to be memorable, but not that way."


Jets Just Can't Seem to Find Right Time to Use Baxter
Brad Baxter was rubbing lotion into his hands, choosing his words carefully,  trying perhaps to run wide around questions about the way he was used earlier this season, especially in a game against the Falcons in Atlanta.
At the time, the Jets were 1-2 and coming off a victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars.
Trailing Atlanta by 13-3 early in the fourth quarter, the Jets had wrestled the momentum away from the Falcons, and were poised for a score on a first-and-goal from the 1-yard line.


Who's to Blame? Ask the Turkey
HOW much turkey should I buy for five Great Danes?"
"Is it safe to feed the giblets to my piranha?"


Joseph L. Galiber Dies at 71; Political Power for 3 Decades
State Senator Joseph L. Galiber, a Bronx Democrat who took unpopular stands on crime and drug addiction and survived major scandals to remain a power in city politics for three decades, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 71.
He had suffered a heart attack about a year ago, his office said.


Seeking the Next Gold Rush
Wells Fargo &amp; Company knows something about how to rise above a dying business.
It was, after all, founded in 1852 as a stagecoach line, carrying eager prospectors to California's gold rush.
By World War I, the company had transformed one of its sidelines -- gold storage -- into a thriving San Francisco-based banking business.
Now Wells Fargo is reinventing itself again.
Its industry is under siege -- too many banks, too much business lost to mutual funds and other rivals.
But while its competitors respond by merging into coast-to-coast giants, Wells is, in many ways, shrinking.


Pataki Lists Tracts to Protect
Gov.
George E. Pataki today approved a list of 90 tracts of open space -- from the shores of Lake Ontario to the Brooklyn piers -- that the state wants to buy or protect.
But he conceded that with the state's budget problems, moving from wish list to reality will be difficult.
Surrounded by 14 Yonkers schoolchildren as he signed the land-protection plan in the courtyard of the Hudson River Museum, Mr.
Pataki said he was determined to work with the Legislature to insure that long-term interests prevail.


There's a New Toy in the House. Uh-Oh.
Raised high above his humble station, Mr.
Potato Head is now movie royalty, a star of the sweetest and savviest film of the year.
The computer-animated "Toy  Story," a parent-tickling delight, is a work of incredible cleverness in the best two-tiered Disney tradition.
Children will enjoy a new take on the irresistible idea of toys coming to life.
Adults will marvel at a witty script and utterly brilliant anthropomorphism.
And maybe no one will even mind what is bound to be a mind-boggling marketing blitz.
After all, the toy tie-ins are to old friends.
It's a lovely joke that the film's toy characters are charmingly plain (Etch-a-Sketch, plastic soldiers, a dog made out of a Slinky) while its behind-the-scenes technology, under the inspired direction of John Lasseter, could not be more cutting edge.
It's another joke that this film begins with human characters who have the flat, inexpressive look of toys.
A boy named Andy  is seen playing boisterously with Woody, his favorite cowboy, whose features remain innocently blank.
Only after Andy gets bored and goes elsewhere does Woody spring magically to life.


New Timetables for Turkeys
HAVE you been scrupulously following directions for cooking a turkey offered  by the Government, the National Turkey Federation or the Butterball Turkey-Talk  Line?
Is your Thanksgiving turkey usually overcooked?
No wonder.
The federation and the Government have finally caught up with what many turkey cookers have known for years.
Recommended cooking times are too long.


Gingrich Wants Backup From G.O.P. Governors
Recruiting additional forces for the budget fight, Speaker Newt Gingrich today invited Republican governors to become his de facto negotiating partners during the talks with the White House that are to begin next week.
Mr.
Gingrich said at a meeting of the Republican Governors Association that he hoped that Gov.
John M. Engler of Michigan, the group's new chairman, would have a team in Washington every week for the duration of talks over the Republicans' budget plan, which would shift control over a myriad of domestic programs to the states from the Federal Government.


Isles Closer to Muller Trade
Nine days after he told Kirk Muller to go home, General Manager Don Maloney appeared to be tantalizingly close to trading the Islander forward.
"We have irons in the fire," said Maloney, who had hoped to have something wrapped up by last night.
"We're close on something, but we're still not there.  We've put something back to a team and are waiting for a response."


VIRGIN ATLANTIC FINED FOR VIOLATIONS IN ADS ON INTERNET
Virgin Atlantic Airways was hit yesterday with the first civil penalty imposed by the Department of Transportation on an airline for violations in advertisements on the Internet.
Virgin Atlantic, the British carrier, has agreed to pay a $14,000 fine for failing to disclose the full prices of flights advertised on the Internet's World Wide Web and for listing a fare that was not  available.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Bartok, Leclair and Faure, With Beef Stew and Cake Itzhak Perlman Avery Fisher Hall


Fidelity Issues Special Bonuses
FMR's Fidelity Investments has issued special cash bonuses to employees for one of the few times in its 49-year history as the firm's assets ballooned with  this year's market rally.
Other mutual fund companies, including T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., said employees should expect year-end bonuses to be higher than usual.


MICROSOFT CO-FOUNDER RAISES PRECISION SYSTEMS STAKE
Precision Systems Inc. said yesterday that a company controlled by Paul G. Allen, the co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation, had raised its stake in Precision Systems to 20 percent.
The company, based in St.
Petersburg, Fla., sells a computer and software combination that automates the handling of transactions involving shopping by telephone.
Vulcan Ventures, the investment firm controlled by Mr.
Allen, exercised warrants to buy 1.5 million shares of Precision Systems for a total of $8.63 million, at prices ranging from $5 to $6.25 a share.
Vulcan Ventures now owns 2.45 million Precision Systems shares, which closed up 75 cents yesterday, at $13.25, in Nasdaq trading.


Jump Mark Invalidated
The Italian Athletic Federation yesterday rejected a world long-jump mark by  IVAN PEDROSO because of irregularities when the Cuban leaped 29 feet 4 3/4 inches, at Sestriere on July 29.
The decision left an American, MIKE POWELL, with the record at 29 feet 4 1/2 inches, set in 1991.
The federation also banned an official who influenced the reading of the wind gauge, and suspended two judges in charge of the jumping events for three years.
AP


Daimler-Benz Unit
Daimler-Benz Aerospace won final backing yesterday from its parent, Daimler-Benz A.G., the largest industrial company in Germany, to proceed with a  program to eliminate thousands of jobs.
Approval of the plan paves the way for 8,800 jobs to be eliminated in the next three years and at least three factories to be sold.
The aerospace unit, which first announced its intention to cut jobs in late  October, said the cuts were needed to help it reverse a first-half loss of 1.6 billion marks ($1.1 billion) and overcome the impact of a strong mark and a weak global aircraft market.
Labor leaders had fought the cuts, organizing protests throughout Germany and offering alternative cost-cutting plans to management as  late as last weekend.


Bagamoyo Journal;An Arts School in Search of a Soul
Music class here is in the shade of a tree just a stone's throw from the Indian Ocean.
The dozen students sit on cement blocks, rocks or rusty chairs, playing their cowhide drums and wooden marimbas.
In a building nearby, three men practice handstands and dance steps undisturbed by a couple playing the guitar and rehearsing the same song over and over.
In the thatched-roof theater, mime students perform for their teacher.


Holiday on Thursday;Thursday is Thanksgiving
NEW YORK


Honesty 101 for Police
To the Editor:
Why do I worry as I read that Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has announced plans to "train officers to testify" (news article, Nov. 15)?
This plan's purpose is to counter the widespread police perjury exposed in a series of scandals.
A two-day course at the Police Academy is in the works wherein the  officers will hear lectures on the law and participate in moot court.


Republicans Look to a Governor Who Stood Firm
As John M. Engler prepared to run for his second term as Governor of Michigan two years ago, his pollsters, relieved to see Mr.
Engler's approval ratings rebounding from dismal lows, started asking voters what animal he brought to mind.
Some politicians might have hoped for "thoroughbred horse" or "golden retriever." But the voters delighted Mr.
Engler's staff by suggesting creatures  like "badger" -- not because of Mr.
Engler's build, but because of his determination.


British Woman Convicted Of 3 Mass Murder Counts
As one of Britain's most infamous mass murder trials drew to a close, a 41-year-old woman was found guilty today of the brutal murder of three girls, including her 16-year-old daughter and eight-year-old stepdaughter.
The woman, Rosemary West, remained stone-faced as the foreman of the 11-member jury in Winchester read the verdicts.
The jury will resume deliberations Wednesday on seven other murder charges against Mrs.
West, who faces life in prison.


INSIDE
New Cabinet for Israel


Corrections
A map caption last Wednesday with an article about a visit by Israel's Acting Prime Minister, Shimon Peres, to the Jewish settlement at Zufim, in the West Bank, referred incorrectly to the settlement's status.
The site is near Qalqilya, which is scheduled to be handed over to Palestinian control, but the settlement itself is to remain under Israeli control.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11


A Celebration Of Riesling
CHARDONNAY dominates white wine consumption in the United States, but here in the Rheingau, Germany's oldest and most prosperous wine region, riesling is king.
For eight days this month, thousands of Germans from nearby Frankfurt and Mainz and other parts of the country, as well as other Europeans, toasted the king with the 1994 and earlier vintages.


A Dwarf Writes of His Psychic Mother
Sincere, serious and more than a little strange, "Frankie Starlight" tells of a dwarf who writes a book that combines autobiography and astronomy, and of his  mother, a psychic Frenchwoman who drifted to Ireland and to Texas.
As directed with quiet gravity by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, whose relatively recent "Object of Beauty" had far more zest, it radiates confidence in an audience interest level  it cannot always sustain.
Quirky as it is, this earnest film offers few real surprises and only fleeting charms.
One of its disappointments is the listless performance by Anne  Parillaud, the fiery star of "La Femme Nikita," who moves distractedly through her role.


F.C.C. Approval Seen Today For Westinghouse-CBS Deal
After two weeks of feuding over children's television, the Federal Communications Commission is expected on Wednesday to approve the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's $5.4 billion purchase of CBS Inc.
The approval has never been in much doubt -- all five commissioners have made it clear that they do not oppose the merger.
But the decision became embroiled in an internecine agency debate over how the approval should be couched.


Education Chief in Trenton Asks Legislature to Set School Budgets
New Jersey officials, under court order to equalize spending between rich and poor school districts, today proposed that the State Legislature, rather than local voters, set the basic school budget for all districts.
The New Jersey Commissioner of Education, Leo F. Klagholz, presented the plan -- the latest development in a 25-year legal battle -- without actual dollar figures.
The Commissioner said it would take weeks to determine whether following the recommendation would mean an increase in the state budget for education and what effect it might have on local property taxes.


Peres Puts 3 'Young Turks' and a Rabbi in His Cabinet
Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres today announced his Cabinet, in which he will direct the Defense Ministry himself, and he appointed a moderate rabbi to rebuild bridges with settlers and religious Jews.


Raphael P. Powell, Baptist Minister, 96
The Rev.
Dr.
Raphael Philemon Powell, who began his career as a polemicist inspired by the Marcus Garvey black nationalist movement and ended it as a Baptist minister preaching many of the same themes, died on Nov. 12 at his apartment in Harlem.
He was 96 and had been assistant to the pastor of the Mount Calvary Baptist Church since 1986.
Dr.
Powell arrived in Boston from Jamaica on a cargo ship as a teen-ager and  attended classes while washing dishes and holding other menial jobs.
He studied  at a series of Boston colleges during the 1920's, including Northeastern and Suffolk Law School, and even took correspondence courses, but it was not until he was 61 that he received a college degree, a bachelor of science in religion from the Columbia University School of General Studies in New York.
He later received a doctor of divinity from the Manhattan Bible College.


Knives in Their Bags, Celery on Their Minds
WALDY MALOUF, the chef at the Hudson River Club, was racing to La Guardia Airport recently on his way to a cooking demonstration in Minneapolis.
He arrived too late to check baggage and so had to carry his things onto the plane.
Stuffed into one bag were six kitchen knives, rolled up in a leather-and-cloth pouch.
Not so fast, Mr. Malouf.


PARING OF SOME STONE &amp; WEBSTER OPERATIONS IS SOUGHT
Major shareholders of Stone &amp; Webster Inc. have proposed that the company sell, spin off or distribute many of its operations and assets, keeping only the engineering and construction business and some real estate.
The investment group, led by a Stone &amp; Webster director, Frank Cilluffo, and retired Gen.
Edward Meyer, holds an 11.36 percent stake in the company.
It made the proposal  yesterday in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The group requested that Stone &amp; Webster, which is based in New York, include the proposal in proxy materials for the company's annual meeting in May.
The group made a similar proposal in 1994.


2 Big Unions Near Accord In Rail Talks
A week before they would have been free to strike, two unions that had been among the most militant at Metro-North have signed tentative contracts with the  commuter railroad, officials said yesterday.
At the railroad and its parent agency, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, officials hailed the agreements with the engineers' and conductors' unions as a breakthrough that would set the pattern for contracts with 15 other unions.


METRO DIGEST
PROPOSAL TO SHIFT SCHOOL BUDGETING New Jersey officials, under court order to equalize spending between rich and poor school districts, proposed that the State Legislature, rather than local voters, set the basic school budget for all districts. [Page A1.]


2 Kinds of Extremists: A Contrast After Rabin
FIGHTING TERRORISM How Democracies Can Defeat Domestic and International Terrorists By Benjamin Netanyahu 152 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.
MEMOIRS OF A JEWISH EXTREMIST An American Story By Yossi Klein Halevi 248 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95


Personal Health
THANKSGIVING kicks off a holiday season that typically puts three to seven pounds on the frames of American adults by the start of the new year.
Many approach the season with a sense of resignation and entitlement: "The holidays come only once a year. An occasional splurge won't hurt me, and besides I can always diet in January."
But the added padding, which is hard to miss when trying to sit in slacks that once fit, is only the obvious damage.
Beneath the surface there is also likely to be hidden havoc as the fats and cholesterol from six weeks of rich foods find their way to the walls of arteries that feed the heart, brain and every other body part.
In addition, a single large fatty meal can precipitate attacks of angina or even a heart attack in people with underlying heart disease.


CHRONICLE
HEATHER WHITESTONE, who reigned as Miss America 1995, is planning to acquire  a new role: wife.
She has become engaged to JOHN McCALLUM, 25, a legislative assistant to Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House.
The couple met in March when Miss Whitestone, 22, of Birmingham, Ala., went to the Speaker's office to discuss disability issues.
As the first deaf Miss America in the pageant's 75-year history, she has been particularly vocal on the problems faced by people with disabilities.


At the Nation's Table
San Francisco Is That U.F.O. A Lamb Chop?


Bruno Pittini, 50, Hair Stylist To Rich, Famous and Beautiful
Bruno Pittini, who for years was one of the most important men in the lives of some of the world's most glamorous women, died in a hospital in Garches, a suburb of Paris, on Nov. 9.
A hair stylist of renown on both sides of the Atlantic, he was 50 and lived in Paris.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, a spokesman said.


Market Place;Dow Conquers 5,000 Mark, Riding Surge of Confidence
The Dow Jones industrial average moved decisively past 5,000 yesterday, adding another notch to one of the most extraordinary bull markets in history.
The move came less than nine months after the market's most widely watched index passed 4,000 for the first time.
After flirting with the number for several days and briefly piercing it on Monday, the Dow jumped 40.46 points, to 5,023.55, with much of the gain coming in the final hour of trading.


Israel Grants Citizenship to American Spy
Israel granted citizenship today to Jonathan Pollard, an American Jew serving a life sentence in the United States for spying for Israel.
An official announcement said that Interior Minister Ehud Barak had decided to grant Mr.
Pollard Israeli citizenship in response to a request from his lawyers, and after receiving new information about the case.


Confidence in Economy Drops
The business community's confidence in the state economy has declined from last year's eight-year high, according to a survey released yesterday by the New Jersey Business and Industry Association.


Holiday Courses of Music and Mystery
Unlike Christmas and Easter, Thanksgiving is not much of a marketing vehicle  for prime-time entertainment.
There are always turkeys on the schedule, of course, but Thanksgiving-themed shows are still relatively rare.
Viewers must content themselves with scattered specials having nothing to do with the holiday.
Tonight at 8 and 10, for instance, TNT is offering "The Wizard of Oz in Concert," taped Nov. 5 at Avery Fisher Hall.
A grab-bag cast performs the Harold Arlen-E.
Y.
Harburg score and scenes from the 1939 film starring Judy Garland, including songs deleted from the movie.
With the classic Garland version readily available on video, there's really not much need for a somewhat messy concert rendition, but youngsters are not likely to object.


Proposed Prayer Amendment Splits the Right
Opening a rift within the religious right, a House Republican today introduced a constitutional amendment that would provide for prayer in public schools, a proposal that some other conservatives and religious groups say goes  in the wrong direction.
As a result, Representative Ernest Jim Istook Jr., a fiery second-term Republican from Oklahoma who introduced the amendment, is now in a standoff with one of the most respected conservatives in Congress, Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.


Murder Charge in Bus Assault
Almost two years ago, 65-year-old Mariko Westbrook boarded a bus after a shopping trip, but never made it home.
Something she said apparently upset another passenger who beat her and kicked her off the bus with such force that she landed on her head.
She died four days later.


Evangelicals Look Past School Prayer
To the Editor:
A Nov. 17 news article about Representative Henry Hyde's proposed religious equality amendment suggests that the amendment is about "school prayer." It is not.


Corrections
The Media column in Business Day on Nov. 13, about efforts by magazine publishers to adapt to electronic media, misstated the average number of "hits"  received daily at a site operated by Playboy magazine on the Internet's World Wide Web.
The number is three million, not 150,000.
A hit is registered each time a Web user clicks the computer mouse to reach a particular site; "visits" measure longer, consecutive viewings of a site.
The Playboy site receives an average of 150,000 visits a day.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Budget Debate May Keep Dollar in a Tight Range The dollar is expected to trade in a tight range for the rest of 1995 as further wrangling over the Federal budget continues, even though a temporary deal has been reached.
The dollar is likely to remain in the ranges of 97.50 to 104.14 yen and 1.3810 to 1.4440 marks, traders said.
"The budget thing being pushed off into December makes it difficult to do anything on the dollar," a strategist said. [D13.] Treasury prices weakened.
With Congress adjourned until Monday, negotiations over a balanced budget and debt ceiling extension will not begin in earnest until next week, so the market focused on other data.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.26 percent. [D16.]


Marbury's Homecoming Is Packed With Rivalry
It is not quite Wilt Chamberlain against Bill Russell or Hakeem Olajuwon against Shaquille O'Neal.
After all, Allen Iverson is just a 19-year-old Georgetown sophomore from Hampton, Va., and Stephon Marbury an 18-year-old Georgia Tech freshman from Coney Island.
And they are not 7-foot giants who crash the backboards.
Iverson stands 6 feet, Marbury 6-1.
But they are two of the most exciting players in college basketball: quick, fleet point guards who can turn games around with magic ballhandling or highlight dunks.


DDB Needham Ends Ornelas Relationship
The DDB Needham Worldwide Dallas Group said yesterday that it would end a six-year relationship, effective Jan. 2, with Ornelas &amp; Associates, an agency specializing in advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
The agency also said it would help two former top executives of Ornelas to open a shop on Jan. 2 that would create campaigns aimed at that market.
"We mutually concluded that it was not in either party's best interests to continue our relationship," said Michael S. Rawlings, president at the DDB Needham Worldwide Dallas Group, which is owned by the Omnicom Group.
Victor Ornelas, president and chief executive at Ornelas, who founded that shop in 1989, said the parting was "very amicable," adding that Ornelas, with billings estimated at $26 million, would continue to operate independently.


She Inspired the Library
To the Editor:
Everything you published about the New York Public Library, both in the news  article (Arts pages, Nov. 16) and in "Passing the Torch at the Library" (editorial, Nov. 17) is true, but your efforts would have been in context had you mentioned Brooke Astor, the woman who triggered the rebirth of the library and without whose inspiration and leadership it would not be half so fine as it  is today.
Thousands of others have worked and contributed, but she's the mother  of it all.
NANCY DICKERSON WHITEHEAD New York, Nov. 17, 1995


Top Separatist Will Seek Quebec Post
The popular Quebec politician who led a referendum campaign that almost caused the province to break with Canada, said today that he would seek the leadership of the Parti Quebecois, a post that is almost certain to make him the next Premier of Quebec.
Lucien Bouchard, the referendum leader, also said he would not press for another independence vote for at least two years, initially committing his anticipated premiership to straightening out public finances of what has become  the most debt-strapped of all 10 Canadian provinces.
"It is an imperative duty owed to the integrity of the state," he told a news conference in Montreal.


2 Bridge Titles Decided
Two major titles were decided here Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
The open title was won by Chip Martel of Davis,  Calif., and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., with Fred Stewart of Andes, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Glen Ridge, N.J.
The women's title went to Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville, Sue Sachs of Baltimore, Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., Betty Ann Kennedy of Shreveport, La., and Carol Sanders of Nashville.


Reeves Looks to Lewis To Give Offense a Lift
Perhaps the cruelest twist and the thing that is the most inexplicable for Thomas Lewis is that he went through Pee Wee league, high school and college football without an injury.
The young Giants receiver went unscathed until he set foot in Giants Stadium.
Then in two games in his first two pro seasons -- both against the Dallas Cowboys -- Lewis suffered major leg injuries that knocked him out of 15 games.


CHRONICLE
For the last 14 years, MARTY RICHARDS, the theater and film producer, has invited his friends and neighbors in Southampton, L.I., to go on a hayride on Thanksgiving.
Over time, he said, "It's grown from one wagon to three."


Classic Holiday, Anyone?
THE average Thanksgiving dinner at home this year will include 12 people and  will cost $8.79 a person.
The favorite pie will be pumpkin; the most popular side dish, mashed potatoes.
Those findings are part of a study, the Lenox Report, commissioned by Lenox Brands in Lawrenceville, N.J., a manufacturer of china, crystal and gift ware.


Clark T. Randt, Neurologist, 78, Head of Life Sciences for NASA
Dr.
Clark Thorp Randt, founding chairman of the department of neurology at New York University Medical Center and the first director of life sciences for NASA, died on Sunday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 78.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


ACCORD REACHED TO END THE WAR IN BOSNIA; CLINTON PLEDGES U.S. TROOPS TO KEEP PEACE
The presidents of three rival Balkan states agreed today to make peace in Bosnia, ending nearly four years of terror and ethnic bloodletting that have left a quarter of a million people dead in the worst war in Europe since World War II.
The leaders -- Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia -- initialed the peace agreement and 11 annexes in  a hastily-arranged ceremony in the same conference room at Wright-Patterson Air  Force Base where they opened their talks 21 days ago.


Bronx Man Is Charged in the Death of His Son, 4
A Bronx man was facing manslaughter charges yesterday after his 4-year-old son died from being struck on the head, the police said.
They said the father, Edwardo Perez, 27, waited nearly four hours after the boy fell unconscious before calling 911 for help.
Mr.
Perez, of 3405 Tiemann Avenue in Fish Bay, told the police that he accidentally struck the boy, Joseph Dauphin, with a canvas pillow about 11 A.M.
Monday while he was cleaning a bedroom in his family's home in the Bronx, said Capt.
James Campbell of the Bronx Detective Borough.
The boy's mother was away at work at the time, he said.


Genovese Figures Plead Guilty
Taking five men out of circulation has put a significant dent in the Genovese crime family's sports betting and loan shark operations, Federal prosecutors say.
The five, who entered guilty pleas yesterday in Federal District Court, were arrested in September, along with a retired Newark police officer who is scheduled to go on trial on Dec. 4.


Grbac Takes Miami by Storm and Settles on Cloud Nine
Hey, look, guys," San Francisco tight end Brent Jones yelled, trying to get  the attention of as many teammates as possible. The scene was the 49ers' locker  room at Joe Robbie Stadium early today, after their frolicking 44-20 victory over the Miami Dolphins.
"Elvis lives! Elvis lives!" Jones shouted through a wide smile.
"Look, he's got more reporters around him than Steve."


Book Notes;Unexpected Public Service
In his recently published memoir, "Half the House," the poet Richard Hoffman  chronicles his boyhood in Allentown, Pa., including the deaths of two brothers and his repeated rape at age 10 by the man who coached his baseball, basketball  and football teams.
At the book's close, Mr.
Hoffman cries with relief and joy at having finally  told his father about the coach and the "horrible secret," as he calls it.


Boy Faces Slay Charges
The boys were just playing.
The guns were real.
Now a 10-year-old is dead and his 12-year-old friend will be charged with manslaughter.
Noel Daroja, the boy who died yesterday, and the 12-year-old were visiting another friend's house on Monday when the shooting occurred.
Law-enforcement officials, who confiscated several weapons from the house, said it was not clear yesterday whether the homeowner would be charged.
No identification of the boy who was charged was available.


Wine Talk
DON SEBASTIANI is feeling good these days and not without reason.
Just 10 years ago, in a palace coup that ruffled the California wine industry, he became the chairman and chief executive of his family's business, Sebastiani Vineyards, in Sonoma, Calif.


No Headline
The agreement is a victory for all those who believe in a multi-ethnic democracy in Bosnia.
It offers tangible hope that there will be no more days of  dodging bullets, no more winters of freshly dug graves, no more years of isolation fom the outside world." -- SECRETARY OF STATE WARREN CHRISTOPHER. [A1:5.]


An Imperfect Peace
A cold Balkan peace was concluded today, one built over the graves of numberless victims by the very leaders who unleashed the Yugoslav wars, but still a peace that almost certainly offers the last hope for the stubborn vestiges of civilized life in Bosnia.
The American-brokered peace is necessarily imperfect and so could contain the seeds of future conflict.
It divides Bosnia along ethnic lines, thus offering some endorsement to the racist politics of the Serbs who fought for secession.
It offers no cast-iron guarantees that war criminals will be brought to justice.
It will provide scant solace to the myriad bereaved and homeless of a long and savage conflict.


A Brisk Market Develops in College Term Papers
For millions of college students, Thanksgiving marks the start of the heaviest workload of the term, with final exams and papers due in a few weeks.
But thousands of students will reduce the preparation time for a full-length research paper to just minutes -- or however long it takes to thumb through a catalogue, pick up a phone and read off their credit-card number.
These students buy their papers, typically at a cost of about $50 for a standard eight-page paper already on file.
A custom-written paper costs about $200.


PENNSYLVANIA BANK COMPANIES IN ACQUISITION AGREEMENT
The BT Financial Corporation, a banking company based in Johnstown, Pa., said yesterday that it would acquire the Moxham Bank Corporation for $41.1 million in stock.
Under the agreement, BT will exchange 1.15 shares of its stock for each Moxham share.
Moxham's two banks -- Moxham National Bank of Johnstown, Pa., and  First National Bank of Garrett, Pa. -- will be merged into BT's largest affiliate, the Johnstown Bank and Trust Company.
BT will have assets of about $1.5 billion after the deal, including the previously announced acquisitions of  Armstrong County Trust and Huntington National Bank of Pennsylvania.
In Nasdaq trading, Moxham's stock rose $2.50 yesterday, to $34.50, while the shares of BT  fell $1.50, to $35.50.


Fledgling U.S. League Names Commissioner
Major League Soccer, the new league that will begin play next April, yesterday named Doug Logan, a 52-year-old sports and entertainment executive, as its commissioner.
Logan, who signed a five-year contract to run the day-to-day operation of the league, has been a marketing and event-management consultant with clients from the National Basketball Association and the National Hockey League.


Peace in Bosnia
If the commitments made yesterday in Ohio are honored in Balkan cities and villages in the months ahead, Europe's worst conflict since World War II will come to an end.
It will not be a moment too soon.
As President Clinton said in announcing a peace agreement, "the people of Bosnia finally have a chance to turn from the horrors of war to the promise of peace."


The Education-Financing Battle
The New Jersey Constitution requires the Legislature to establish a system of "thorough and efficient education." The effort to define what that means was touched off by a legal battle that began more than two decades ago.
FEB. 3, 1970 A lawsuit, Robinson v.
Cahill, contends that the state's system  of financing local schools discriminates against poorer districts.
APRIL 3, 1973 The State Supreme Court rules in Robinson v.
Cahill that heavy reliance on local property taxes for education discriminates against poor districts.
JULY 1, 1975 The Public School Education Act of 1975 takes effect, creating a formula for state financing of public schools, but lawmakers do not raise taxes  to pay for it.
JULY 1, 1976 After the Legislature misses a June 30 deadline to provide money for schools under the aid formula, the State Supreme Court closes public schools, locking out 100,000 summer session students.
JULY 8, 1976 Resolving more than two years of bitter legislative debate, Gov.
Brendan T. Byrne signs the state income-tax law, intended to provide money needed under the school-aid formula.
Thirteen hours later, the Supreme Court reopens schools.
FEB. 5, 1981 The nonprofit Education Law Center, based in Newark, files a lawsuit, Abbott v.
Burke, contending that the state failed to remedy disparities between wealthy and poor school districts.
JUNE 5, 1990 The State Supreme Court rules that the school financing system is unconstitutional.
The court orders lawmakers to start fixing the problem by the  1991-92 school year.
JULY 3, 1990 Gov.
Jim Florio signs the Quality Education Act, a plan to spend more on poor and middle-income districts, reduce or eliminate aid to wealthier systems and increase income taxes by $1.1 billion.
MARCH 14, 1991 Mr.
Florio signs a bill diverting $360 million from the Education Act to property-tax relief.
JULY 8, 1992 The trial opens in a second lawsuit brought by the Education Law Center.
The suit contends that the revised law falls far short of the court mandate and will widen the gap between rich and poor districts.
AUG. 31, 1993 Judge Paul G. Levy of Superior Court rules that the Quality Education Act does not assure removal of financing disparities and will perpetuate reliance on property taxes.
He invites "further judicial intervention at the highest level." JULY 12, 1994 The State Supreme Court rules that the Quality Education Act is unconstitutional "based on its failure to assure parity of regular education expenditures between the special needs districts and the more affluent districts." The court gives the state until the 1997-98 school year to achieve parity in school financing.
FEB. 1, 1995 The Education Commissioner, Leo F. Klagholz, issues an interim school financing report that says educational equality will be defined in terms  of classroom standards and not dollars spent per pupil.
APRIL 27, 1995 The state holds the first of 70 public hearings on classroom standards.
OCT. 17, 1995 Hearings end.
NOV. 21, 1995 The Education Department issues its final report on educational standards.


The Next Hurdle: Clinton Must Sell Plan to Americans
Even as he triumphantly announced the Balkan accord, President Clinton today  began the difficult task of convincing a skeptical public and a hostile Congress to support sending 20,000 American troops to enforce the peace in Bosnia.
"We are at a decisive moment," the President said in a mid-morning appearance in the White House Rose Garden.
"The parties have chosen peace. America must choose peace as well."


G.M. AND SWEDISH INVESTOR IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT SAAB
Saab Automobile A.B. is losing money again, and its American and Swedish owners are discussing its future, company officials said yesterday.
Saab, in which the General Motors Corporation and Investor A.B. of Sweden each hold 50 percent stakes, lost about $48 million in the third quarter, the company reported last week.
G.M. said yesterday in a statement that it and Investor A.B., which is controlled by the Wallenberg family of Sweden, had held "a number of constructive discussions on how to get Saab back on a sound financial  footing." Speculation has arisen that G.M. might take over Investor A.B.'s stake in Saab.
But in the statement, G.M. said it remained comfortable with the 50-50  split.


Fox Would Air Tyson Bout
If the Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight is rescheduled for Dec. 16 at the Atlantic City Convention Center with financing from Donald Trump, Fox Sports will show the bout, a person familiar with the negotiations said.
The date is not firm yet.
Mathis's promoter, Cedric Kushner, said yesterday:  "Don King and I have been talking and we're trying to get this together. He is trying to make a deal with Mr. Trump. But given that Dec. 16 isn't very far away, I'd think we'd have to get this done by the end of the week."


Corrections
A front-page article on Friday about a decline in the incomes of doctors included an erroneous measure of primary care doctors' incomes supplied by a public relations firm for Ernst &amp; Young, the benefits consulting and accounting  firm.
Primary care doctors -- family physicians, internists and pediatricians -- who received more than half of their gross income from managed care lost 9.9 percent of their income this year, not 15.5 percent, according to the firm.


Clinton Neglected Promises on Economy
To the Editor:
Re "One More Veto" (editorial, Nov. 17), which I found mystifying:


Overall Market Rises Slightly On a Banner Day for the Dow
While the Dow Jones industrial average was shooting off fireworks in its ascent past 5,000 yesterday, the broader market was only narrowly higher.
The Nasdaq composite index fell 4.48 points, to 1,024.99.
And the Standard &amp;  Poor's 500-stock index just about regained its loss on Monday, rising 3.39 points, to 600.24.


Ex-Net Says 'New Nets' Are Old Nets
The Nets have insisted throughout this young season that they have a new, more professional attitude, replacing their uninterested approach of last season.
But from Chris Morris's point of view, they are still the same old easy-to-fold Nets he was part of for seven seasons
Morris now plays for the Utah Jazz, and he scored a season-high 22 points in  Utah's 105-79 romp over the Nets on Monday night at the Delta Center.
Afterward, Morris was asked if the team looked like the same one from last season.


Top Ivy Player Named
DAVE PATTERSON of Princeton yesterday became the sixth defensive player in the 26-history of the Asa S. Bushnell Cup to be named Ivy League player of the year.
Patterson, a senior linebacker from Roselle Park, N.J., had 129 tackles this season and is Princeton's career leader with 352.
Patterson was one of seven players selected unanimously by the league's eight coaches for this year's All-Ivy first team.


A Money-Mad Mirage From Scorsese
Of all the bravura visual effects in Martin Scorsese's dazzlingly stylish "Casino," it's a glimpse of ordinary people that delivers the greatest jolt.
Strategically timed to offset three hours' worth of vintage Las Vegas glitter, it's a reminder that Mr.
Scorsese has given this film's setting the surreal and  breathtaking intensity of a money-mad mirage.
The real world looks shockingly impoverished by comparison.
With its rivers of cash and mountains of neon, its high rollers and lowlife hoods, "Casino" luxuriantly explores the anatomy of America's gaudiest (and now  most cinematically popular) playground.
The place is quagmire enough for an epic morality play, but this film's tone is staunchly journalistic, as borne out by its matter-of-fact last words: "And that's that."


Phone Giant In Britain Cuts Top Officials
Cable and Wireless P.L.C., which built a global presence in the telephone business on the back of the British Empire but never quite achieved strength commensurate with its size, said today that it had ousted both its chairman and  its chief executive after a boardroom dispute between them.
After two days of board meetings and considerable speculation within the industry and in the financial markets, Cable and Wireless said that Lord Young,  a former Conservative Government minister who has headed the company as chairman since 1990, and James Ross, who joined the company as chief executive in 1992, would both leave immediately.


Jury Convicts Philadelphia's Mob Leader
At various stages of his career, John Stanfa described himself as the quintessential immigrant who through hard work rose from a bricklayer to the ownership of a food distribution company.
Yesterday a Federal jury in Philadelphia applied a new title to Mr.
Stanfa -- mob boss -- and found him guilty of racketeering charges, including conspiring to murder gangster rivals and heading a ring that engaged in kidnappings, extortions and gambling activities.


Striking Boeing Workers Reject Contract Offer
Production workers at the Boeing Company rejected their own union leaders' advice and voted today to continue a 47-day strike against the company, the world's largest commercial jet manufacturer.
The proposed three-year contract was rejected by almost 61 percent of the members, union leaders said.
The sticking point was a requirement that workers  begin paying part of their health care insurance premiums to remain in the most  popular health plan.


CLASSICAL MUSIC


Corrections
An article on Monday about a gathering in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in memory of the lawyer William L. Kunstler misstated the attendance.
It  far exceeded 1,000.
Organizers said that the cathedral could seat more than 3,500, and that virtually every seat was filled.
Many people also stood, and at  least 3,000 programs were distributed.


Beijing Still Censors What Shanghai Reads
To the Editor:
In his Nov. 19 Editorial Notebook, Philip Taubman describes China's economic  policy -- part Communism, part capitalism -- as "schizophrenic." The word schizophrenia, invented by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in 1911, refers  to a split between perception and reality, not a split personality.
A person with schizophrenia has only one personality, but it's beset by insistent voices, torturous hallucinations and stultifying fear.
Schizophrenia is such a common illness that the general public needs to understand what it really is.
JOE HOLLEY Austin, Tex., Nov. 19, 1995


'Healthiest Person I Know'
The death by heart attack of the two-time Olympic champion Sergei Grinkov on  Monday was made even more startling by the fact that the 28-year-old Russian was considered among the strongest and healthiest of male figure skaters.
"This is an enormous shock," said Scott Hamilton, the 1984 Olympic champion,  who knew Grinkov and his wife and partner, Yekaterina Gordeyeva, as well as any American skater.
"This is the healthiest person I know. He took care of himself."


COMPANY BRIEFS


A Ban on Gifts in the House
When the hour finally arrived to vote, the House of Representatives gave overwhelming approval last week to a strict ban on free meals, vacations and other gifts from lobbyists.
The lopsided margin of victory -- the vote was 422 to 6 -- showed how powerful Congressional reform has become as an issue.
Indeed, it was powerful enough to force House Speaker Newt Gingrich and others who had been dragging their feet to pay attention to a handful of insistent reformers.
With any luck, the momentum generated by the gift-ban bill will carry forward to an even more important ethical challenge, overhauling the entire system of campaign financing.


Raptors Stun Sonics For Third Straight
Raptors 102, SuperSonics 97


Excerpts From a Paper on a Classic Novel
Following are excerpts from the beginning and end of an eight-page paper prepared by Research Assistance in Los Angeles.
The paper was charged to a reporter's American Express card on Monday and faxed for a total of $69.50.
It analyzes "The Scarlet Letter" by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
In Nathaniel Hawthorne's novel, "The Scarlet Letter," the character Roger Chillingworth is clearly the epitome of sin.
In this regard, Chillingworth is more sinful than the other characters in the novel -- notably Hester Prynne and  Arthur Dimmesdale.
Hester and Dimmesdale have had a secret, adulterous relationship with one another, and Dimmesdale further sins by trying to conceal  his shame and guilt.
However, the sins of Chillingworth are far more serious, because, unlike either Hester or Dimmesdale, he is incapable of love and is therefore driven to hate.
His hatred causes him to commit the harshest sin of "The Scarlet Letter," that of seeking revenge against Dimmesdale.
The minister Dimmesdale deeply regrets his sin, even though he is afraid to confess it in public.
Hester's sin is less severe in view of the fact that she is a victim of  both her society and her obsessive ex-husband Chillingworth.
Chillingworth himself, however, intentionally commits the sin of seeking revenge against his fellow man.
In addition, Chillingworth hides his feelings of anger and hatred in order to plot his revenge, thereby committing the further sin of deceit. . . .


China Charges Leading Dissident With Trying to Overthrow Regime
China formally charged the country's best-known dissident, Wei Jingsheng, today with trying to "overthrow the Chinese Government," a step that almost certainly will lead to conviction and a second, lengthy prison sentence for the  44-year-old democracy advocate.
Mr.
Wei had been held incommunicado at an undisclosed police "guest house" without charge since April 1994, when he was seized by seven carloads of plainclothes policemen while driving into the Chinese capital from the nearby city of Tianjin.


Corrupt Officer Draws 5 Years
A former police officer who admitted extorting money from drug dealers was sentenced yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan to five years in prison, the longest sentence yet for any officer charged in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal.
The officer, Alfonso Compres, had faced 20 years in prison if convicted of all the original charges, including shooting a suspected drug dealer while the man waited for an elevator, then robbing him.
But in May, he signed an agreement admitting to a single count of extortion in return for a reduced sentence.


Blacks Found Less Likely Than Whites to Be Promoted in Military
A study of the military for Congress has found that blacks are less likely to be promoted than their white counterparts, but it stopped short of attributing the difference to racism.
The study, conducted by the General Accounting Office and released on Monday, found "statistically significant" evidence that blacks were promoted less often  than would be expected based on their numbers in the armed services.
It also found that women had proportionally more promotions than would be expected.


Whitewater Counsel Objects to Law Firm
A law firm defending Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker in the Whitewater case should be removed because of conflicts of interest, the Whitewater special prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, says.
One of the firm's partners was once indicted in the case and the firm has represented a man planning to testify against Mr.
Tucker, said Mr.
Starr, who filed a request on Monday asking the court to look into the matter.


People
Donald F. Brown, vice president at Time Inc., Tokyo, who oversees the operating  divisions in Japan, Korea and Taiwan, was named to the new position of president of Time Canada, Toronto.
Both units are owned by Time Warner Inc.


SUNY Trustees Are Taking Tuition Proposal to Albany
The trustees of the State University of New York will ask the State Legislature for the power to raise tuition according to cost-of-living indexes and to set different tuitions by campus or type of campus.
The authority to set tuitions is something most state universities now have,  but in New York, tuition can only be set by type of degree.
If the 16 trustees are given this authority, they could use it to raise tuition by type of school or by campus, or they could give the 64 campuses the right to set their own tuitions.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:


Grandpa: Old, Wise, Gentle and Al Pacino
The Academy Award he won for "Scent of a Woman" has apparently whetted Al Pacino's appetite for more character roles in which he plays an eccentric sage with a soulful gleam in his eye and a "Zorba the Greek"-size life force.
"Two Bits," finds the 55-year-old actor chewing up the scenery in the role of a dying old man gently imparting the lessons of a lifetime to his 12-year-old grandson.
His face caked with blotchy, crinkling makeup, the actor, who still looks too young and vigorous for the role, discreetly hams it up, squinting, rolling his eyes and emitting alarming noises that foreshadow his imminent collapse.


No. 3 Villanova Vies for Title
Kerry Kittles scored 23 points to lead a balanced offense and No. 3 Villanova held off several second-half rallies today in beating Santa Clara, 77-65, and advancing to Wednesday's championship game of the Maui Invitational.
The Wildcats will face No. 20 North Carolina, which defeated Michigan State by 92-70 in the other semifinal.


Double A Trio And the Music Debates
In a recent interview in Guitar World magazine, Robert Fripp explained the epiphany that led him to reform his influential art-rock band, King Crimson, as  a double-trio (two drummers, two guitarists, and two people playing the Chapman  stick, which combines guitar and bass).
It occurred when he was driving down a street with a school on the left and a church on the right.
Here were two institutions intrinsic to human history but also teaching lessons that conflict with each another.
On Monday night at the Longacre Theater, in the first of a series of five concerts that concludes on Saturday, King Crimson worked toward reconciling conflicting musical styles.
In past incarnations of the band, which formed in 1969 and regrouped this year after a decadelong hiatus, this meant melding improvised and composed music using blues-rock, modal jazz, early-20th-century classical music and electronic technology.


Sale of Viacom Cable Systems Is Detailed
Viacom Inc. disclosed the final details today for the planned sale of its cable television systems to Tele-Communications Inc. in a transaction valued at  $2.25 billion.
The unusually structured sale -- which includes spinning off the cable unit and selling it to Tele-Communications -- would be a coup for Viacom's chairman,  Sumner M. Redstone.
The deal would eliminate $1.7 billion of Viacom's $10.9 billion in outstanding debt.
Moreover, because of the structure of the deal, Viacom would avoid a tax bill that could have reached $650 million.


Its Stars Eclipsed, Hayden Is Cleared for Demolition
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission approved a plan yesterday to demolish the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History, and the museum said that it had raised half of the $120 million cost of a new planetarium.
Museum officials maintain that the 70-year-old Hayden Planetarium, a part of  the landmark museum complex on the Upper West Side, is obsolete technologically and undistinguished architecturally.
A spokeswoman for the landmarks commission, Deborah Sack, said that it was unusual but not unheard of  for the panel to approve the demolition of part of a landmark.


Johnny Depp's Deadly Quid Pro Quo
In "Nick of Time," Johnny Depp plays an ordinary man with an extraordinary problem: total strangers have kidnapped his daughter, given him a gun and insisted that he kill an assigned target, who happens to be the Governor of California.
And he must accomplish this in little more than an hour, which means that the film is loaded with shots of clocks ticking off minutes.
Despite such constant evidence of time passing, you will be tempted to look at your own watch.
Often.
"Nick of Time" calls for Hitchcockian cleverness to make the real-time device work (and Hitchcock had his own troubles with it in "Rope").
Instead, John Badham supplies pumped-up direction that often seems needlessly feverish, and plenty of little touches that don't quite pay off.
"I'm not gonna give you no key," a hotel chambermaid tells Mr.
Depp, who is trying to break into the Governor's room.
But then she drops the key by accident.
The film isn't often more ingenious than that.


LOEWEN GROUP SHARES DROP AFTER JURY AWARD IS UPHELD
Stock in Loewen Group Inc. fell yesterday for a second day after a judge in Mississippi upheld a jury's award of $500 million in damages against the company, an operator of a chain of funeral homes.
Hinds County Circuit Judge James Graves confirmed the award on Monday in the lawsuit filed by a Biloxi, Miss., businessman, Jerry O'Keefe Sr., and his Gulf National Group against Loewen.
The plaintiffs contended that Loewen broke a 1991 agreement for Loewen to acquire two funeral homes from Mr.
O'Keefe and to sell an insurance company to him.
Loewen's stock slid $3 a share on Monday in Nasdaq trading.
Yesterday, it dropped an additional $1.75, to $27.125.
Loewen is based in Burnaby, British  Columbia.


Ailing Seles to Miss Fed Cup
Monica Seles pulled out of this weekend's Fed Cup finals today because of recurrent knee problems.
The United States team, which includes Mary Joe Fernandez, Gigi Fernandez and Lindsay Davenport, now assumes an underdog role against Spain, the two-time defending champion.
The withdrawal was Seles's third this month because of problems in her left knee, which began this summer as she made a comeback after two and half years on the sideline.


Dollar Rises vs. Yen and Mark; Trading Quiet Before Holidays
The dollar rose yesterday in quiet trading ahead of holidays in the United States and Japan.
Some market participants said that they expected wrangling over the United States budget and economic crosscurrents to keep the dollar in narrow ranges for the rest of the year.


Prices of Treasury Securities Are Weaker
Treasury prices weakened yesterday as market participants, faced with additional new supply, squared their positions ahead of the Thanksgiving holiday.
Prices were hurt in part by retail sales data that suggested that consumers were stepping up their buying as the holidays approached.
The market was also weighed down by the Treasury's auction of new 10-year notes.
While the $13.5 billion sale drew strong demand, some traders and analysts said the results were not as impressive as Monday's auction of three-year notes.
In any case, prices are typically weaker when there are auctions as the market braces to absorb the  new supply.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell 10/32, to 108 /32.
Its  yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 6.26 percent, from 6.24 percent on Monday.


NEXGEN APPROVES A SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS PLAN
Nexgen Inc. said yesterday that it had adopted a shareholder rights plan to try to prevent third parties from blocking the $857 million acquisition of Nexgen by Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
Nexgen, which is based in Milpitas, Calif., said it was not aware of any other entities interested in acquiring a stake in the company or trying to derail the agreement with Advanced Micro.
The  rights plan, also known as a poison pill, is intended to make an unfriendly acquisition of Nexgen, which makes computer chips, prohibitively expensive.
Advanced Micro, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., said last month that it would buy Nexgen by swapping eight-tenths of a share of its stock for each share of Nexgen.


Hear Ye! Hofstra's Team Is Wonderful, Too!
Joe Gardi sat in a lounge chair on Monday afternoon, overlooking the scaffolding surrounding Hofstra's blue-and-gold football stadium.
"I'd like to turn Long Island into football country," said Gardi, in his sixth season as head coach of the Flying Dutchmen.
"I'd like to scream from the  top of the highest building and say, 'Hey, Long Island, hey, New York City, don't you understand! We've given you a quality product on the field, and we need your help to take this program to the next level.' "


Weekend Drivers Face Scrutiny
In an effort to keep roads safe over the Thanksgiving weekend, hundreds of troopers will be added to each shift from 6 P.M. tonight to midnight on Sunday,  according to John Hagerty, a state police spokesman.
Police around the state will also watch for the 40 percent of New Jersey drivers who still ignore seat belt laws, according to the state's traffic safety chief, Peter J. O'Hagan.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Study Finds Doctors Refuse Patients' Requests on Death
After 25 years of public outcry over the right to die with dignity, doctors are still ignoring patients' last wishes, according to a new study of terminally ill patients.
The study, reported in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, has found that doctors often misunderstand or ignore the patients'  requests, with the result that large numbers of people still die alone, in pain and tethered to mechanical ventilators in intensive care units.
Twenty-five years since the living will movement began, the study's authors say they have discovered that the wills, which are supposed to give terminally ill patients legal safeguards against unwanted medical treatment, offer virtually no protection.


Sports of The Times;Mattingly Should Play Elsewhere
THE meeting, brief and unplanned, occurred near the first-base line at Yankee Stadium one Friday evening late last summer.
Don Mattingly, head down, was walking toward the Yankee dugout.
Dave Winfield, in his Cleveland Indians uniform, was jogging out when he noticed Mattingly go by.
"Donnie," Winfield called out.


New Rights for Unmarried Couples
In a momentous 4-to-3 decision, New York State's highest court has granted unmarried couples -- heterosexual and homosexual -- the right to adopt children.
The ruling has been criticized by Gov.
George Pataki as an example of judicial overreaching to settle a controversial issue of social policy -- the same objection expressed by the three dissenting Court of Appeals judges in a surprisingly caustic minority opinion.
There is no question that the decision has major consequences.
It will bolster the legal standing of the state's non-traditional families.
It will also grant the child of an unmarried couple a host of rights and benefits from both parents, including health insurance coverage and inheritances.
Yet this is  a humane result that did not require aggressive legislating from the bench.
The  carefully reasoned majority opinion, written by Chief Judge Judith Kaye, reflects a common-sense reading of the language of the state's adoption statute  and of its overall intent.


Do I Dare to Eat a Strawberry?
THE only way to avoid pesticides in fruits and vegetables entirely is to buy  organic produce.
But that is not always possible or affordable.
Yesterday, the Environmental Working Group, a research and advocacy group in  Washington, came out with a list of 12 fruits and vegetables that it has calculated have the highest levels of pesticides.


NEW MONEY DISAPPEARS
The Government is missing $40,000 in newly printed bills.
The Bureau of Engraving and Printing discovered the shortage on Friday, a Treasury Department  spokeswoman said today
The cash was being shipped from the bureau, a few blocks from the White House, to the Federal Reserve bank in Minneapolis, she said.


Tentative Pact Allows Enron To Continue Project in India
A regional government of India tentatively agreed yesterday to let the Enron  Corporation go ahead with a $3 billion power plant project, signaling that India will probably continue to embrace, however hesitantly, the foreign investors it  so desperately needs.
The state's nationalist Hindu leaders had scrapped the plant, the nation's largest foreign project, in August, but lately had softened their opposition in  the face of legal threats and the country's huge power needs.


Ex-Foreign Minister Jailed in Cambodia
The former Foreign Minister of Cambodia and a prominent critic of Cambodia's  current Government, Prince Norodom Sirivudh, was jailed today on charges that he had plotted to kill one of Cambodia's two Prime Ministers.
The Prince, a half-brother of King Norodom Sihanouk and a member of Parliament, was taken from his home in Phnom Penh, the capital, after telling reporters that he had turned down a deal that would have allowed him to leave his war-shattered nation.


$1.6 Million in Racehorses, Sold
Twenty-seven racehorses from Due Process Stables, owned by Robert E. Brennan, the troubled financier, were auctioned yesterday at Belmont Park in New York.
The Associated Press said the sale raised $1,641,500 for Mr.
Brennan, who has a lot of creditors, as well as state and Federal authorities, looking over his shoulder these days.


City Plan to Revamp AIDS Services Unit Draws Fire
Already critical of the city's efforts to help indigent people with AIDS, some of their advocates said yesterday that the Mayor's plan to revamp the Division of AIDS Services may make it even more difficult for vulnerable AIDS patients to receive essential services.
Although Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the agency would not face cuts in workers or financing, leaders of community groups that deal with AIDS said they feared that the plan did not go far enough in dealing with the needs of a growing number of AIDS patients.


Pope Names 2 New Bishops
The Pope has given new jobs to two church leaders.
The Most Rev.
Michael A. Saltarelli, an auxiliary bishop in the Newark Archdiocese, was named yesterday as bishop of the Diocese of Wilmington, which covers Delaware and part of Maryland.
Monsignor Andrew Pataki was appointed bishop of the Byzantine Catholic Diocese of Passaic, which serves Catholics of the Byzantine-Ruthenian rite in 16 states.


Empire State Building Fire Injures 15
Two circuit breakers caught fire in the Empire State Building's subbasement last night, sending smoke up to the observation deck and causing minor injuries  to 15 tourists who inhaled smoke before being evacuated from the landmark skyscraper.
The fire, which started shortly after 7 P.M., was under control by 10 P.M., fire officials said.
It was confined to the subbasement, two floors below street level, which houses the building's transformers and their circuit breakers.
But as can be the case with such fires, the smoke quickly rose through the skyscraper, causing several tense moments for those on the upper floors.


Study Disputes Link of Sugar to Hyperactivity
The approaching holidays may bring visions of sugar plums to dance in children's heads, but parents need not fear that candy-eating children will spin out of control, according to researchers who analyzed 23 studies on sugar and behavior.
Sugar consumption does not significantly affect the way most children act or  think, researchers concluded after reviewing studies involving more than 500 youngsters, mostly younger than 15 years old.


CHRONICLE
CHRIS EVERT, the former tennis champion, and her husband, ANDY MILL, a former Olympic skier, announced yesterday that they are expecting their third child in  June, Reuters reported.
The couple, who have two sons, 4 and 1 1/2, issued a statement from Boca Raton, Fla.
Ms.
Evert, who is 40, won at least one Grand Slam title each year for 13 years.


Chicken With Garlic, Polenta With Pizazz
IN this recipe for garlic chicken, the herbs and garlic will turn dark brown  on the grill.
Even so, they should be scraped from the pan and spooned over the  chicken because their roasted flavor is superb.
Pair the chicken with polenta, which takes on a lot of pizazz with the addition of a little buttermilk and Gorgonzola.
Grilled Garlic Chicken


Livingston Hall, 92, Former Vice Dean At Harvard Law
Livingston Hall, Roscoe Pound Professor Emeritus and former vice dean at Harvard Law School, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Great Barrington, Mass.
He was 92 and had lived in Great Barrington since retiring from Harvard in 1971.
Mr.
Hall graduated fourth in his class from Harvard Law in 1927 and worked briefly with a New York law firm and as a prosecutor in the office of the United States Attorney in Manhattan.
He returned to Harvard as an assistant professor in 1932, was promoted to professor in 1937 and, in 1939, was named vice dean of  the law faculty, a title he held for 20 years.
He was named Roscoe Pound Professor, one of the most distinguished positions in his profession, in 1963.


Germans Join America Online In Europe Deal
Two of Germany's largest media groups and the country's biggest telecommunications company said today that they would join forces with America Online Inc. to offer Europe-wide interactive communications networks.
The agreement in principle signed by the publishers Bertelsmann A.G. and Axel Springer Verlag A.G., and the German telephone giant Deutsche Telekom A.G., creates the largest and most financially powerful support group for any computer on-line service to date.
And, at least on paper, it makes America Online the dominant force in Europe's fast-developing interactive market.


As the Whistle Blows, a Referee Blows the Devils' Tie
The Devils thought they had tied the game, but the referee thought differently.
The result?
Florida 4, New Jersey 3.
Left wing Steve Thomas scored what appeared to be the game-tying goal with 1  minute 21 seconds left, but Referee Lance Roberts disallowed it, saying he had blown his whistle before the puck crossed the goal line.
The replay showed that  Thomas scored before Roberts blew his whistle, but league rules do not allow such disputes to be reviewed.


Perahia Cancels Recital
The pianist Murray Perahia has canceled his scheduled Dec. 10 recital at Avery Fisher Hall because of a hand injury that is not yet healed.
Tickets may be exchanged for any other concert in the 1995-96 Great Performers at Lincoln Center series, depending on availability.
Exchanges may be made at the Avery Fisher Hall box office or by returning the tickets with a stamped, self-addressed envelope to Great Performers/Perahia, 10 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10023.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


20,000 G.I.'s Will Face Challenges and Risks
Enforcing a Balkan peace plan would send 20,000 American troops in a matter of weeks on the military's riskiest mission since the Persian Gulf war, Pentagon officials said today.
If President Clinton approves a final peace accord, heavily armed Army troops from the First Armored Division with M1-A1 tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles and  Apache attack helicopters would leave Germany for the American headquarters in Tuzla, according to the Pentagon's current plans.


After a Regular Is Killed, Bar Patrons Blame Keno
For some of the regulars at the Kings Korner Bar and Lounge in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, things just haven't been the same since a Quick Draw keno machine arrived in September.
The machine, they say, has drawn strangers with a gambling itch to a place where everybody had always known everybody else.
And some said they blame the machine for the shoot-out that took the life of  their friend, Leroy Nichols, 52, a retired City Correction Department captain who was shot six times Monday night defending their bar during a robbery attempt.


Giving Thanks Early At St. Bartholomew's
THANKSGIVING is upon us, and, as usual in this season, various organizations  will distribute turkey dinners tomorrow to the homeless and others in distress.
They do good work, says Michael Polenberg, who runs the food program of the Coalition for the Homeless.
But eating happens to be one of those things most people like to do every day, the poor included.
It requires an effort considerably more sustained than the bursts of eleemosynary fervor witnessed at  holiday time.
That is where Mr.
Polenberg and his volunteers come in.


Coca-Cola, Pepsico and Burger King sign on with Disney for a happy ending with 'Toy Story' tie-ins.
THOUGH the big holiday film from the Walt Disney Company is titled "Toy Story," the marketing strategy behind it is far from child's play.
Disney is undertaking a huge promotional push to entice moviegoers to buy tickets for "Toy Story," which opens nationwide today.
Though the film is a full-length animated feature, a genre in which Disney excels, and advance reviews have been almost giddily enthusiastic, there is considerable risk.
That's because "Toy Story" is the first such movie made by computer animation rather than the traditional cel-animation technique used for "Aladdin," "The Lion King" and other huge hits.


New Buyer Being Sought For Coliseum
After more than a decade of pitched neighborhood battles, court fights, environmental studies and last-minute deadlines over the fate of the New York Coliseum, the state and city have now decided to turn the clock back to 1984 and look for a new buyer for the valuable Columbus Circle site.
Yesterday, Charles A. Gargano, the chairman of New York State's economic development agency, announced that the state, the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the Coliseum, would issue requests for new  development proposals before the end of the year.


Food Notes
Gourmet Garage North


SERVICEMASTER TO BECOME FULL OWNER OF UNIT
Servicemaster L.P. said yesterday that it would take full control of its Consumer Services division by buying WMX Technologies Inc.'s 28 percent stake in it for about $500 million in stock.
WMX, the provider of waste management services, has had a minority interest in the division since 1990.
Servicemaster, which provides housekeeping, maintenance and management services, will exchange  18.1 million of its shares, or about 19 percent of the total outstanding, for the stake.
WMX agreed not to increase its holdings in Servicemaster, which is based in Downers Grove, Ill., to more than 21 percent.
The deal includes a five-year option for WMX to buy another 1.25 million Servicemaster shares at $33 each.


Big Board Sees a Rise in Its Uncovered Short Sales
Short sellers, who have not had much success this year betting against domestic stocks, are now focusing more attention on companies whose shares trade here but which do business overseas.
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that for the second straight month Telefonos de Mexico, or Telmex, posted the largest increase in short interest.


Penguins' Sigh of Relief
Aside from Mario Lemieux, Eddie Johnston had to be the most worried person in Madison Square Garden last night as he watched his superstar drop to the ice after being hit from behind by the Rangers' Jeff Beukeboom.
Lemieux's back troubles have been well documented.
He missed last season because of them.
Without Lemieux, the Penguins are still a high-scoring team, but probably an ordinary one.


Blaze in Skyscraper Hurts 15 Tourists
Two circuit breakers caught fire in the Empire State Building's subbasement last night, sending smoke up to the observation deck and causing minor injuries  to 15 tourists who inhaled smoke before being evacuated from the landmark skyscraper.
Article, page B3.


Japanese Premier Vows to Renew Leases on U.S. Bases in Okinawa
Easing a sore point with the United States, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama  declared today that he would force Japanese landowners to renew leases for property that is used for American bases.
The first of the leases expires next March.
If Mr.
Murayama does not intervene then part of the land on an American base will revert to its Japanese  owner.


Survey Finds Dirtier Subways After Cleaning Jobs Were Cut
New York City's subway trains and stations have grown markedly dirtier in recent months -- just as the Transit Authority eliminated hundreds of cleaning positions in a round of budget-cutting, according to a report released yesterday.
During July, August and September, litter, graffiti and general grime were all worse than in the three previous months, according to a report card issued by the Transit Authority.
It is based on the observations of a group of transit  workers.


Knicks Get New Uniforms
Pending approval by the National Basketball Association, the Knicks are scheduled to unveil an alternate road uniform on Saturday when they play host to the defending champion Houston Rockets at Madison Square Garden.
Although the club is not expected to announce the change until later this week, the uniform will remain mostly blue but will also incorporate black and orange trimming, lettering and numbering.
The current road uniforms have white and orange trim.


Underground Fun House With the Basketball Duo
What's the difference between a New York subway tunnel and a fun house?
Not much, if you succumb to the delirious rush of "Money Train," a comic thriller filmed largely in the subways of Manhattan.
More viscerally charged than "Speed" and hipper than "Die Hard With a Vengeance," the movie is a careening, screeching joyride that showers sparks like fireworks.
Directed by Joseph Ruben, from a screenplay (by Doug Richardson  and David Loughery) that is seasoned with scatological humor, it is also an extended Freudian joke.


NOW FOR THE HARD PART
In announcing the Bosnian peace accord yesterday, President Clinton declared  that the role of U.S. troops in implementing this agreement will be "a clear, limited, achievable mission," with minimal risks.
I think that such a minimalist mission -- but only such a minimalist mission -- can be sold to the American public and Congress.
But before we can judge whether that is really the mission President Clinton  is dispatching U.S. forces on, we need to know not only the fine print of this agreement, but what has not been printed at all, only whispered to the parties in the hallways of Dayton.
There was obviously a lot of 11th-hour horse-trading.


New York's New School for Young Immigrants Doesn't Segregate
To the Editor:
By coincidence, I along with my Subcommittee on Immigration visited the Newcomer School on the day a complaint was filed that mistakenly charged that the academy segregated young immigrants (news article, Nov. 14).
No compulsory segregation forces teen-agers into this school.
Admission is voluntary, restricted to adolescents who have lived in the United States less than a year and have little fluency in English.


S.E.C. Raises Fee in Stock and Bond Registration
The Securities and Exchange Commission today ordered businesses to pay a higher fee to register their stocks and bonds rather than a lower fee that could have saved them millions of dollars.
The partial shutdown of the Government last week meant the commission lost its authority to charge the typical registration fee of one twenty-ninth of 1 percent of the total amount of stocks or bonds registered for sale.
From Tuesday through Friday of last week, the fee dropped to one-fiftieth of 1 percent, an amount written into the law governing the commission.


The Knicks' Family Man
One of the cornerstones of the Knicks' front line was cutting his spaghetti into bite-size portions at a restaurant last week in Denver, the way parents do  for their children, when a young hostess approached him for an autograph.
"Excuse me," she began, "are you Charles Barkley?"


Davis Cup Team Is Chosen
PETE SAMPRAS, ANDRE AGASSI, JIM COURIER and TODD MARTIN were picked yesterday to play for the United States in next month's Davis Cup final against Russia.
The team captain, TOM GULLICKSON, will determine singles and doubles players before the draw on Nov. 30.
The matches will be played at Moscow, Dec. 1 to Dec. 3.
AP


DOW CHEMICAL INVOLVED IN TWO DEALS IN ARGENTINA
The Dow Chemical Company agreed yesterday to buy a plastics business and a 21 percent stake in a chemical complex from Ipako Industrias Petroquimicas Argentinas S.A., an Argentine maker of petrochemicals, for $193 million.
On Monday Dow Chemical, in a consortium with the Argentine oil producer YPF S.A. and the Itochu Corporation of Japan, paid $357.5 million for the Argentine Government's 51 percent stake in the same chemical complex, Petroquimica Bahia Blanca S.A., and the Government's 38 percent stake in Indupa S.A., a maker of chemicals and plastics.
Dow Chemical will own 80 percent of the venture with YPF and Itochu.
The plastics business that Ipako is selling is Polisur S.A.


Mattingly Makes Speech, but Not Quite a Farewell
Don Mattingly sounded confused whenever he discussed the possibility of retiring after the 1995 season, so it was not surprising yesterday that his concession speech was not definitive.
Unwilling to commit himself to playing next season, he basically severed a 17-year relationship with the Yankees organization, while continuing to methodically ponder the future.
Four days after Jim Krivacs, Mattingly's agent, told George Steinbrenner that his client was still uncertain about whether he wanted to continue his career, the two sides finally agreed on the wording of a six-paragraph news release.
It  cleared the way for the new general manager, Bob Watson, and the new field manager, Joe Torre, to proceed in applying their imprint on the 1996 Yankees by  pursuing the free-agent first basemen Fred McGriff or Mark Grace, or attempting  to trade for Seattle's Tino Martinez or Oakland's Mark McGwire.


Colgate Dismisses Coach
ED SWEENEY's doleful tenure at Colgate ended yesterday, three days after the  team closed out its first season without at victory in football at 0-11.
Colgate discharged Sweeney and promoted the veteran assistant coach DICK BIDDLE.
AP


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the rising popularity of film schools misidentified the one attended by the director Martin Scorsese.
As noted elsewhere in the article, Mr.
Scorsese attended New York University, not the University of California at Los Angeles.


Timing Is Everything In the Season of Travel
Only a few years ago, the day before Thanksgiving was the busiest of the year for the nation's major airlines.
But that distinction now belongs to the Sunday  after the holiday, when almost 1.6 million passengers are expected to jam airplanes.
The airports will be crowded today, when the Air Transport Association estimates there will be 1.3 million passengers on major carriers.
But travel patterns have changed, and Saturday and Monday should be worse, with an expected 1.4 million passengers on Saturday and 1.5 million on Monday.


It's a Repeat Performance For Richter
Pat Verbeek had called this home-and-home series against the powerful Pittsburgh Penguins "a measuring stick of how good a team we are." If last night and tonight proved anything, it is that the Rangers (12-7-2) are a very good team -- when they want to be.
"We're a pretty good team in November," Coach Colin Campbell said after his the Rangers had swept the Penguins with a 4-3 victory here at the Igloo.
"I guess you could say it that way."


Cannoe' Diplomacy
After Gov.
William Bradford and his fellow Pilgrims had gathered their first  harvest at Plymouth in 1621, they invited their Indian neighbors to join them in celebration.
According to one Puritan who was there, the guests included "king Massasoit with some 90 men, whom for three days we entertained and feasted." The Indians themselves contributed "five deer" to the menu -- Thanksgiving as potluck.
What did each side expect of and take from the other?
Both presumably were concentrating on short-term gains: the colonists needed help in surviving, while the Indians coveted English farming tools.
In this, the first Thanksgiving foreshadowed the substance and tenor of interracial encounters for decades to come.
Contrary to much subsequent mythology, the key word for these early experiences is "exchange."


Walesa's Defeat Called Big Setback for Polish Catholic Church
The downfall of Lech Walesa in Poland's presidential election represented a considerable defeat for the powerful Roman Catholic Church, political analysts and officials of the church say.
In sermons and statements, the church hierarchy had urged its members to vote against Aleksander Kwasniewski, the former Communist who won the presidency with 51.7 percent of the vote in a runoff.


Former Barings Trader Flies to Singapore
The British securities trader Nicholas W. Leeson, blamed for bringing down the Barings Bank with trading losses of $1.4 billion, left Frankfurt today to stand trial in Singapore.
Mr. Leeson was aboard this flight for the 12 1/2-hour passage.


G.O.P. Primary Rules Contested in Court
In a novel legal dispute that could affect next year's Presidential election, lawyers for a former candidate, Larry Rockefeller, and a battery of lawyers for  the Republican Party clashed in a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn yesterday over the rules under which the party in New York State conducts its primaries.
After listening to two and a half hours of spirited arguments, United States  District Judge Edward R. Korman did not act last night on the plaintiffs' request to suspend the Republican primary rules.
But he is expected to make a decision before candidates begin their petition drives on Tuesday for the Presidential primary on March 7.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a proposal for a nuclear waste dump in Ward Valley, Calif., misstated the role of several environmental groups in organizing a protest.
The Sierra Club, the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Committee to Bridge the Gap all oppose the project, but were not organizers of an encampment near the site and have not urged acts of civil disobedience.


The Cornhuskers' Frazier Is a Subtle Player, Maybe a Little Too Subtle
He doesn't pass enough.
He doesn't run enough.
Just what has Tommie Frazier been doing lately, anyway?
Frazier's growth into a finished product -- skilled passer, deceptively powerful rusher and the precise leader of Nebraska's so-far unstoppable offense  -- will one day secure him a place in the College Football Hall of Fame.
But the emergence of his dominant, disciplined versatility may just be too subtle for most Heisman Award voters to grasp.


Gambler Loses Suit on Losses
The courts haven't been too sympathetic to a gambler who has sued two casinos for $8 million, claiming free drinks are responsible for his losses.
A Federal appeals panel in Philadelphia ruled against Ayhan Hakimoglu, saying New Jersey courts have not extended the liability of alcohol servers beyond drunken driving, barroom accidents and fights.


The Misrule of Law in China
China seems to think it can justify the detention of Wei Jingsheng, the country's most prominent dissident, by formally charging him with sedition instead of simply holding him in secret without accusation of criminal conduct.
It is a pathetic and transparent effort to create the illusion that China is a nation governed by the rule of law.
With the Chinese leadership maneuvering for position in the power vacuum created by the long illness of Deng Xiaoping, the favored posture in Beijing these days is reaffirmation of dogma, from relations with Taiwan to the treatment of dissent.
Recent meetings between President Jiang Zemin of China and President Clinton and Vice President Gore may have eased the tensions that developed in relations earlier this year, but it is now clear that the White House's muted concern about Chinese human rights abuses has only encouraged Beijing to pursue a Stalinist policy of repression.


Drew's President Phones Home
Students and faculty at Drew University had a surprise caller yesterday on their telephone automated-message system: the university president, Thomas H. Kean, thanking everyone for the get-well messages and cards they sent after his operation last Thursday to clear a blocked heart artery.
"I'm doing just fine," Mr.
Kean said.
"I can't wait to get back to the university to see you all again. In the meantime, have the best possible Thanksgiving."


Despite Trade Report, the Dollar Ends Mixed as Traders Buy Yen
The dollar ended mixed yesterday, despite rallying briefly after a report showed a narrower United States trade deficit.
Traders attributed the dollar's performance -- off against the Japanese yen but higher against the German mark -- largely to a pent-up demand for yen.
That  indirectly helped the dollar against European currencies, but left the dollar weaker against the yen.


No Headline
Thanksgiving means to be happy and glad and healthy and careful, and you got to care for another people, not just yourself.
I pray for the homeless people and the sickness people."
LEILA TAMARI, 6, of Manhattan. [B7:1.]


Leila Mourad, Egyptian Film Actress, 77
Leila Mourad, an Egyptian singer and actress who rose to fame in the 1940's and 50's, died on Tuesday, Egyptian newspapers reported today.
She was 77.
They said the Jewish-born actress -- who withdrew from the limelight after a  career spanning 39 years -- died of heart failure.


Ex-Communist Rules Turkmenistan Like a Sultan
High-stepping soldiers and twirling children in native costume marched in tight formation past the balcony of their leader, chanting his name and brandishing his portrait.
In a national day parade five years ago, they would have held up Lenin's image.
Now, it is the plump, somber face of Turkmenistan's President, Saparmurad Niyazov, who has restyled himself Turkmenbashi -- "Leader of the Turkmens" -- that graces every parade float, hotel, office building and park pedestal in the  country.


BAXTER UNIT TO ACQUIRE PSICOR FOR $80 MILLION
The Baxter Healthcare Corporation, a subsidiary of Baxter International Inc., said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Psicor Inc. for $80 million.
The acquisition, for $17.50 a share, is expected to be completed within the next several weeks, Baxter said.
Psicor, based in San Diego, supplies technicians, equipment and disposable products to hospitals that perform open heart surgery.
Baxter International, of Deerfield, Ill., makes heath care products and systems.
Shares of Psicor were up $2 yesterday, to $17.25, in Nasdaq trading.
Baxter's shares fell 37.5 cents, to $37.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Smucker, Profits Off, Is Selling Its Mrs. Smith's Frozen Pie Line
The J. M. Smucker Company said yesterday that it was selling its Mrs.
Smith's frozen pie business, which it bought 18 months ago for $84 million.
Smucker also reported a 24 percent drop in earnings for the quarter.
The terms of the sale of Mrs.
Smith's to a unit of SBI Brands Inc., a food company, were not disclosed.
Smucker said it spent more than it had expected to market the desserts at a time of slumping industry sales.


H. B. FULLER EXPECTS LOWER EARNINGS IN QUARTER
Shares of the H. B. Fuller Company fell yesterday after the chemical maker said that it expected a 20 percent to 30 percent drop in earnings for its latest quarter, which ended Nov. 30.
Fuller, which is based in St.
Paul, blamed the earnings decline on reduced demand from the automotive and construction markets.
The company said a continued slow economy in Europe has restricted its sales.
Fuller makes adhesives, sealants, coatings, paints and other specialty chemical products.
It said it was making plans to reduce expenses and had put a  general hiring freeze in place.
Fuller's shares fell $2.25 yesterday, to $33.25, in Nasdaq trading.


DOUBLETREE IN DEAL TO DEVELOP EXTENDED-STAY HOTELS
The Doubletree Corporation has signed an agreement to develop an extended-stay, economy-priced lodging brand with Jack DeBoer, the founder of Residence Inn.
Doubletree, a Phoenix-based manager or franchiser of 110 hotels in the United States, plans to invest an initial $15 million in the project and  to own a 50 percent stake.
Mr.
DeBoer, who will serve as president and chief executive, will own the other 50 percent.
The venture, to be based in Wichita, Kan., and to be called Candlewood Hotels, will charge less than $50 a night for  a suite with a kitchenette.
The properties, which are aimed at travelers who plan stays of several days or more, will have an average of 135 rooms and will cost about $4.7 million to $5.4 million to build.


Job Bias Cited For Minorities And Women
A bipartisan Federal commission studying discrimination in the workplace issued its final report on Tuesday, noting that minorities and women still faced barriers to advancement in corporations: the so-called glass ceiling.
The commission's report, "A Solid Investment: Making Full Use of the Nation's Human Capital," comes after a three-year study and offers a counterargument to those who maintain that affirmative action is unnecessary because equal opportunity already exists.


Alex Rosen, 80, Dean of a School Of Social Work
Alex Rosen, the first dean of the reorganized Graduate School of Social Work  at New York University, who also developed outreach programs and improved health care services on the Lower East Side, died on Tuesday at his winter home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 80 and also lived in Manhattan.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Futurist Concepts Star In Bizarre Retro Revue
Italian dancers looked back at Futurism on Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse.
Compagnia Vera Stasi offered "Siiovlummia: Torrente No. 3," a performance inspired by the ideas of the Futurists, an Italian artistic movement earlier in this century that praised machinery, delighted in aggressive action and scorned the art of the past.
In 1917, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, a writer and Futurism's chief polemicist, called for a dance that would be "anti-graceful, dynamic, asymmetric." Compagnia Vera Stasi tried to meet these demands and, in so doing, combined earnestness with a bit of humor.
The Roman group's title is itself a joke.
"Vera Stasi" sounds like a woman's name.
But a spokeswoman for the company explained, no such person exists; rather, "vera stasi" means "true stasis" in Italian.


A Survey Of Political Activism
Morton Feldman liked to tell of an argument he once had with his teacher Stefan Wolpe about the role of composers in society.
Wolpe, a former left-wing activist in Weimar Germany as well as an early devotee of Schoenberg's 12-tone method, told the resolutely apolitical Feldman to compose more for ordinary people.
"Write for the man in the street!" he cried, pointing out the window.
The man in the street at that moment was Jackson Pollock.
The moral is that composers who begin writing for the man in the street often end up writing for an elite audience of colleagues and friends.
Feldman's malicious little story ran through my mind on Saturday night during a concert by the Continuum ensemble in the Miller Theater at Columbia University.
It was a survey of political activism in 20th-century music: "A Just New World Is in Creation" by Wolpe, along with Ruth Crawford's "Sacco, Vanzetti," Aaron Copland's "Into the Streets May First," Frederic Rzewski's "Winnsboro Cotton Mill Blues" and many other earnest efforts.


A Different Holiday for Vietnamese Catholics
On the surface, the holiday that drew Vietnamese parishioners to Our Lady Star of the Sea Church, just a couple of blocks away from the neon gaudiness of  the casinos, had nothing to do with the American tradition of Thanksgiving.
Some showed up in colorful dress: traditional Vietnamese embroidered outfits  known as ao dai on the women, saffron-colored gowns and tiara-like headpieces on the girls, satiny blue robes and caps on the men.


Husband May Cooperate in Campaign Inquiry
The husband of Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz is apparently considering cooperating with Federal prosecutors in their investigation of the couple's personal and campaign accounts.
At a hearing today in Federal District Court here, Assistant United States Attorney William Lawler 3d told Judge Emmet G. Sullivan that the husband, Joe Waldholtz, had not decided whether he would testify before the grand jury investigating the couple's finances.
But Mr.
Lawler said discussions with Mr.
Waldholtz and his lawyers were continuing.


Robie Macauley, 76, Editor, Educator And Fiction Writer
Robie Mayhew Macauley, an editor and writer, died on Monday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 76 and had homes in Boston and South Wellfleet, Mass.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said Anne Bernays, the novelist and a friend of his family.


Genetic Sleuths Follow Clues To Elusive Ancestral 'Adam'
In new genetic studies of modern human origins, scientists think they have found strong evidence that there was an ancestral "Adam" about 188,000 years ago to go with the previously discovered "Eve."
The scientists used certain male-specific segments of the Y chromosome, the chromosome that is passed from father to son, to trace to that period the common ancestor of every man now on earth.
They are reporting the findings today in the journal Nature, which also includes a separate study placing Adam in a more  recent time.


Suspect in Slayings To Fight Extradition
A lawyer for a drifter suspected of a series of cross-country slayings says his client will fight extradition to states where he faces murder charges.
"We've been given no evidence that he killed anyone," the lawyer, Ernie Lewis, an assistant public advocate, said on Tuesday.
But he acknowledged that it was unlikely that the suspect, Glen Rogers, would be successful in fighting the extradition efforts.


BALKAN ACCORD: THE PLAY-BY-PLAY21 DAYS IN DAYTON: A special report.; In U.S. Eyes, 'Good' Muslims And 'Bad' Serbs Did a Switch
The wine was drunk and a lavish lobster dinner eaten, and it was time to resolve one of the most delicate issues in the Bosnian peace talks: a route for  the Bosnian Government from Sarajevo through Bosnian-Serb territory to the beleaguered Muslim enclave of Gorazde.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia made his way to a high-tech auditorium to play Powerscene, the Pentagon's computer mapping program that reproduces terrain on a vast movie screen.
The Serbian leader was adamant that the corridor could be no more than two miles wide.


Chavis Is Held Liable in Harassment Case
A judge here has ordered the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., former executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, to pay up to $245,200 to an aide who accused him of sex discrimination and harassment.
The judge, Henry Kennedy of District of Columbia Superior Court, ruled on Tuesday that Mr.
Chavis was personally responsible for making payments stemming  from a settlement he negotiated in 1993 with the former aide, Mary Stansel, who  had been dismissed from the N.A.A.C.P.'s staff.


Ricoh's Profit Rises
The Ricoh Company said yesterday that helped by strong sales of digital color copiers its profit surged in the first half of its fiscal year to the highest level in five years.
Ricoh, the Japanese office-equipment maker, said its pretax profit rose 41 percent, to 14.27 billion yen, or $139.8 million, in the six months that ended on Sept. 30.
Sales rose 1.8 percent to 310.7 billion yen.
For  the full year, Ricoh forecast profit would rise 34 percent, to 29 billion yen, a six-year high.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Clinton Plans TV Talk
President Clinton will make a televised address Monday night in an effort to  build public and Congressional support for his plan to send 20,000 American troops to help NATO police the Bosnia peace agreement, the White House announced today.


Sports of The Times;Some '95 Thank-You Notes
WHEN pro football's money-obsessed owners have been center stage more often than the players, when baseball is still trying to apologize to many of its customers, when basketball is willing to cheapen its games with replacement referees, it's time to thank all those who make sport's little corner of the world a better place.


Italgas in Hungary
Hungary will sell a controllingstake -- 50 percent plus one vote -- in Tigaz, the nation's biggest gas company outside of Budapest, to the Italian gas company Italgas S.p.A., the Hungarian news agency MTI reported yesterday.
The Hungarian  privatization agency plans to sign a contract for the sale in the next few days.
Italgas offered $171.9 million for the stake, the highest bid in an auction that closed on Monday.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Dow Continues to Surge, But Broad Market Is Flat
The Dow Jones industrial average continued its remarkable surge yesterday, while the broad stock market remained relatively flat.
"The day's story was that the economically sensitive stocks rose," said Barbara G. Marcin, vice president of Citibank Global Asset Management.
"And the  Dow is made up of 30 economically sensitive stocks."


Leon Lishner, a Bass-Baritone, Is Dead at 82
Leon Lishner, a bass-baritone who was a mainstay of the New York City Opera and NBC Opera rosters during the early 1950's and sang in the premieres of several of Gian Carlo Menotti's operas, died on Tuesday at his home in Seattle.
He was 82.
Mr.
Lishner was born in New York City on July 4, 1913, and studied music at City College and at the Juilliard School.
His first major professional role was  as the Chief Police Agent in the premiere of one of Mr.
Menotti's Broadway operas, "The Consul," in 1950.
A year later he appeared as Balthazar in the first performance -- a live national broadcast by the NBC Opera -- of "Amahl and the Night Visitors." Later he created roles in Mr.
Menotti's "Labyrinth" and "The Saint of Bleecker Street."


DANCE
Dreams and Meditations From the Realm of Experience 'O Gravity, O Light' Mulberry Street Theater


CHRONICLE
When MARIA COOPER JANIS, Gary Cooper's daughter, took one of his prized possessions -- a letter by George Washington -- to be appraised recently, she was shocked to learn that it was stolen property.
"The letter, which was written by a scribe and signed by Washington, was given to my father as a gift, I guess in the mid- to late 1940's, and I have no  idea why or by whom," she said yesterday.
"For many years, it was hanging on a wall in the library of our home in Beverly Hills."


Founder Quits As Chairman At Borland
Philippe Kahn, the flamboyant founder of Borland International Inc., said he  was resigning as chairman today to concentrate on his latest start-up company, Starfish Software.
Mr.
Kahn, who led Borland for 12 years, was forced out as president and chief executive in January, before Borland posted a quarterly loss of $22.9 million, or 80 cents a share.


At the Ballot Banquet, a Table for One
PATRICK J. BUCHANAN does not make it easy.
He has a good argument against New York State's Republican Party and how it will probably bar him (and every other  Republican who is not Senator Bob Dole) from its presidential primary.
But instead of sticking to the facts during a recent visit, he stuck a few fingers in New York City's eye, calling it crime-ridden, a "magnet" for illegal aliens and "coarse, dirty, angry." The city, Mr.
Buchanan told New York 1 News, "is getting worse."
At a subsequent news conference in Albany, Mr.
Buchanan came up with another  gem, apparently meant as a compliment.
New York's reputation as a liberal state  was an unwarranted stereotype, he said: "There's a lot of social conservatives,  ethnic conservatives and Catholic voters -- and frankly some very conservative Jewish voters -- who are with me."


Granada's $5.3 Billion Bid Soundly Rejected by Forte
Granada Group P.L.C., seeking a stronger foothold in the hotel and leisure industry, offered $5.3 billion today for Forte P.L.C., which rejected the bid.
Investors apparently expected a higher bid to emerge for Forte, which operates hotels and restaurants.
They pushed up the company's stock 26 percent today, or 72.5 pence, to a close of L3.475 -- 6.5 pence above Granada's hostile  offer.
About 47.2 million Forte shares traded on the London Stock Exchange, well above the daily average for the last six months of about 2.8 million shares.


Two Players Suspended
The Texas Southern basketball star KEVIN GRANGER has been declared ineligible because of dealings with the sports agent involved in the recent suspension of the Texas Christian running back ANDRE DAVIS.
And the N.C.A.A. ruled that Utah's BRANDON JESSIE, who averaged 16.4 points a game last season, must sit out seven  games for receiving benefits from a sports agent while in junior college. (AP)


Liberties;Antlers, Boleros and Crossbows
My friend mistakenly got a catalogue in the mail the other day that was meant for the guy who lives down the hall.
Now she's too scared to return it.


Dawkins Moves to C.B.A.
DARRYL DAWKINS has signed with the Sioux Falls Skyforce of the Contintental Basketball Association and was to suit up against the Florida Beachdogs last night.
Dawkins, 38, signed with the Skyforce Tuesday after a year with the Harlem Globetrotters.


Boeing Outlook Hurt by Labor's Rejection of Pact
The surprise decision by 32,000 machinists to continue their six-week strike  against the Boeing Company led analysts yesterday to cut their earnings estimates once again for the fourth quarter.
If the strike continues long enough, they said, the company, the world's leading maker of commercial aircraft, will face a loss.
On Tuesday, 61 percent of the votes by members of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers were against the contract, even  though union leaders had unanimously recommended it.
The sticking point appeared to be a requirement that workers either join a health maintenance organization or pay an insurance premium for health care for the first time.
There was also concern that the contract did not contain strong enough language regarding the use of overseas contractors, negotiators said.


Japan Expands Bank's Role in Financial Failures
The Tokyo Kyodo Bank, a special bank set up in March to take over two failed  Tokyo credit cooperatives, will have a vastly expanded role to deal with any other failures of financial institutions, the Finance Ministry said today.


F.D.I.C. Plans Action Against Maxxam
Maxxam Inc. has been notified that Government regulators intend to take action against the company over the 1988 failure of the United Savings Association of Texas.


Soundproof Plinka, Plinka, Plinka
THIS sounds like a variation on the old they-laughed-when-I-sat-down-at-the-piano music school advertisement.
But in this case "they" was a crotchety neighbor, and he wasn't laughing; he was close  to screaming.
It happened 28 years ago on the morning after Misha Dichter moved into his cooperative apartment on Central Park West.
Mr.
Dichter started playing his nine-foot Steinway concert grand.
A minute or two later, the telephone rang.
It  was his downstairs neighbor, clearly not amused.


Early Salary Game for Buckley
Linebacker Marcus Buckley was caught in the middle of what turned out to be an ugly situation last month involving himself, Corey Miller and Coach Dan Reeves.
Now he might have to do a tango again.
Scott Casterline, the agent for Buckley, met with the Giants last week as the two sides began negotiations for a new deal.
Buckley, a third-year player out of Texas A&amp;M, is a restricted free agent and in the last year of a contract that will pay him an average of $238,000 a season.


Robert H. Adleman, Author, 76
Robert H. Adleman, an author whose work included books about World War II as  well as a number of novels, died on Thursday at Ashland Community Hospital in Ashland, Ore.
He was 76.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son-in-law Jonathan Edelman.


OPEC Keeps The Ceiling On Oil Output
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries decided today that it would maintain its production ceiling through the first half of next year, even though some members were pumping more oil than allowed.
After OPEC ended its meeting, some analysts warned that prices could drop if  the organization did not crack down on members who exceeded their quotas.
Prices are already $4 to $5 a barrel below OPEC's target of $21.


Pete Welding, 60, Authority on Jazz
Pete Welding, a leading authority on jazz and the blues who became a successful record producer, died on Friday at his home in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif.
He was 60.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokesman for EMI Records Group North America, where Mr.
Welding dealt in artists and repertory.


A Kennedy Remembrance


Scout Troop Denies High Post to Muslim
A man who served nearly three years as a Cub Scout leader has been rejected for a higher Scout post because he is a Muslim.
Haven Reformed Church, which sponsors Cub Scout Pack 293, said the man, Umar  Abdul-Mutakallim, could not be cub master because of his religion.


COMPANY BRIEFS
APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATONAL INC., Arlington, Va., which conducts pharmaceutical safety testing, completed the sale of two laboratories to Huntington International Holdings P.L.C., Huntington, England, an engineering and scientific services company, for $37 million.


Housing Chief Faulted on Use Of Paint Cited in Stair Fires
The chairman of the New York City Housing Authority yesterday faced angry City Council members who charged that his agency lagged in its efforts to stop the stairwell fires that have plagued some housing projects.
Over the last 18 months, at least 34 fires have raced through the stairwells  of Housing Authority buildings.
One fire this month killed two residents of the  Frederick Douglass Houses on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Baltimore Opening High-Tech Central Booking Center
Just beyond the vast renewal efforts that have made Baltimore a model of urban redevelopment in recent years, another new building stands ready as a tribute to the city's modernization.
On Tuesday, the doors will open at the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center, a high-tech detention center that will replace the less-sophisticated booking operations now conducted at nine police district buildings around the city.
It is designed to save countless hours of manpower and paperwork, and experts on prisons and criminal justice say there is nothing like it in the country.


For the City Ballet, A Show Does Go On
Unlike Broadway, the ballet world does not take kindly to time-honored expressions of good luck like "break a leg." One wonders, in fact, what would happen if an actor really broke a leg onstage in the middle of play.
Could the show really go on without a second's interruption the way Damian Woetzel replaced the injured Jock Soto at the New York City Ballet's gala opening on Tuesday night?


Windows 95 Comes to Japan


S.&amp;P. TO ADD HUMANA TO ITS 500-STOCK INDEX
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that it would add Humana Inc. to its S.&amp;P. 500-stock index after the close of trading on Nov. 30.
S.&amp;P. also said it would replace the First Chicago Corporation and NBD Bancorp Inc. of Detroit, with the First Chicago NBD Corporation.
First Chicago and NBD are merging to form First Chicago NBD in a transaction that is expected to close on  that date.
Shares of Humana, based in Louisville, Ky., rose $1.125 yesterday, to $24.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Pizazz vs. Gravitas, Running vs. Governing
Reporters and commentators on all channels have been telling viewers for a week or more that the now unstuck impasse over the budget was in large part playacting for the campaign season, and polls found that the President was giving the more appealing performance.
Insofar as television rather than, say, worries over Medicare can be credited or blamed for that achievement, there may  be a lesson here about the difference between what the audience wants of a President and what it expects of a candidate.
As David Gergen, who has had plenty of experience with Presidents, candidates and television, noted in a recent seminar at the Museum of Television and Radio, Bill Clinton has not always been able to find the line between effective campaigning and effective governing; the gravitas of office does not seem to come as naturally to him as the pizazz of running.
Whether it's being pictured so frequently in shorts or, on one occasion, answering a question about them, he has often come across as more of a good old boy than as a mature leader.


Body in Concrete Is Linked to Capital Murder Case
Larry Whitehurst, who could become the first person to stand trial under New  York State's new death penalty law, became a suspect in another killing yesterday as authorities began exhuming a body found buried under concrete and sand in the basement of his apartment building in Kingston.
Mr.
Whitehurst, a 25-year-old grocery clerk, was charged in September with kidnapping and killing a 7-year-old girl.
At the time, the Ulster County District Attorney vowed to seek the death penalty.


'ABUSIVE PRACTICE' COMPLAINTS AGAINST DIGITAL IN EUROPE
European Union inspectors raided offices of the Digital Equipment Corporation after customers complained about "abusive practices," a spokesman for the European Commission said yesterday.
Digital's European unit said it would cooperate with the investigation but said that it believed its business practices were in line with competition rules.
Willy Helin, a spokesman for Karel Van Miert, the European Union's competition commissioner, said that on Tuesday, inspectors visited three Digital subsidiaries, in Britain, the Netherlands and Germany.
Mr.
Helin said the complaints related to linked deals for hardware and software maintenance contracts.


She's Thankful for New Jersey
Another holiday message, this one from Gov. Christine Todd Whitman:
In a letter to state residents, she listed reasons to be thankful for what New Jersey has to offer, including its natural resources, its history and its cultural institutions, and particularly for "our wonderfully diverse family of races, cultures and religions."
SUSAN JO KELLER


Serial Rapist Feared In Brooklyn Attacks
The recent rapes of two women as they emerged from subway stations in Brooklyn after midnight have been linked by the police department, raising fears of a serial rapist.
The police said the first rape occurred at 12:15 A.M. on Oct. 27, when a 31-year-old woman emerged from the Hoyt-Schermerhorn station in downtown Brooklyn.
At Schermerhorn and Bond streets, she was struck from behind and fell  to the ground, then was forced to her apartment where the attacker raped and robbed her.


Boeing and U.S. May Settle Contract Suit
The Boeing Company has disclosed in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it may be close to settling a 1991 dispute with the Federal Government stemming from the termination of a contract to develop an air-defense program for Saudi Arabia.
As a result of the termination, the Government had demanded the repayment of  $605 million that Boeing had received.


Death Penalty Ruling Attacked
The Essex County Prosecutor and the Attorney General plan to appeal a ruling  striking down a law that allows relatives of murder victims to testify in death  penalty cases.


Washington's Statistical Wars
The chairman of the House's tax-writing committee, Bill Archer, has defended  the fairness of the budget bill Congress passed this week by pointing to his staff's estimates that only about 9 percent of the Republicans' tax cuts would go to families earning over $200,000, the richest 1 percent.
The Democrats did not believe the figures, and yesterday the Treasury showed  why.
It estimated that the richest 1 percent would rake in almost twice as much, or 17 percent, of the tax cut.
Indeed under the Republican bill the poorest 20 percent of families, taken as a group, would pay higher taxes as a percentage of their income.
But the bill would reduce taxes by steadily increasing amounts  as family incomes rise.
The biggest tax cut would go to the richest families.


I.B.M. Names Brand Manager for PC Unit
I.B.M. named Anthony Santelli yesterday to the post of general manager of product and brand management of its personal computer division.
Mr.
Santelli replaces Bruce Claflin, who recently left to head the Digital Equipment Corporation's PC business.


Be Less of a Target, House Republicans Urge Gingrich
Despite a year of legislative successes, Speaker Newt Gingrich enters the final stage of budget negotiations with a public image so battered that the Democrats see it as one of his party's prime vulnerabilities.
Congressional Republicans, including some of his staunchest loyalists, are increasingly concerned.
Mr.
Gingrich dismisses his poll ratings, which dropped significantly during this month's budget maneuvering, as transitory, the short-term price of pushing  for long-term change against the fierce opposition of a party that he asserts is bound to distort his program.
"When people learn the facts over the next five or six months, we'll be fine," he told the Republican governors this week at their  meeting in Nashua, N.H.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the whereabouts of the grave of the guerrilla leader Ernesto Che Guevara included a garbled passage.
It should have read, "Guevara disappeared from public view in 1965, when he left Cuba to assist one of the rebel factions fighting in the former Belgian Congo, now Zaire."


Essay;Biting Bosnia's Bullet
For years, those of us who believed the world had an obligation to stop Serbian aggression in Bosnia favored "lift and strike": First, lift the U.N. arms embargo that blocked the Bosnians from matching the far superior Serbian firepower; then, strike hard from the air to stop the aggressors while a balance of power was being achieved.
The idea was to get ineffective U.N. troops out and make possible a peace between military equals.
This road was not taken.


Devils Are in Need of Stress Management
Frustration is so consuming the Devils these days that they have become too tight to play up to their ability, Coach Jacques Lemaire said tonight.
"The guys are playing with too much stress," Lemaire said after New Jersey fell limply to the Tampa Bay Lightning, 3-1, before 16,243 fans at the Thunderdome.
Tampa Bay is the second team from the bottom of the National Hockey League's Atlantic Division, with only the Islanders behind it.


King Priority Is to Reverse Casino Ban
There is not yet an announced deal for a Dec. 16 Mike Tyson-Buster Mathis Jr. fight in Atlantic City with backing from Donald Trump.
But Don King, Tyson's promoter, has a more pressing concern -- reversing his suspension by the New Jersey Casino Control Commission or finding someone else to promote Tyson.
After King's indictment last year on wire-fraud charges, the commission suspended King and Don King Productions from doing business with Atlantic City's casinos or its employees.
King's trial ended last week in a mistrial, but the commission is in no rush to rescind its order against King.


A Town Feels Betrayed by Milosevic and Talks of Fighting On
Just past a French checkpoint that straddles the front line outside Sarajevo, there is a grumbling that grows louder with every pass of the bottle and every mention of peace.
Ilidza, a Serb-held suburb, is set to return to the Bosnian fold.
For the soldiers and civilians who crowd the checkpoints on the road into town, this provision of the peace agreement reached on Tuesday has brought nothing but pessimism and pain.


Exxon in Belgian Deal
The Exxon Corporation's Exxon Chemical unit will acquire the 35 percent stake in a Belgium ethylene and polypropylene complex held by the Danish petrochemical company Borealis A.S., the Belgian oil and gas company Petrofina S.A. said today.


The Music That Moved Proust
Among major authors who wrote about musicians, Marcel Proust ranks fairly high.
Not quite as high as Thomas Mann, whose fictional composer in "Doktor Faustus" is the greatest feat of musical imagination in literature; but certainly higher than James Joyce, who cared only for the voice.
"Remembrance of Things Past" is filled with music, chamber music in particular.
Shadowy works by a nonexistent composer named Vinteuil float in and out of the narrative, provoking meditations on memory and the transformation of perception over time.
Da Camera of Houston, led by the pianist Sarah Rothenberg, visited the Walter Reade Theater on Monday night with a remarkably thoughtful program of music that inspired Proust.
Faure's First Violin Sonata and Franck's String Quartet were here, offering possible models for the "little phrase" that infiltrates the consciousness of Swann in "Swann's Way." There were also songs of Reynaldo Hahn, including adaptations of two Proust poems in the form of voice-and-piano melodramas, and two Baudelaire settings by Debussy.


New Orleans Casino Project Is Halted in a Bankruptcy Filing
As a city whose unofficial motto is "Let the Good Times Roll," New Orleans always seemed a good bet as a location for a casino.
But its nascent gambling industry was dealt a major setback yesterday when the Harrah's Jazz Company, the consortium that was building a big casino on Canal Street, filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy law.
The company immediately suspended construction of the 200,000-square-foot casino, which was to open next June 1 as one of the largest in the world, and closed a temporary casino that had been operating in the city's municipal auditorium.


Shutdown's Cost Put at $700 Million
The White House said last week's Government shutdown cost taxpayers $700 million to $800 million, roughly split between the salaries of the 800,000 furloughed workers and lost Federal revenue.


You and I Is Retired to Stud
You and I, winner of the Metropolitan Handicap in May and the Brooklyn Handicap in June, was retired to stud yesterday.
He will stand at Airdrie Stud in Midway, Ky.
The 4-year-old colt earned $701,325 from 6 victories in 16 careers starts.


Acquisition by Tesoro
The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation will acquire Coastwide Energy Services Inc., an oilfield services company, for about $21 million in cash and stock.
Under the agreement, each Coastwide share will be converted into the right to receive $2.55 in cash and 0.41 of a Tesoro share.
Tesoro, an oil and gas producer and marketer based here, said the noncash part of the payment would be free of taxes to Coastwide stockholders.


AT HOME WITH: Alicia de Larrocha;A Pianissimo Star
THE Spanish pianist Alicia de Larrocha has a lot of carpet padding in her apartment, down the block and around the corner from Carnegie Hall, but not all  of it is under the carpet.
Several thick rolls have been hidden beneath the sounding board of her Steinway grand -- out of sight, but they do the job.
"I do not want to disturb the neighbors," she said midway through a recent interview.
Inspecting the old-fashioned coarse-hair material, she added: "I didn't want them to complain. The very first day, a friend of mine put the stuff under the piano. I can practice very comfortably."


Magic Struggles to Top Grizzlies
Magic 95, Grizzlies 93


Hurst Obtained by Rams
The St.
Louis Rams got some help for their secondary yesterday, but they may  have to wait for results.
Cornerback MAURICE HURST, a seven-year veteran who was waived by the New England Patriots on Monday, was claimed off waivers by the Rams.
But Hurst's agent, DOUG SUNSERI, said his client has been playing with a herniated disk in his neck that bothers him when he turns his head to the right.


Hard Times for a Dream Car's Descendant
Romano Artioli has always glowed at the mention of the word Bugatti.
Mainly, he was stirred by memories of roadsters like the fabulous Type 41, dubbed La Royale, that Ettore Bugatti, the flamboyant Italian-born auto designer, built for Europe's gilded set between the world wars.
After all, wasn't Bugatti the only car ever to strangle a beautiful woman who had fallen in love with it?
In 1927, the dancer Isadora Duncan fulfilled her dream of driving  a Bugatti, and perished when her scarf, streaming in the wind, became entangled  in a wheel.


70 Double Buses Are Ordered for New York
Three-axle accordionlike buses that can carry 50 more passengers than the current models are to go into service on New York City streets early in 1997, transit officials said this week.
The Transit Authority has ordered 70 of the double buses, manufactured by New Flyer Industries of Winnipeg, Manitoba.
They are 60 feet long and can seat 60 passengers, with 60 more standing.
Current buses seat 43 riders and can hold 27  standing.


No Surgery for Hostetler
Oakland Raiders quarterback JEFF HOSTETLER will not require surgery for his ailing left shoulder and might be able to play Monday night at San Diego.
Hostetler, who is right-handed, reinjured his shoulder when he was slammed to the ground by Dallas's CHAD HENNINGS in the first half of the Raiders' loss Sunday. (AP)


Bridge
The Women's Board-a-Match Championship on Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals produced a blend of happiness and sadness.
Two winners, Carol Sanders of Nashville and Betty Ann Kennedy of Shreveport, La., announced they were retiring from national and international competition, ending a 26-year partnership that has brought them four world titles and many national ones.
Their teammates were Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville, Sue Sachs of Baltimore,  Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., and Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md.


CHRONICLE
JILL KREMENTZ has become expert in a subject close to home: the habits and rituals of writers.
It comes not just from her living with a writer (her husband is Kurt Vonnegut) but also from her 35 years of photographing writers.
Last year she decided to put together a book called "The Writer's Desk," which is to be published next year by Random House.
Fourteen of the 50 pictures  in the book are on view through the end of the year at the Montblanc Boutique on Madison Avenue at 57th Street.


Ernest Jarvis, 92, a Contractor Who Lighted Theaters and Road
Ernest Jarvis, who began his career as a 14-year-old union electrician and ended it 64 years later as head of his own contracting company, died on Tuesday  at a nursing home in Morristown, N.J.
He was 92 and had outlived many of his most famous projects, from the illuminated West Side Highway in Manhattan to a string of Loews movie palaces across the country.
Mr.
Jarvis, who bore such a striking resemblance to his second cousin, Jacob  Javits, that the Senator's bodyguards were forever being fooled, could be a case study of the social and economic saga of 20th-century America.


German Rate Is Cut
Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, shaved one basis point yesterday from its key repurchase rate, continuing a gradual easing begun in late August.
The Bundesbank said it had allocated securities repurchase funds at a lowest accepted rate of 3.97 percent, down from last week's lowest accepted rate of 3.98 percent.
Economists said the decision by the Bundesbank to sanction a small reduction in its money-market "repo" rate underscored its intention to fine-tune policy one step at a time.
(Reuters)


Arrest in Airport- Device Blast
A youth was arrested yesterday in last month's bombing of a wind-shear detection device serving La Guardia Airport, an attack that was linked to the Federal raid on the Branch Davidian compound outside Waco, Tex., in February 1993.
The suspect, who was not identified, was charged with conspiracy and maliciously damaging and destroying the equipment at Flushing Airport in Queens, said Zachary W. Carter, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.


Bosnia Serbs Balk, And U.S. Is Stern
American officials said the United States would not send troops to help enforce the Balkan accord unless the Bosnian Serbs agreed to it.
Although the President of Serbia initialed the pact on behalf of the Bosnian Serbs, their representatives to the talks refused to attend a signing ceremony on Tuesday to  protest an accord that they said essentially makes NATO an occupying force.
Article, A12.


White House Feathers Ruffled


Man Who Had Heart Surgery Is Executed
A 47-year-old child-killer who underwent surgery less than a month ago to relieve a heart condition was executed early today, prison authorities said.
George Del Vecchio died by lethal injection at Stateville Correctional Center, a prison 60 miles southwest of Chicago, for the 1977 murder of 6-year-old Tony Canzoneri.


Hyundai's India Plant
The Hyundai Motor Company, South Korea's largest auto maker, said yesterday that it planned to build a $1 billion assembly plant in India through a joint venture.
Construction on the factory in southern India would begin in 1996.
Hyundai plans to hold a 60 percent stake in the venture, which it is discussing  with several potential Indian partners.
When it starts operation in 1998, the plant will assemble 100,000 units a year of Hyundai's Accent and Sonata models.
(AP)


Pilgrims Wear Different Hats In Recast Thanksgiving Tales
Plymouth Rock and the Mayflower were nowhere to be found in the Thanksgiving  story that Kate Seid read to her fourth-grade class at Public School 87 on the Upper West Side this week.
Instead, there was a band of "strange-looking people" who landed a "big airship" in a family's backyard and proceeded to ransack their house, cut down their trees, kill their pets and take tomatoes from their garden.


Philips New Mexico Plan
Philips Electronics N.V. announced plans this week to invest 300 million guilders ($189.9 million) to raise chip output in Albuquerque, N.M.
The investment is aimed at increasing production of chip wafers to about 200,000 a year by late next year from 95,000 last year, the Dutch electronics company said.
The investment will create about 400 new jobs, it said.
The plant, opened  in 1981, employs 1,300.


Bottoms Up: The Cocktail, Shaken and Stirred
THE COCKTAIL The Influence of Spirits on the American Psyche By Joseph Lanza Illustrated. 168 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.


Baltimore Ends Education Experiment
The nation's largest for-profit manager of public schools suffered a serious  blow yesterday when Baltimore officials said they were canceling its contract to manage 12 city schools.
The termination of the contract, which is expected to be formalized by a vote of the Board of School Commissioners on Nov. 30, leaves the company, Education Alternatives Inc., with only one partnership with a public district, in Hartford.
Officials there have scaled back the company's direct involvement to only six schools, rather than all 26 schools in the district, and have said they have no money to pay back the $8 million the company has spent in the city so far.


Meshing the Sacred and the Secular;Floyd Flake Offers Community Development via Church and State
On the corner of Merrick Boulevard and Sayres Avenue, the old Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church is like the knotted bottom of an old oak tree, its long arms stretching out in all directions across St.
Albans, Queens.
Down the street is the Allen Christian School, where Allen's pastor, the Rev.
Floyd H. Flake, preaches on Sunday mornings to his swelling, 8,400-member congregation.
To the west, there's the 300-unit apartment complex for the elderly built by the parish 15 years ago with Federal housing loans.
Next door are about four dozen two-family homes that the church's real estate arm is helping to build with city and state housing dollars.
Dotting the neighborhood are 75 more houses that the church acquired or developed and sold to private home buyers.


INSIDE
Governors Duel Over Port


Stocks Falter in Japan
Stocks ended lower in quiet trading here today ahead of a national holiday.
The Nikkei index closed down 144.48 points, or eight-tenths of 1 percent, at 18,239.84.
The market will be closed on Thursday for Labor Thanksgiving Day.
On  Tuesday, the Nikkei rose a half-point.


For Martha-holics, It's Marathon Season
THE holidays are a time for reflection.
And so it was that Tracy Dockray, a Manhattan illustrator and decorative painter, was ruminating on just what it was that led her to gold-leaf her motorcycle tank and glue-gun a coat for Zeus, her  Chihuahua.
Sitting on her glue-gunned upholstery, near her glue-gunned swags, she said,  "The glue gun changed my life," referring to the concealed weapon that always distinguishes a Martha Stewart person.


Such Progress Could Strangle New York
To the Editor:
Is there a limit to the Manhattanization of Manhattan?
Not if one reads your  news article on 42d Street returning from decline and becoming a magnet for merchants (Nov. 15).


Games Old Women Play With a Younger One
Ernest Thompson's play "The West Side Waltz," starring Katharine Hepburn and  Dorothy Loudon, opened on Broadway 14 years ago this week.
In it, he explored a  tight little world of aging and generational conflict, much as he did two years  earlier in the very different context of "On Golden Pond." The latter was made into an award-winning film.
Now, tonight at 9 on CBS, "The West Side Waltz" is revived as a television movie starring Shirley MacLaine, Liza Minnelli and Jennifer Grey.
The scene is the Upper West Side of Manhattan, somewhere around 72d Street.
Margaret Mary Elderdice (Ms. MacLaine), a widow, lives alone in a rather grand apartment.
She is impatient with the indignities of growing old, losing her hearing and having to use a cane.
Margaret Mary is a fairly accomplished pianist.
Her neigbor is Cara Varnum (Ms. Minnelli), a sweet but somewhat glum woman who would like to move in with Margaret Mary, who unfortunately finds Cara too much of a downer.
Cara plays the violin.
The two women get together regularly for musical diversions, preferably Strauss waltzes.


Goldman Sets Management Revamping
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, Wall Street's last remaining large partnership, has announced an overhaul of its management structure intended to put more power in  the hands of fewer executives.
This is the first time in nearly 23 years that the firm has reorganized its top management committees; it said it was doing so to better reflect its changing lines of businesses and operations.


Israel, Not Judaism, Will Have to Save Israel;For Tolerance Training
To the Editor:
"With a Handshake, Rabin's Fate Was Sealed" (front page, Nov. 19) painfully notes that Yigal Amir, Yitzhak Rabin's assassin, was "a Sabra -- a native -- a studious Jewish boy brought up in their most revered institutions."


For Knicks, a Few Words Go a Long Way
About the time Charles Oakley and Anthony Mason invented the no-look turnover in the second quarter tonight -- throwing away consecutive passes the way the Knicks threw away the first half -- was also about the time Don Nelson became unglued.
He was trailing a team from Cleveland that bore no resemblance to last season's playoff version, and these evil twins that showed up in the Knicks' places were doing nothing right.
He walked briskly to the locker room.
The door  closed behind him.


Israel, Not Judaism, Will Have to Save Israel;Valuing Life Over Land
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's Nov. 19 column, "Land or Life?" incorrectly states that  many religious Zionists give more emphasis to the value of land than to the value of life.
This is not the case.
Almost all religious Zionists value life above all else, and this is why they want to retain the West Bank and the Golan  Heights.


Treasury Issues Down a Bit In an Abbreviated Session
Prices of Treasury securities were slightly lower in an abbreviated session yesterday.
The consolidation came despite the release of a number of economic reports -- including data on the nation's trade deficit and business inventories -- that had been delayed by the Government's partial shutdown last week.


World News Briefs;Sri Lanka Plane Crashes; Rebel Attack Suspected
A military transport plane carrying 62 people crashed into the Indian Ocean off the Jaffna peninsula today, and Government officials said they feared Tamil  rebels had brought it down.
Navy gun boats scoured the sea for the 2-member crew, the 54 soldiers and the 6 airmen aboard.
The weather was clear at the time of the crash.


Mortgage Rate Unchanged
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 7.35 percent this week, unchanged from last week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today.
The rate  remains at the lowest level since Feb. 24, 1994, when rates averaged 7.32 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.61 percent, down from 5.65 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 6.85 percent this week, down from 6.86 percent a week earlier.


New Office Furniture With an Eye on Home
THE latest in office furnishings were presented at Interplan, a three-day trade show early this month at the New York Coliseum that was also open to the public.
The home office was the focus.
The Moderns, a New York design firm, gave the  show graphic sparkle with fluorescent orange sign kiosks that were inspired by those in European subways and a lively "information sculpture" (below left) depicting advances in office technology since 1940.


7 Die in Fiery Truck Crash
A big rig lost control on a rain-slicked highway Wednesday and hit a logging  truck and a car in a fiery head-on crash that killed seven people.
The accident just south of Dunsmuir shut down 60 miles of Interstate 5 for several hours, snarling Thanksgiving eve traffic.
Dunsmuir is 300 miles north of San Francisco.


Peres Proposes Inclusive Peace To Syrian Chief
Prime Minister Shimon Peres challenged President Hafez al-Assad of Syria today not only to make peace with Israel, but also to take the lead in concluding a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
In a speech to Parliament on introducing his new Cabinet, and in an interview later, Mr.
Peres declared an intention to go beyond another agreement that would exchange land for peace, and to seek an all-inclusive regional settlement by the end of the century.


Air France Returns To Profitability
Compagnie Nationale Air France, the international airline operations of Air France, said yesterday that it had returned to profitability in the six months that ended on Sept. 30 as it benefited from a reorganization of its parent.
The  state-owned carrier reported a pretax profit of 176 million francs, or $36 million, compared with a loss of 857 million francs a year earlier.
Operating profit jumped to 826 million, or $170 million, from 213 million francs.
The company said the pretax profit improved largely because of the first effects of structural changes arising from the Air France reorganization.
These  included higher productivity and the closing of money-losing routes.
(Reuters)


Helping the Medicine Go Down, for a Start
The day begins for Linda Woods at 6 A.M. with a shower and a pill.
The shower keeps her clean and fresh.
The pill keeps her sane.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-13


Executive Changes
ANTHONY INDUSTRIES, Los Angeles, a maker of leisure products, sporting goods and industrial products, promoted Richard M. Rodstein, its president, to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Bernard I. Forester, who will continue as chairman.


CHRONICLE
Even during Thanksgiving week, there's no letup of news of marital discord.
NATALIE COLE, the singer and daughter of Nat King Cole, has filed a second time for divorce from ANDRE FISCHER, a producer, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Legislature May Reignite Suffolk Feud On Car Deal
Now that Election Day and the need for a united front have passed, Suffolk County Republicans are feuding again over who was responsible for a county car lease deal that went sour.
On Tuesday, the Republican-led County Legislature is to take up resolutions aimed at District Attorney James M. Catterson, also a Republican, who has been accused of threatening legislators who sought investigations of the deal.


Today is Thanksgiving
New York


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
The Battle of the Bronx


U.S. Sending an F.B.I. Team to Investigate Bombing in Pakistan
F.B.I. agents have been sent to Pakistan to search for possible links between a deadly bombing at the Egyptian Embassy there on Sunday and a car bomb that killed five Americans 10 days ago in Saudi Arabia, law enforcement officials said today.
The investigation has not yet yielded any direct connection between the two bombings, but the Federal Bureau of Investigation is exploring whether the attacks were carried out by the same or allied Islamic militant groups, which have denounced the American and Egyptian Governments.


A Briefing on the Rules for U.S. Troops


Economic Scene;Making the Republican tax plan fairer to poorer families.
THE budget crisis is over.
President Clinton and the Republicans have agreed  to issue passports, audit tax returns and reopen the national parks while they negotiate a compromise budget.
But with the ideological gap as wide as ever, is  there really any middle ground?
On at least one important issue -- how to make the Republican tax proposals fairer to families struggling to make ends meet -- the surprising answer is yes.
Representative Thomas E. Petri, a centrist Republican from Wisconsin, thinks he  has found a way to satisfy both sides.


Gingrich's Views on Slayings Draw Fire
Speaker Newt Gingrich's remarks blaming the "welfare state" for the murder of an Illinois woman and two of her children drew criticism today from relatives of the victims and from Democrats.
Speaking to Republican governors in New Hampshire on Tuesday, Mr.
Gingrich said: "Let's talk about what the welfare state has created. Let's talk about the moral decay of the world the left is defending."


California County Votes Against Nuclear Dump
In a protest vote, county supervisors here on Tuesday approved an ordinance against a dump for low-level nuclear waste proposed for the eastern part of San  Bernardino County near the Colorado River.
Adoption of the ordinance on a 5-to-0 vote was prompted by residents' fear that the dump could contaminate drinking water.


Japan Does Well to Protect Rice Farmers
To the Editor:


Beame's Wife, 88, Is Dead
Mary Beame, the wife of former Mayor Abraham D. Beame, died on Tuesday at the New York Medical Center.
She was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Beame was married to the former New York Mayor, who served from 1974 to  1978, for almost 68 years.
The two met as teen-agers at the University Settlement House, which provided social services for poor Lower East Side residents.


Children Hurt By Gas Fumes In Family Car
Yesterday afternoon, Herbie and Antoinette Newsome piled suitcases atop their '83 white Chevrolet station wagon, squeezed their adult daughter, seven children and two grandchildren in, and left their home in eastern Staten Island to drive  to North Carolina for Thanksgiving.
They got as far as Mrs.
Newsome's twin sister's house, near Staten Island's northwest end, when an apparently faulty exhaust pipe sent carbon monoxide inside the car and rendered the children unconscious, the police and relatives said.


Some British Moderns Seeking to Shock
Brilliant!: New Art from London" at the Walker Art Center here is the first  American museum exhibition to celebrate the reinvigorated London art scene. As is well known by now, this scene began to be the envy of the contemporary art world in the late 1980's. It was then that a new generation of artists, led by a promotionally savvy sculptor, Damien Hirst, took matters into its own hands.
Starting with a 1988 show called "Freeze," they staged a series of impromptu  exhibitions in the run-down Docklands area of London, and were soon demonstrating a taste for the startling in materials, subjects and techniques that often verged on the sensational.
Their overall aim, if one could be identified, seemed to be to connect art directly to life without passing Go, and to epater the bourgeoisie as much as possible.


Bobby Short's Camaraderie From His Usual Bench
If any cabaret performer could be described as a philosopher of good times it is Bobby Short, who at 69 embodies the word exuberant.
The singer and pianist, who is appearing at the Cafe Carlyle through Dec. 31, conveys a joie de vivre so intense that it seems anything but frivolous.
What makes his best performances moving as well as uplifting is the sense that he is all too aware of life's darker side and has pushed it away at some personal cost to create another magical evening of celebratory camaraderie.
Pleasure, Mr.
Short implies, is as precious as it is evanescent, and is not to be taken lightly.
At Tuesday's early show, Mr.
Short delivered an extravagant verbal tribute to Ginger Rogers, then invited the audience to pretend they were Rogers while he took the role of Fred Astaire.
The medley began with "Beginner's Luck," continued with "Cheek to Cheek," "The Way You Look Tonight" and "The Carioca," and reached a peak with "Shall We Dance?" in which his jubilant tone took on an  edge of alarm.
As he shouted the words, "You'd better dance whenever you can!,"  the song assumed the overtones of a warning.


Tokyo Journal;In a Land Lush With Cash, the Robbers Cash In
Morimatsu Saito barely knew what hit him.
The 63-year-old securities company  employee was walking through Tokyo's financial district carrying a bag containing $400,000 to his company.
Just as he reached his building, a man wearing a helmet approached him, sprayed a debilitating gas in his face, and ran off with the money.
The robbery, which took place in September on a busy street in broad daylight, was one of several recent episodes that have shocked normally safe Japan.
But why would someone walk unguarded through the streets with $400,000 anyway?


Last Meeting Of S.&amp; L. Board
The Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board has set Dec. 4 as the date for its closing meeting, which will be a milestone in the effort to resolve the  savings and loan crisis of the 1980's.
The board was created by Congress in 1989 to review policies of the Resolution Trust Corporation, an agency set up to clean up the savings and loans debacle.
The trust corporation, which took over hundreds of savings and loan institutions and sold their assets, is scheduled to close down permanently on Dec. 31.


Masco Gets $1.1 Billion For Home Furnishings Unit
The Masco Corporation said yesterday that it had sold its home furnishings business to an investor group assembled by Morgan Stanley Capital Partners for more than $1.1 billion.
The sale ends a decade-long effort by Masco to provide homeowners with everything from kitchen sinks and plumbing equipment to curtains and dining room tables at an acceptably high rate of return.


Success Has Many Fathers Among Allies
The United States may have brokered the deal that finally brought peace to Bosnia, but the European allies who spent nearly four years trying without success demanded a share of the credit today.
As a result, there will be a whirlwind of Bosnia peace conferences in Europe  in coming weeks: a conference in Paris in early December for a formal signing of the Dayton accords, talks in London on Dec. 8 and 9 to discuss how the accords will be put into effect, and then discussions in Bonn on setting limits on weapons in the former Yugoslavia.


SHARES OF PARAXEL INTERNATIONAL SURGE ON FIRST DAY
Shares of the Paraxel International Corporation were up strongly on the first day of trading, after the company offered nearly 2.2 million shares for $15 each.
The company, which provides clinical research and development services to  the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries, offered 1.6 million of the shares, while shareholders offered 582,078 shares.
The company, based in Waltham, Mass., will use proceeds for geographic expansion, additional services, capital expenditures and other purposes.
The shares closed at $19.25 yesterday in Nasdaq trading.


GAINS IN EXPORTS CUT TRADE DEFICIT
American exports unexpectedly continued to climb to new heights in September  as the nation's trade deficit inched down to $8.35 billion, the lowest level of  the year, Commerce Department figures showed today.
At the same time, the American deficit with Japan narrowed for the sixth consecutive month to a level nearly one-third less than in the spring.
And even  the deficit with China, which has been swelling rapidly to rival Japan's, contracted.


F&amp;M NATIONAL AGREES TO BUY PARENT OF FAIRFAX BANK
The F&amp;M National Corporation, a bank holding company, said yesterday that it  had agreed to buy the FB&amp;T Financial Corporation for $47.3 million in stock.
F&amp;M National, based in Winchester, Va., said the deal values FB&amp;T's stock at $35 a share.
FB&amp;T shares fell 50 cents yesterday, to $23.50, in Nasdaq trading.
The deal was announced after the close of trading.
FB&amp;T Financial, the parent company for the Fairfax Bank and Trust Company in Fairfax, Va., has assets of about $244.6 million.
F&amp;M has more than $1.8 billion in assets.


Steven Powsner, 40; Founded Gay Center
Steven J. Powsner, a founder and former president of the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center in Greenwich Village, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
The cause was complications from AIDS, a spokesman for the center, Benjamin Stilp, said.


3 Lawyers Plan to Aid Servicemen In Okinawa
Three American lawyers plan to help defend three American servicemen now on trial for the abduction and rape of a 12-year-old Okinawa girl by challenging the Japanese investigation that, they contend, may have resulted in coerced confessions.
The three lawyers -- Eric V. Ross of Atlanta, Michael J. Griffith of Southampton, L.I., and Charles Beach of Clinton, Tenn. -- have never met their clients, who come from small towns in Georgia and Texas.
Their only direct information from the servicemen comes from letters and telephone calls to relatives in which one complained about "coaching" by Japanese investigators.


Camden Native Dies in Bosnia
An American killed in Bosnia over the weekend was identified yesterday as William Jefferson, a Camden native who was a civilian employee of the United Nations, The A.P. said.
Mr.
Jefferson, who would have turned 44 next week, was found shot to death near the town of Banovici.


Gasoline Prices Rise Sharply As Demand Draws Down Stocks
Gasoline prices rose sharply yesterday after a report showed that unusually high consumption was draining refinery stockpiles.
Crude oil prices were little changed after OPEC ended a meeting without changing its output ceiling.
On other markets, coffee fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities dropped 0.31 point, to 241.23.


World News Briefs;Serial Murderer Is Jailed For Life in Britain
One of Britain's most infamous murderers was sentenced to prison for life today, protesting she was innocent of torturing and killing 10 women and girls,  including a daughter and a stepdaughter.
The lawyer for the killer, Rosemary West, 41, said afterward, "We are actively pursuing an appeal."


Alaska Shootout Lists Field for '96
Kentucky and Stanford will be among the teams playing in next year's Great Alaska Shootout.
Tournament organizers said today the eight-team field for the 19th annual Shootout will also include Syracuse, Arizona State, College of Charleston, Maine, North Carolina-Greensboro and host Alaska-Anchorage.


The Attorney General's Office in Albany Was a National Model
To the Editor:
It is galling to have two letters to the editor on Nov. 16 (David J. Kaufmann, "New York's Top Lawyer Has the Right Idea," and Philip S. Glickman, "The People Will Lose") that contain misinformation.


On Giving Thanks
The First Thanksgiving" has long been a favorite topic of grade-school artists and pageant producers. The politicians' tradition of citing Governor William Bradford's thanksgiving proclamation in 1621 -- observed again this year by President Clinton in his proclamation -- has also contributed to the general  impression that there was a "first" Thanksgiving. But in this as in so many human endeavors, first-ness is not so easy to nail down.
Indeed, the event proclaimed by Governor Bradford was not, in religious terms, the Pilgrims' first observance.
That happened spontaneously on a cold day in November 1620, when they waded ashore at Provincetown, a month before they got to Plymouth.
After two months at sea, they fell to their knees in prayerful thanks to God for their survival.


METRO DIGEST
PILGRIMS IN A NEW THANKSGIVING STORY


Staff Reductions Seen at Salomon
Salomon Brothers, the large investment banking and commodities trading firm,  is expected to announce staff cuts in its operations and support staff early next week, a person at the firm who refused to be identified said yesterday.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Comfortable Unity Of a Father and Daughter Pamela and Claude Frank, Violinist and Pianist 92d Street Y


Bomb's Away


Rare Hawk Shot to Death
A partly blind red-tailed hawk that had lived at Stanford University after being injured and nursed back to health has been shot to death on the campus.
Wildlife groups are offering a $1,000 reward for information leading to the  arrest of the bird's killer.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Friday about the proposed purchase of L. Kellenberger &amp; Company of Switzerland misspelled the name of the buyer.
It is Hardinge Inc., not Harding.


Virginia Is in Peach Bowl
Virginia accepted an invitation yesterday to play in the Peach Bowl, the site 11 years ago of its first bowl game and first bowl victory.
The No. 19 Cavaliers (8-4), co-champions of the Atlantic Coast Conference, had been waiting to be invited since losing to Virginia Tech by 36-29 last Saturday in their final regular-season game.
The Cavaliers will most likely play No. 23 Arkansas (8-3) if the Razorbacks lose to No. 3 Florida on Dec. 2 in the Southeastern Conference championship.


Doubts Are Raised on Hilton Hotels' Spinoff Intentions
The Hilton Hotels Corporation left the investment community puzzled yesterday as to whether the company intended to carry out its plans to split itself into separate hotel and gambling companies.
Hilton's president, Raymond C. Avansino Jr., who came to the company three years ago with experience in gambling law, resigned on Tuesday, and Wall Street  cast a skeptical eye on the reason given.
But the company said little yesterday to clear up the matter.


Nestle to Sell California Wineries to Focus on Its Core Businesses
Nestle S.A. said yesterday that it would sell its California wineries, including Beringer Vineyards, to focus on its other foods and beverages.
The announcement came as Nestle, the Swiss food company that is the world's largest, warned that a strong Swiss franc would drag this year's earnings below  earlier forecasts.
But the company also said that it expected that improvements in its business, which includes brands like Stouffer's frozen dinners and Taster's Choice freeze-dried coffee, would help it post earnings growth next year.


Talk Radio's Support
To the Editor:
I know these are tough days for The New York Times.
Your circulation is falling.
Your editorials go unheeded by the President of the United States.
It takes energy and effort to not cover monumental Republican successes.
I feel your pain.


Professors' Defense Opens
Two professors from Trenton State College charged with discrimination against a colleague opened their defense in Federal District Court yesterday.
Dr.
Howard Robboy, the former chairman of the sociology and anthropology department, and Eugenia Shanklin, professor of anthropology, were sued by Professor Mohamoud M. Ismail, who said they called him racist names, posted offensive cartoons and prevented him from being promoted.


James Laycock, 81, Racing Historian
James Robert Laycock, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway historian, died Wednesday morning at his son David's home in Avon, Ind.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Laycock, who failed to attend the 1914 Indianapolis 500 only because he was born on June 3 of that year, a few days too late for it, was present at every one of the Memorial Day races after that until 1994, when illness forced him to stay home.


Budget Bill, Following Tradition, Offers Its Share of Tax Oddities
As long as the United States has had tax laws, politicians have twisted them  for political reasons.
The very first such law, approved by the First Congress,  levied a tax on Jamaican rum -- not so much because the Founding Fathers wanted to discourage drinking the demon rum but because they wanted to give an advantage to the Kentucky bourbon industry being developed by the Rev.
Elijah Craig.
There was no exception this year in the way the Republicans handled the tax sections of the big budget legislation that Congress approved this week.


Gene Defect Tied to Violence in Male Mice
A brain chemical already infamous for its role in human strokes also holds sway over aggressive and sexual behavior, at least in male mice, scientists have reported.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore have found that male mice specifically bred to lack a gene essential for the production of nitric oxide, a molecule that allows nerve cells to communicate, are relentlessly aggressive against their fellow males, often to the point of killing them.


New Disclosure on Arakis Head's Stock Sales
The president of the Arakis Energy Corporation, Terry Alexander, sold 198,837 shares of the company's stock in August, an insider trading report filed recently with the British Columbia Securities Commission shows, even though Mr.
Alexander said at the time that he had not sold any stock.
The disclosure is likely to raise questions among Arakis shareholders, who saw their investment plunge in the weeks after Mr.
Alexander's stock sale.


James Woods 3d, 32, Professor and Author
James Desmond Woods 3d, an author and assistant professor at the City University of New York, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 32 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, according to the College of Staten Island, where he taught.


After Kerkorian Complaint, A Chrysler Director Resigns
Joseph E. Antonini surprised the Chrysler Corporation today by resigning from the auto maker's board, thus increasing pressure on the company to replace him with Kirk Kerkorian's chief strategist, Jerome B. York.
Mr.
Kerkorian, Chrysler's second-largest shareholder and leading critic, called on Monday for the resignation of Mr.
Antonini, the former chief executive of the Kmart Corporation.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Kerkorian filed proxy materials to nominate Mr.
York and add two other outside directors before the annual meeting  in May, when all directors stand for re-election.


Government Shutdown Cost Is Estimated at $700 Million
As the Administration considered its strategy for next week's budget negotiations with Congress, the White House disclosed today that last week's Government shutdown cost taxpayers $700 million to $800 million.
And it said it  could not promise Federal workers that another shutdown would not occur in a few weeks.
Roughly half of the estimated costs, White House officials said, are the salaries of the 800,000 workers furloughed for four work days.
As in past Government shutdowns, these workers will be paid for the time they were sent home.
The other half consists of lost Federal revenues, some of which may be recouped.


Bosnian Serbs Balk at Pact, Imperiling U.S. Troop Plan
A day after the leaders of three rival Balkan states initialed a peace plan for Bosnia, Clinton Administration officials turned their attention today to a potentially serious obstacle to the pact: the refusal of the Bosnian Serbs to agree to it.
American officials said the United States would not send 20,000 troops to help enforce the accord unless the Bosnian Serbs agreed to the deal.


First-Half Profit Soared For Nippon Telegraph
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation said yesterday that its pretax profit for the six months through Sept. 30 had more than tripled as the company  was helped by a long-awaited rise in basic telephone rates.
N.T.T., Japan's largest domestic telephone carrier, posted pretax profit of 126.8 billion yen, or about $1.25 billion, for the half year, compared with profit of 35.49 billion yen a year earlier.
The company's sales rose 6 percent, to 3.03 trillion yen.
The company had an average increase of 16.4 percent in basic phone rates, which went into effect earlier this year.
N.T.T. also raised charges on telephone directory services.
(Dow Jones)


Softkey Setback in Learning Company Bid
A Delaware court rejected today Softkey International's attempt to invalidate a bylaw change by theLearning Company that Softkey said hindered its hostile takeover bid.
The Learning Company and Broderbund Software Inc. have already proposed a friendly merger for $460 million in stock.
Shareholders are scheduled to vote on the plan on Dec. 11.
Softkey, which has made an offer for the Learning Company valued at $570 million, wants shareholders to call a special meeting on Dec. 13  to replace the Learning Company's board.


Marbury Keeps Threading Passes
The best of times were always when it was just Stephon Marbury, with the ball, in rhythmic motion.
In the bleachers, the kids would howl over the dribble between the legs or the no-look pass.
The coach saw beauty in simplicity, though, in the perfect bounce pass to the kid curling across the lane.
From the day 14-year-old Stephon Marbury followed his three older brothers and made it onto Bob Hartstein's Lincoln High School team on Ocean Parkway off Brooklyn's Belt Parkway, his arresting skills made him a commodity to college recruiters.
But that pass, Hartstein told him, would one day make him his living.


Rubin Selected For Fed Cup
Chanda Rubin was selected today to replace Monica Seles on the United States  team for this weekend's Fed Cup finals against two-time defending champion Spain.
Rubin, ranked No. 13 in women's singles, will join her teammates Lindsay Davenport, Mary Joe Fernandez and Gigi Fernandez.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


Philip Morris Is Faulted on Ad in Europe
The European Commission accused the Philip Morris Companies this week of misleading publicity amid a growing dispute over proposed restrictions on tobacco advertising.


Giving Away the Trappings of a Lifetime
OUR farmhouse down in Maryland is full of old furniture.
Highboys and four-poster beds, sideboards, marble-topped washstands, love seats, corner cupboards, secretaries, drop-leaf tables and a mahogany dining-room table big enough to raft down the Mississippi.
Depressed guests think they're in a mausoleum.
Cheerful souls call it homey.
Either way, there are ghosts.
My mother just told me that the bed in the back room -- a heavy oak monstrosity with grapes and vines carved all over the headboard -- was the last resting place for a lot of our relatives.
No wonder my sister and I never wanted to sleep in it.


Kasparaitis Gets Tough And Lifts Islanders
Since last February, when he suffered a severe knee injury, the Islanders have missed defenseman Darius Kasparaitis.
He is one of the most rugged and energetic body checkers on a team that sometimes lacks toughness and vigor.
In his third game back, Kasparaitis got rather involved last night when the Islanders beat the Los Angeles Kings by 5-2 at Nassau Coliseum.


Israel, Not Judaism, Will Have to Save Israel
To the Editor:
It is a little unbelievable that Thomas L. Friedman should conclude, in "Land or Life?" (column, Nov. 19), about the religious roots of the murder of Yitzhak  Rabin, that "Judaism can still save the Jewish state." This is like saying that  the fire will put out the fire.
It is exactly the language that excites Mr.
Rabin's murderer and his ilk.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Unexpected Turn to Acoustic
Though the Goo Goo Dolls had five albums of hard alternative-rock to build their set from on Tuesday night at the Academy, in the encore they repeated songs from earlier in the show but now in acoustic versions.
The band had decided to take advantage of a high-energy performance by recording a few live songs for forthcoming albums.
An acoustic set wasn't something one would have expected from Buffalo's fast-rocking Goo Goo Dolls in the past, but the band has followed in the footsteps of alternative-rock brethren like Soul Asylum and the Meat Puppets and found success on the basis of an atypical song, a ballad.
The Goo Goo Dolls' only top-10 hit, "Name," showcases the band at its most sedate, picking clean melodies on acoustic guitar instead of bashing out heavy electric riffs.


Governors Tussling Again, With Port Authority Jobs at Stake
Gov.
George E. Pataki and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, two Republicans who agree on most issues, are feuding again over the Port Authority of New York and  New Jersey -- this time over control of jobs, contracts and policy at the multibillion-dollar agency.
Mr.
Pataki is holding up the appointment of a new Port Authority chairman because he is seeking a guarantee from Mrs.
Whitman that his appointees to the authority's board will oversee hiring and finances, officials said.
He is also looking for assurances that the authority will not be biased in New Jersey's favor and will continue to cut its budget.


Israel, Not Judaism, Will Have to Save Israel;Students Back Peace
To the Editor:
To say in your article "With a Handshake, Rabin's Fate Was Sealed" (front page, Nov. 19) that "The students at the institute at Bar-Ilan University . . .  saw peace with the Palestinians not as a blessing, but as a curse, not just wrong, but a sin" is not just an insulting and outrageous generalization but a heinous misconception.


Director of State AIDS Institute Says She Is Resigning in Protest OverPataki Policies
Denouncing the Pataki administration's AIDS policies, the director of the state's AIDS Institute said today that she is resigning to protest anticipated budget cuts that she said would "dismantle H.I.V. care in New York State."
The director, Dr.
Nilsa Gutierrez, who has led the agency for the last two years, said in an interview that aides to Gov.
George E. Pataki have told her to find ways to cut the institute's $180 million budget by up to 20 percent next year, or about $36 million.
In the institute's 12-year history, its budget has never been cut.


Canada-India Phone Deal
A consortium led by Bell Canada International and the Tata Group of India has received a license from the Indian Government to provide cellular mobile telephone services in the state of Andhra Pradesh, Bell Canada said today.
Bell  Canada, a unit of BCE Inc., will initially own 39 percent of the consortium and invest about $35 million.


Events: Shows Feature Trees, Cities, Designers
Of Trees and Trains New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.


His Goal: No Room at the Inns
Dismissed by the Walt Disney Company in 1972, Harris Rosen lived in a tiny apartment for the next two years as he struggled to make a living selling carpets.
Even after he scraped together $20,000 toward a down payment on a hotel that was about to be foreclosed on, he bunked down in two of its rooms for the next seven years.
Now one of the most successful independent hotel owners anywhere, Mr.
Rosen can stay pretty much where he wants -- including in any of the 1,334 rooms of the recently opened Omni Rosen here.
"But I still can't get to sleep," said Mr.
Rosen, who is 56, "until I know all my hotels are filled."


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest yesterday referring to the Advertising column misstated the name of the Walt Disney Company's new animated movie.
It is "Toy Story," not "Toy Store."


Velarde Becomes Latest Yank to Hit the Road
Every major league team wants a clubhouse of players with character, not characters, but the Yankees continued to struggle with that philosophy yesterday.
They lost another classy player when the California Angels startled them by signing Randy Velarde to a three-year, $2.45 million contract.
Velarde's vanishing follows by one day Don Mattingly's strange decision not to return until he decides his future and by two days the anticipated banishment of Mike Stanley after catcher Joe Girardi was obtained from the Colorado Rockies.


Bright Lights, Big Game For Iverson
It was last night's best bet on Broadway -- Allen Iverson of Georgetown against Stephon Marbury of Georgia Tech.
The scene was Madison Square Garden.
The occasion was a semifinal game in the 11th annual Preseason National Invitation Tournament.
The war between the precocious college basketball stars was more or less a draw.
Iverson had the better numbers, but he also had a better team behind him.
A noisy and appreciative crowd of 15,249 watched Iverson and Georgetown pull away in the second half to a 94-72 victory.
That was no surprise because the Hoyas are ranked fifth and Georgia Tech 25th in the latest Associated Press poll.


U.S. Markets Closed
All markets in the United States are closed today in observance of Thanksgiving.
Banks and government offices are also closed.
But most markets overseas are open.
Tomorrow, the stock and bond markets and the Chicago commodity markets will be open but will end trading in the early afternoon; the  New York commodity markets will be closed.


REED ELSEVIER SELLS ITS BRITISH NEWSPAPER UNIT
The publisher Reed Elsevier P.L.C. of London said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its regional newspaper business in Britain to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm, for L205 million, or about $319 million.
Reed Elsevier, which said its plan to sell off its consumer businesses  was nearly complete, has agreed to sell all but its Reed Consumer Books business.
Agreements for the other five businesses, including the newspaper sale announced yesterday, will net the company about L685 million.
The sales include three operations in the Netherlands, one in Britain and one in the United States.


Rabin's Assassin Was Focus Of Security Inquiry in August
Security officials specifically sought more information on Yigal Amir at least three months before he gunned down Yitzhak Rabin, but their key undercover informer apparently did not believe Mr.
Amir's declarations that he intended to kill the Prime Minister and did not pass the comments on, according to press  reports of a secret Government investigation.
And so, despite more than a year of mounting concern by the Shin Bet, Israel's internal security service, that the religious right would try to disrupt the Government's peace efforts, primarily by attacking Arabs, and the pinpointing of Mr.
Amir himself, he calmly mingled among the drivers and bodyguards in a supposedly secured area before stepping up close to Mr.
Rabin and shooting him on Nov. 4 in Tel Aviv.


The Attorney General's Office in Albany Was a National Model;Prosecutions Flourished
To the Editor:
David J. Kaufmann (letter, Nov. 16) responds to your Nov. 10 report that Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco has fired many experienced lawyers and substituted less experienced attorneys who appear to have political sponsorship.


Conking Heads in Hard Day's Work
As promised months ago, the 2-9 Jets finally played smashmouth cold-weather football today.
It just happened that two of them were beating up each other.
Actually, Marc Spindler, a defensive lineman, whacked Matt O'Dwyer, an offensive lineman, with a helmet across the bare head after O'Dwyer's helmet had been knocked off.
The incident did not create any injury, but was unusual because the two happen to be friends.


State May Cap Pay-Phone Bills
Remember calling home collect from a pay phone at a diner six weeks ago?
Probably not, unless the phone bill sent you into shock.
The state Board of Public Utilities wants to make sure that doesn't happen.


John Thorp Jr., 70, Claims Court Judge
Judge John S. Thorp Jr. of the State Court of Claims in Mineola, L.I., and a  former Democratic Assemblyman from Nassau County, died on Tuesday at Mercy Medical Center in Rockville Centre, L.I.
A lifelong resident of Rockville Centre, he was 70.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


World News Briefs;Quake in Gulf of Aqaba Rattles Mideast, Killing 8
An earthquake rocked a wide arc of the Middle East today, killing at least eight people and injuring dozens of others.
The quake struck at 6:15 A.M. and shook seaside resorts in Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
It was centered about 68 miles south of the Israeli resort of Eilat, on the Gulf of Aqaba.


Takeover of CBS Cleared by F.C.C.
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation cleared the final obstacle today to becoming the nation's largest broadcasting company, gaining Federal approval for its $5.4 billion takeover of CBS Inc.
At a special meeting, the Federal Communications Commission approved the transfer of the CBS broadcast licenses to Westinghouse and granted rule waivers  that will allow the two companies to begin operating as one immediately.


A Zapata Director Resigns in Dispute
A director of the Zapata Corporation resigned last week because of his disagreement over the energy company's plans for entering the food services business.
In his Nov. 16 resignation letter, the former director, Peter Holt, accused Zapata officials of planning to change the company's direction without adequately informing the board and after "misleading" shareholders about new investments.


SHARES OF LUND INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS DROP 23%
Shares of Lund International Holdings Inc. fell 23 percent yesterday after the company said late on Tuesday that sales for its second quarter, ending Dec.  31, would be lower than expected.
The company, which makes accessories for light trucks and vans, attributed the outlook to a soft retail economy, a decline in light truck sales and other factors that caused expanded inventory at distributors.
Lund, which is based in Anoka, Minn., said it had cut its work force by 10 percent and had consolidated its operations.
In last year's second quarter, Lund earned $1.65 million, or 37 cents a share, on sales of $11.1 million.
Lund's shares were down $3.375, to $10.75, in Nasdaq trading.


U.N. Begins to Lift the Embargoes on Balkans
The Security Council, fulfilling its part of the Bosnia peace agreement, began today to lift economic and military sanctions that had been imposed to end fighting in the Balkans.
One resolution, adopted without opposition but with Russia abstaining, suspends indefinitely the arms embargo that was imposed in September 1991 after  Yugoslavia disintegrated.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Strong Export Sales Shrink U.S.
Trade Deficit American exports rose to new heights in September and the trade deficit inched down, to $8.35 billion, the lowest level of the year, the Commerce Department said.
The American deficit with Japan narrowed for the sixth consecutive month,  and even the deficit with China declined.


JOHNSON UNIT BUYS A MAKER OF ULTRASONIC SCALPELS
Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson, said yesterday that it had bought Ultracision Inc., a Smithfield, R.I., company that makes an ultrasonic scalpel.
Terms were not disclosed.
Ethicon, which is based in Cincinnati, said the purchase adds to its line of ultrasonic and videoscopic surgical instruments.
Ethicon has been competing against the U.S.
Surgical Corporation of Norwalk, Conn., to sell instruments used in minimally invasive surgery.
Ultracision is one of a handful of companies that use ultrasound technology in surgical instruments.
Its Harmonic scalpel vibrates more than 55,000 times a second, to cut tissue and seal blood vessels simultaneously.


Diana's Soul-Baring Interview Draws Tory Calls for Divorce
Two days after Diana, the Princess of Wales, admitted to adultery and revealed lurid details of her broken relationship with Prince Charles, the heir  to the throne, in a television interview, Conservative politicians called for the couple to resolve their very public marital difficulties with a divorce.
They married in 1981 and have been legally separated for three years.
Details of the breakdown of their marriage -- Charles's continued love for another woman and his indifference to his wife, and Diana's anguished descent into bulimia and subsequent efforts to find love with an army officer -- have been widely reported in the press and in tell-all books about the royal family for years.
But on television on Monday, Diana confirmed unequivocally that most of the rumors were true.


A Slain Retired Schoolteacher, 68, Had Been Preyed on Before, Perhaps by Her Killer
For months, the retired schoolteacher had been easy prey for burglars and car thieves who knew she lived alone in South Ozone Park, Queens, the police said yesterday.
Late Monday or early Tuesday, one of her past tormentors sneaked into her home and, after watching television, went upstairs and smashed her skull, the police said.
The killing of Marguerite Curtin, 68, in her bedroom at 115-01 111th Avenue and the arrest of a suspect late Tuesday brought to light a depressing story of  big-city crime -- one in which the suspect might never have been on the streets  if the authorities had known he had been arrested for preying on the woman before.


Cut Government Spending At Expense of Schools?
For more than a year, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's pledge to cut government  spending has been on a collision course with a New Jersey Supreme Court mandate  to equalize financing between rich and poor school districts.
The initiative by the Department of Education that was announced this week tries to reconcile the two objectives by changing the angle of approach.
The state argues that parity should not be measured simply in dollars and cents, but through a new set of academic standards guaranteed to all of New Jersey's 1.15 million public school students.


James Woods 3d, 32, Professor and Author
James Desmond Woods 3d, an author and assistant professor at the City University of New York, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 32 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, according to the College of Staten Island, where he taught.


Warehouse Dispute Gives Looters a Free Pass
On Tuesday, a rumor that seemed too good to be true spread through a North Philadelphia neighborhood about a nearby warehouse that had been damaged in a fire: new, boxed pieces of furniture and electronic equipment were up for grabs.
The rumor also had it that the owner would not press charges against people who helped themselves.
So residents wasted no time in doing just that, many pulling up to the six-story warehouse in pickup trucks.
Others just carried the  chairs, couches, tables, televisions and videocassette recorders out, police officers said today.


Ferenc Molnar, Cafe-Society Comedian or Poet of Despair?
Although Ferenc Molnar was one of the most popular and prolific playwrights of the first half of the 20th century, today he is commonly regarded as a Budapest boulevardier who wrote frothy comedies for the cafe society of his time.
Molnar remains primarily an entertainer, but there was substantial evidence at a recent Actors Theater of Louisville festival to suggest that a re-evaluation of his career would be justified.
Molnar possessed a mordant wit and an artfulness in mocking theatrical convention.
At the very least, he was the Hungarian equivalent of Arthur Schnitzler, a fact that his native country is celebrating.
Earlier this year, Hungary presented the first International Molnar Festival.
Tamas Ungvari, a professor and translator who delivered the keynote address in Budapest, set the tone in Louisville by suggesting that "like all court jesters, Molnar was a poet of despair."


A Way to Health
For more than 20 years, Linda Woods refused to swallow the pills that keep her sane.
The turnaround came with the help of the Brooklyn Bureau of Community  Service, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which begins its 84th annual appeal for donations on Sunday.
Article, page B3.


Working Out Anglo-Indian Rock's Cross-Cultural Options
Anglo-Indian rock is as old as the Beatles and as new as Cornershop, which performed at the Mercury Lounge on Monday night.
Cornershop's East-West fusion is simultaneously self-conscious and cranky, breaking stereotypes while exploring instrumental combinations.
Tjinder Singh, the band's songwriter, singer, guitarist and dholki (hand drum) player, toys with the incongruities of  Anglo-Indian identity.
Some songs had lyrics in Punjabi, while in "Wog," a two-chord song somewhere between folk-rock and Indian folk music, he sang: "First I was a foreigner, then suddenly everything was cool forever. This Western Oriental's going full circle."
At the Mercury, Cornershop had an uncommon lineup: two drummers, a sitar and  synthesizer player, a tamboura player and Mr.
Singh.
The point of contact between East and West was the drone, which could carry a resonant quasi-Indian melody or a low-key alternative-rock vocal; the beat might come from hip-hop or  Punjabi rhythms.
Mr.
Singh, with his bangs hanging in his eyes, had the self-effacement that Indian traditional musicians and collegiate rockers share.


Tikkanen Dealt to Canucks
The Devils traded Esa Tikkanen to the Vancouver Canucks last night for a second-round draft choice in 1996.
New Jersey acquired Tikkanen, a former Ranger, on Nov. 1 from the St.
Louis Blues for a third-round draft pick in 1997.


Indiana Struggles for a Victory in Alaska
Brian Evans scored 23 points and No. 23-ranked Indiana struggled past Alaska-Anchorage, 84-79, tonight in the first round of the Great Alaska Shootout.
The tournament-host Seawolves refused to let a taller, stronger and faster Hoosier team intimidate them.
They kept the outcome in doubt until the final seconds, when Indiana's Todd Lindeman grabbed his missed free throw and hit a jumper at the buzzer.


Young, Old, White and Black Came to Celebrate Kunstler's Life
To the Editor:
I am a freshman at Wesleyan University who knew Bill Kunstler and his family  as I was growing up.
My dad knew Bill for most of his life and worked with him for many years at the Center for Constitutional Rights.


At Nebraska, a Reunion of Sorts
Damian Peter is expecting a happier holiday season this year as he visits his older brothers, Christian and Jason, at the University of Nebraska this week.
Nebraska, college football's No. 1 team, will play Oklahoma at Lincoln today  and Damian, who attends Notre Dame, will be watching his brothers play on the defensive line for the unbeaten Cornhuskers.


Art in Review
Herbert Matter Staley Wise Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Dec. 1


Oil and Wildlife Just Don't Mix
To the Editor:
Re "Open Alaska's Wildlife Refuge" (Op-Ed, Nov. 20): Alaska's Governor, Tony  Knowles, is living in a fantasy land created by the big oil companies and their  puppets in Alaska's Congressional delegation.


Nicaragua Disease Kills 26
Ten more people have died in an epidemic that has now killed at least 26 since it surfaced in Nicaragua last month, the Health Ministry said today.
The disease is leptospirosis, a bacterial infection carried by the urine of some mammals, most likely rats.


In House Election, a Familiar Name
Shoppers and store clerks at a mall here ran up to the Rev.
Jesse Jackson the other day asking for his autograph and squeezing close to pose for pictures.
The civil rights advocate, two-time Presidential candidate and talk show host was glad to oblige as he hugged and kissed his way down the hall, the jingle jangle  of a Salvation Army bell echoing behind him.
"We need your support," Mr.
Jackson told a man who had elbowed his way through a group of people waving pens and paper.
"Don't forget to vote for Jesse."


New Burundi Battles Reported to Flare
The Tutsi-dominated Burundi Army and Hutu rebels have been fighting battles that included heavy artillery fire along the southeast border with Tanzania, the Tanzanian state radio said today.
The fighting in the provinces of Ruyigi, Rutana and Makamba has been raging for the last five days, the radio quoted residents of border villages in the East African country as saying.


On My Mind;The Agent Provocateur
Natan Sharansky is not a man given to foreboding.
He suffered in the political cells of the Soviet gulag but endured, preserving not only his life but his verve and hope.
He saw dreams become reality -- freedom after nine hideous prison years and now a role as leader of a new moderate and fiercely democratic party in Israel.
When the time came, after the gulag, for this man to write what he had learned, he chose three words as title: "Fear No Evil."


Turkey a la Zagreb


John Collins, 76, Boston Mayor During City's Renewal in the 60's
John F. Collins, one of three strong postwar mayors who rebuilt Boston with a formula emulated around the country, died of pneumonia today at Vencor Hospital  here, where he had been under treatment since July.
He was 76.
During his two terms as Mayor, from 1960 to 1968, Mr.
Collins oversaw a wave  of rebuilding and renovation begun in the late 1950's by his predecessor, John Hynes.


25 Countries Offer To Join Bosnia Force
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said during a visit to Macedonia today that 25 countries had agreed to send troops to join the 60,000-member NATO force that would enforce the peace accord in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr.
Perry said at a news conference that the force, led by NATO, would be deployed in Bosnia soon after the signing of a peace accord, and that within weeks there would be enough troops to carry out essential tasks.
The accord, reached by the Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian Presidents in Dayton, Ohio, on Tuesday, is expected to be signed in Paris next month.


The Spoken Word
"LO-BALL POETRY SLAM," Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A competition featuring the worst poetry that participants have written.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


Mass Slaughter in a Small Town in Western Poland
KONIN A Quest By Theo Richmond 543 pages. Pantheon. $27.50


Chih-Kung Jen Is Dead at 89; Leader in Microwave Physics
Chih-Kung Jen, who was born in a mud house in a remote village in China and made his way to the Ivy League and a career as a theoretical and experimental physicist in the United States, died on Sunday at a daughter's home in Needham,  Mass.
He was 89 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
Dr.
Jen worked for 27 years at the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, where he was head of the microwave physics group and vice chairman of the research center.
In 1966, he was named the first  William Parsons Professor of Chemical Physics at the university.


METRO DIGEST
HOLIDAY HELPS DEFY THE STING OF DISASTER At a house on Herkimer Street in Brooklyn, a Thanksgiving meal was prepared.
There were spices and drinks, and because one child wasn't present, there were tears to go with every serving.
But there wasn't surrender, and across the city  there were scores of other people celebrating Thanksgiving in a kind of solemn comfort.
On a day given over to gratefulness, theirs was the tiny, but growing gratitude that the greatest hurt their lives had ever known was maybe starting to hurt a bit less. [Page A1.] NEW YORK CITY


Foreign Stocks And the Dollar Finish Mixed
With markets closed in the United States, stocks were mixed overseas yesterday, while the dollar gained strength against leading European currencies  but fell against the Japanese yen.
Gold was lower.
In London, the broad-based Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 stocks tumbled eight-tenths of 1 percent.
The selloff was led by electricity stocks, which fell after news that the British Government would begin antitrust investigations of proposed takeovers of regional electric companies by two British power companies, Powergen P.L.C. and National Power P.L.C.


Researchers Offer Clue to How AIDS Virus Survives Prolonged Attack by Immune System
Researchers have discovered an important clue to one of the fundamental mysteries of AIDS, the ability of the virus to persist in the body for years while under vigorous attack by the immune system.
An answer, say researchers at Oxford University in England, may be that the virus, by subtle mutation, actually defuses the immune system attack force that is meant to destroy virus-stricken cells.


Lotto Jackpot Query: You Want That to Go?
If New York State lottery officials have their way, winners of the Lotto jackpot will soon be able to pocket all their winnings at once.
Winners of big prizes currently receive their jackpots in payments spread out over 20 years.


Investments Abroad Reach Record Pace
American corporations, flush with record profits, are investing far more abroad than ever before -- buying companies, building factories and opening offices and stores.
Direct investment abroad reached $33 billion for the first six months of 1995, according to the Commerce Department.
This $66 billion annual pace represents a 47 percent jump from last year and a 27 percent increase from the record year, 1993.


Johnson Sells Teams
JUNIOR JOHNSON, one of the last of the pioneers of big-time stock car racing, has sold his teams, published reports say.
The Charlotte Observer, citing an unidentified source, reported yesterday that the 64-year-old Johnson has sold one of his teams to BRETT BODINE, who drove for him last season.
The other team  went to the Arkansas lawyer DAVID BLAIR.
The newspaper said Bodine purchased the No. 11 -- a car in which CALE YARBOROUGH and DARRELL WALTRIP combined to win six Nascar Winston Cup championships -- for an estimated $3 million to $5 million.


Sounds Around Town;Two Guitar Gigs
Donald Miller, the Alterknit Theater at the Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, TriBeCa, (212) 219-3055, and Nightingale, 213 Second Avenue, at 13th Street, East Village (212) 473-9398.
Donald Miller, who normally performs as the bottom end of Borbetomagus's dark, noisy improvisations, will be performing in two very different guitar ensembles this weekend.
Tonight at the Alterknit Theater, he teams up with the Swiss free guitarist Stephan Wittwer for an evening of string bending and envelope pushing.
Tomorrow at Nightingale, he is to perform in a trio with the minimalist composer Michael Schumacher and with the cellist Charles Curtis, who is on break from recording with Kathleen Battle.
All three will be playing guitars prepared with bits of metal and other percussive objects thrust between the strings.
The concert at the Alterknit Theater begins at 7 P.M. and costs $7; the Nightingale's concert is at 9:30 P.M. and costs $5.
N. S.


Is Spanish Politics on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown?
Spain is living a season of memories these days, as the country marks the 20th anniversary of the death of Franco and the establishment of a constitutional monarchy.
But the holder of many secrets of the past, the Prime Minister who dismantled Western Europe's last dictatorship, says he is not talking.
Everyone else over 35, it seems, has an opinion to offer on the 20th anniversary of the death of Franco, but Adolfo Suarez, 63, a pivotal figure of the period, has been dodging microphones and cameras because he says he does not want to add to the feverish state of current politics.


Foreman-Moorer Is Set
A rematch between the heavyweights GEORGE FOREMAN and MICHAEL MOORER is set for Feb. 29 at Madison Square Garden, according to The Daily News, which reported yesterday that the deal was all but completed on Wednesday.
Foreman, who turns 47 in January, knocked out Moorer last November to win the International Boxing Federation and the World Boxing Association heavyweight titles and become the oldest heavyweight champion.
But he has been stripped of both crowns. (AP)


The Structure Of Parliament
The Parliament of the Russian Federation consists of the lower house, or State Duma, for which elections are scheduled for Dec. 17, and the upper house,  or Federation Council, intended to represent Russia's 89 regions, republics and  territories.
Both houses were elected in December 1993 for a special two-year term after President Boris N. Yeltsin dissolved the Soviet-era Congress by shellfire in October 1993 and installed a new Constitution, which mandates a four-year term for Parliament and President.


Bad Boy Bart


Seoul May Charge Big Companies in Scandal
State prosecutors said today that they were considering charging 24 South Korean conglomerates, including the country's top four business groups, with bribery in connection with the slush-fund scandal involving former President Roh Tae Woo.
The four are the Hyundai, Samsung, Daewoo and LG Groups.


Barnes Foundation, A Recluse No More
Go figure.
There were no lines outside, no milling masses inside.
The Barnes  Foundation in Merion, Pa., quietly reopened to the public last weekend after a nearly three-year renovation.
While it was shut, millions of people, from Tokyo  to Toronto, made a traveling exhibition of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist  highlights from the Barnes collection into one of the biggest stampedes since the gold rush.
At the Philadelphia Museum of Art alone, almost half a million people packed themselves into the show when it was there early this year, and the Philadelphia museum is only about a 20-minute drive from the Barnes.
So you might have guessed that its reopening would have attracted mobs, too.
It didn't, though maybe it is just a matter of time until word spreads and the crowds come.
Or maybe all the people who saw the show thought they had already seen the Barnes, which, in fact, they hadn't.
Despite the hoopla about putting on view an exceptional collection, the traveling show in a sense didn't hint at  what is really exceptional about the Barnes -- namely its eccentric blend of old and new, good and bad, African, American and European art, along with the equally eccentric way Dr.
Albert C. Barnes, who died in 1951, concocted of displaying them.


Vaske Out of Hospital
DENNIS VASKE, the Islanders defenseman who spent Wednesday night at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., for observation after suffering a  concussion and lacerations on his face during his team's 5-2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings, was released from the hospital yesterday.


Leeson Is Formally Charged in Singapore
Singapore formally charged the extradited former Barings P.L.C. trader Nicholas W. Leeson today with fraud and forgery linked to some $1.4 billion in losses that broke the venerable bank.
The 11 charges were read in court by an official of Singapore's financial police, the Commercial Affairs Department.
It was a lengthy process rather than  the five-minute remand hearing that Singapore legal experts had predicted.


Anticipation Is Keeping Them Waiting


In the Face of Criticism, Egypt Sentences 54 Muslim Leaders
An Egyptian military court sentenced 54 militant Islamic leaders today to prison terms of up to five years after a mass trial that has been criticized by  human rights campaigners around the world.
Those sentenced to jail include prominent doctors, scholars and community leaders who are members of the Muslim Brotherhood, an organization that has been the target of a harsh Government crackdown.
They were convicted of nonviolent offenses including holding secret meetings and preparing anti-Government leaflets.


Sri Lanka Says It Has Sealed Rebel Stronghold
The Sri Lankan Army said today that it had sealed the rebel stronghold of Jaffna, trapping 2,000 guerrillas in the northern town as Government troops pressed their biggest offensive in 12 years of separatist warfare.
"We have effectively cut off Jaffna town from the rest of the peninsula," Brig.
Sarath Munasinghe, a military spokesman, said at a news conference.
Guerrillas known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam who are trapped in the  town "have to jump into the sea, bite cyanide or surrender," he said.


Strolling in a Bucolic New Jersey Corner
NEW JERSEY is known for many good things, from beefsteak tomatoes to Bruce Springsteen.
But as a place to head for a quiet country weekend in late fall, the state usually falls off the radar of urbanites who drive north to Litchfield County in Connecticut or to the Hudson Valley in New York.
Well, commit this name to memory: Hunterdon County.
Little known beyond New Jersey, Hunterdon is extraordinary for its rural beauty and urbane sensibility.
In the last 10 to 15 years, it has sprouted enough restaurants, inns and interesting boutiques to become a natural extension of Bucks County, its better-known neighbor across the Delaware River in Pennsylvania.
"What a wonderful place this is," wrote an unsuspecting visitor in the guest book of Hunterdon House, an Italianate Victorian bed-and-breakfast in the borough of Frenchtown.
"With all the bad rap you hear about New Jersey, it's hard to believe that's where we are."


Correction
A picture last Friday with an article about the Beijing subway system was published in error.
It showed passengers squeezing onto a commuter train in Tokyo, not Beijing.


Defender of the People
To the Editor:
Prof.
Philip Zelikow was mistaken (Op-Ed, Nov. 18) to claim that on budget issues the Constitution clearly states that "Congress should get its way." His narrow interpretation of the Constitution ignored the critical domestic policy role of the Presidency to "promote the general welfare" of the American people.
The commitment to fulfill this duty, a principal purpose for which the Constitution was established, is central to the Presidential inauguration pledge "to protect and defend the Constitution."


Woman Is Hurt In Parade Fall
A spectator at the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade fell about 20 feet when a sidewalk subway grate collapsed under her about 10:30 A.M. yesterday, the police said.
The woman, Martha Pizarro, 35, of the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx, was taken out of the hole after about 20 minutes.
She was treated for minor injuries and released from St.
Luke's Roosevelt Hospital, the police said.


Power Play Becomes Devils' Weakness
Coach Jacques Lemaire says the Devils are playing hockey these days as if they sense a perpetual black cloud following them around, making them frustrated and tense.
Never is that more evident than when New Jersey has a power-play opportunity.
Actually "opportunity" is a bit of a stretch.
The power play has been no Devils ally, not when you've made only 4 of your 43 chances over the last 8 games, including 1 of 9 in a 3-1 loss to the Tampa Bay Lightning on Wednesday night.


4 Years Later, Boy Still Missing
At 3:15 P.M. on Nov. 25, 1991, 11-year-old Mark Himebaugh left his mother at  home to investigate a nearby brush fire and was never heard from again.
For five days and nights, helicopters and police dogs combed the marshy shoreline of the  Delaware Bay, said Middle Police Sgt.
Scott Webster.
One white sneaker was found on the beach.
After four years, authorities refuse to end the search.
"You always hold out some glimmer of hope that you'll find him," Sgt.
Webster said as his department and the State Police issued a plea for any information about the  boy.
A nonprofit group, the Friends of Mark, has offered a $30,000 reward, and local and state authorities are working with the F.B.I.'s newly formed Child Abduction and Serial Killer Unit.
Anyone with information is being asked to call (800) 709-7090.


Little Alisa's Corpse Evinces Life of Pain
Authorities have yet to assemble a definitive portrait of Alisa Izquierdo's six years on this earth, but their voices trembled with outrage as they described what they know: the little girl lived her final weeks, and perhaps years, in agony and horror.
Her corpse told secrets that she apparently held inside.
Cigarette burns and bruises indicated that she had endured beatings for some time, the police said.
Alisa's killing evoked memories of another 6-year-old, Lisa Steinberg, whose death in 1987 drew attention to child abuse.


Junior Walker, 53, Saxophonist And Leader of Motown Group
Junior Walker, one of popular music's premier saxophonists and leader of the  Motown group Junior Walker and the All Stars, died today of cancer at his home in Battle Creek, according to Perry Mortuary.
He was 53.
Reference books say Mr.
Walker was born Autry DeWalt Jr. in Blytheville, Ark., sometime in 1942.


A Week of Action at Statehouse
The Statehouse was shut down yesterday, but earlier in the week there was a lot of work completed in committees:


Ruthless Ex-Dictator Getting Credit for South Korea's Rise
If there is a villain in South Korean history, it might at first seem to be Park Chung Hee, who overthrew a democratic Government and ruled for nearly two decades as a ruthless dictator.
Yet Mr.
Park's image these days is improving.
While few people deny that he was sometimes brutal, Mr.
Park is also increasingly remembered as the architect  of the South Korean economic miracle.


Judge Blocks Effort to Evict Abortion Clinic
A landlord who won court permission last month to evict a Garden City, L.I.,  abortion clinic moved this week to begin the eviction, but the clinic has won yet another court stay to block the action.
Justice Gloria Goldstein of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in  Brooklyn issued a temporary stay on Tuesday, a day after the landlord began eviction proceedings, Stephen B. Latham, the clinic's lawyer, said today.


3 Thanksgivings in Brooklyn Help Defy Disaster's Sting
The man handling the order for the burial headstone this week took down the details: Shamone Johnson.
Born Feb. 21, 1991.
Died Aug. 27, 1995.
He then spoke  to the woman making the purchase.
"Looks like a real lousy holiday coming up," he said.


Offers for LaFontaine
The Buffalo Sabres are considering trading the veteran center PAT LaFONTAINE  after receiving offers from Vancouver and the Islanders, The Buffalo News reported yesterday.
A trade to Vancouver would reunite LaFontaine with his former linemate, ALEXANDER MOGILNY, who was traded by the Sabres to the Canucks during the draft.
A deal with the Islanders would link LaFontaine with his former team.


Arrest in Model's Vanishing
A photographer was booked today for investigation of murder in the disappearance of a model who has not been heard from since she went on an assignment on Nov. 16.
The body of the 27-year-old model, Linda Sobek, a former cheerleader for the  Los Angeles Raiders football team, has not been found, said Sgt.
Ron Spear of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department.


Shares of Forte Rise After Bid
The shares of Forte P.L.C. rose today as investors prepared for a battle with Granada Group P.L.C. over control of Forte, a British hotel and restaurant company.
Granada announced a hostile bid of L3.4 billion ($5.3 billion) for Forte this week.
Analysts doubt that a bid from another entity will emerge, and they expect little increase in Granada's offer.


British Water Utility Accepts Bid From France
Lyonnaise des Eaux announced today that Northumbrian Water Group had accepted its $1.28 billion takeover offer.
Lyonnaise, the first French water company to agree to buy out a big British counterpart, said it had won unanimous approval from Northumbrian's board and would pay Northumbrian shareholders L11.65 ($18.22) a share and a special dividend of 14 pence.
Northumbrian shares began rising about a month ago on speculation about an offer.


Inside Art


Recall of Morrell's 3-Pound Canned Hams
John Morrell &amp; Company is recalling 6,000 of its 3-pound cans of ham because  of possible under-processing that could make consumers sick.
The voluntary recall announced on Wednesday involves all of John Morrell's "Golden Smoke Brand Fully Cooked Boneless Ham and Water Product" produced in 3-pound cans on May 22, 1995.
The dated code on the center of the lid is "142 5," the Department of Agriculture said, and "EST. 17D" appears inside the USDA inspection seal.


Los Angeles Is Ordered to Cut Airport Fees
A Federal judge has ordered the city to reduce its airport landing fees and has chastised officials for using Los Angeles International Airport to produce money for the police and fire departments.
"It is breathtaking in its audacity, and it is breathtaking in the straight-faced manner with which it is propounded and defended," Judge Burton S. Kolko wrote in a decision handed down on Wednesday from the Department of Transportation.


G.I. Gets Support for Shunning U.N. Insignia
As United States troops prepare for a NATO peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, a  22-year-old American soldier is facing a military trial here for refusing to wear United Nations insignia for a mission elsewhere in the Balkans.
The trial of the soldier, Specialist Michael G. New, of Conroe, Tex., has struck a chord in Washington, where scores of legislators opposed to United States involvement in United Nations operations have signed a petition supporting the soldier.


The Mayor Lends a Hand


Suddenly, the Inflow of Mexicans Seems to Slow
Victor Covarrubias knows Mexico's northern border well.
He has waded the Rio  Grande here many times, slipping past the Border Patrol as he heads north to America's pepper harvests or construction sites where $6 an hour is 15 times what he can earn back home.
But this week Mr.
Covarrubias, who has crossed the border at many different points, found that it has changed.
For several days, he tried to cross the river from Juarez into El Paso, only to have American agents block his advance again and again.
Finally he hired a coyote, a people-smuggler who promised to lead him across the river along a secret route and put him on a plane to Dallas for $400.
But that was a swindle, and although Mr.
Covarrubias did finally make it to the  United States, agents detained him before he got close to his plane.


Home Video
In "Congo," Frank Marshall's scenic action film, which was released this week on videocassette by Paramount, a SWAT team of scientists drops into central Africa to search for colleagues who have vanished while searching for a lost city.
The film, whatever justice it does to the Michael Crichton novel on which  it's based, focuses on jungle mystery and ends in a wild, high-tech donnybrook between the scientists, lasers ablaze, and a horde of killer gorillas.
Sound like the makings of a video game?
On Dec. 11, Viacom New Media, a division of the same company that owns Paramount, is to release the CD-ROM "Congo: The Movie -- Descent Into Zinj." Yes, it's a game, but peace is at hand.
"It's not combat," said Michele DiLorenzo, Viacom New Media's president.
"It's a narrative game in which a protagonist moves toward a goal by solving a succession of puzzles."


About Real Estate;Some Manhattan Town House Prices Top $5 Million
Buyers are paying more for Manhattan town houses, real estate agents say, with a handful of houses going for more than $5 million.
In the first half of this year, four houses priced at more than $5 million were sold, compared with none the year before.


One Killed and 15 Hurt In San Salvador Riot
One person was killed and 15 were wounded today when riot police officers opened fire on civil war veterans who had occupied a Government office to demand land and financial help.
Reporters saw a policeman shoot one of the protesters point blank with a shotgun as the unarmed man tried to escape the scene.
The man, Rene Pineda, 27,  died shortly afterward.


Abroad at Home;Modified Rapture
It is the glass half empty or half full.
Skeptics can say have said -- that the Bosnian peace agreement ratifies ethnic cleansing by effectively dividing the country.
Optimists can call it, as President Clinton did, "a chance to turn  from the horror of war to the promise of peace."
There are reasons to be skeptical.
The peace depends heavily on the man who aroused the murderous violence in the first place, President Slobodan Milosevic  of Serbia.
Implementing the agreement will be a daunting job.


Oil and Wildlife Just Don't Mix;Timber Tales
To the Editor:
I am not certain which law or litigation Marc Reisner was berating in "Government by Chainsaw" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), but it certainly was not those he cited.


Perfection at 40 M.P.H.: CBS Paying Tribute to Fallen Russian Skater
Sergei Grinkov's death Monday reminded the CBS Sports producer David Winner of the sublime, yet quiet talent that the 1988 and 1994 Olympic gold medalist displayed on the ice with his wife, Yekaterina Gordeyeva.
"They were not known for their throws, but for their perfection," Winner said.
"They never went out of unison. Nothing was sacrificed for the artistic integrity of the program. Scott Hamilton would say to me: 'Watch him on a throw. All the other men throw and then come to a dead stop, but Sergei doesn't lose any speed.' On all throws, Sergei was skating 40 miles per hour, he'd pick up Yekaterina, throw her and keep skating at 40 miles per hour.


The Fatigued As Counselors To the Crowded;With Nearly 1,000 Cases, Queens Guidance Officer Typifies Schools' Plight
Each in turn, dozens of anxious students and parents filed into the office of Joel Grossman, a guidance counselor at William Cullen Bryant High School in Long Island City, Queens.
A 17-year-old from China wanted assurance that her English was smooth enough  for her to write a compelling essay on her college application.
The mother of a  ninth grader asked that her son be transferred because he feared "being jumped"  in the hallways.
And a 16-year-old girl said she did not want to apply to a college on Long Island because, she sheepishly explained, she was "afraid of cars."


Art in Review
Mike Kelley Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street (at Houston Street) SoHo Through tomorrow


Revamp State Dept., But Not Helms's Way
To the Editor:
I could not help finding ironic the special plea by James Nance, Senator Jesse Helms's principal foreign policy aide, "that the Senate simply be allowed  to vote" on Mr.
Helms's foreign policy reorganization plan (letter, Nov. 17).


For Brown and Reeves, It Seems to Be First Down and 100 Yards of Apart
When quarterback Dave Brown and Coach Dan Reeves got into a vigorous argument on the Giants' sideline during the Eagles game in Philadelphia last Sunday, it may not have unfolded from the heat of the moment and the frustration of a losing season.
No, the reason for the dispute might have been deeper because cracks have apparently surfaced in the relationship between player and coach.
It is what Brown said during the argument that might serve as a small window  into their relationship, a chemistry that could be a factor in deciding the fate of Reeves when the team's co-owners, Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch; the executive vice president, John Mara, and General Manager George Young sit down at the end of the season.


Team Spirit From Chancellor Crew
Inner-city teen-agers are in desperate need of structure and guidance.
New York's Board of Education eliminated a vital source of both when it cut its junior varsity sports program.
Chancellor Rudy Crew's decision to restore the program for the rest of this year -- and to seek money to sustain it in the future -- deserves broad private-sector support.
The high school sports program, which includes nearly 40,000 students, is the only supervised after-school activity that many students experience.
The junior  varsity portion of the program includes 6,500 boys and girls, mainly ninth graders who are less physically mature or skilled than varsity players.
The sports include basketball, football, softball, baseball, track and lacrosse.
The program supports education by requiring participants to maintain at least an 80  percent attendance rate as well as passing grades in science, math and English.


Gloomy 3-Star Chefs Say the Fault Is Not Theirs
Rising labor costs, higher taxes on meals, critics who think nothing's sacred, and now terrorist bombs: running a great restaurant in France has always been a high-risk business, but lately it's also become a little bit like combat.
"We are a long way from the end of the tunnel," said Jean-Pierre Haeberlin, maitre d'hotel of the Auberge de l'Ill in Alsace, one of 20 restaurants in France awarded three stars by the Michelin Guide, at a gathering of chefs at the Crillon Hotel here the other day.


Looking at Athletes After the Cheering, After the Fight Songs
Fourteen seasons ago, early in the Coach Bobby Bowden era at Florida State, a young Rhodes Scholar found herself teaching remedial English to nine freshman football players.
Each weeknight for two hours after dinner, Caroline Alexander  would meet her students in the athletic cafeteria in the "underbelly" of the ramshackle old stadium.
She was not tutoring them in specific courses to keep them eligible.
She was trying to raise their sixth-grade reading levels.
At first, to this British bookworm who had graduated from F.S.U. without ever attending a football game, they were just a clump of very large, very young, black men.
As one of them explained to her: "We can't write. We ain't got no grammar." But as the year rolled out, Alexander was able to separate the bumpkins from the slicksters, the dreamers from the doers.
She came to see them  as individuals rather than "Seminoles."


Pakistan Arrests 10 In Embassy Bombing
The Pakistani police have arrested 10 Arab and Afghan suspects in connection  with a suicide bombing of the Egyptian Embassy in Islamabad that killed 16 people on Sunday, the Interior Minister said today.
Of the eight Arab men who were held, six are Egyptians and two Jordanians, said the Interior Minister, Naseerullah Khan Babar.


Prison Agency Will Continue Doubling Up Of Prisoners
Prisoners doubled up in New York State's maximum-security prisons will not get their own cells any time soon, despite a court ruling on Wednesday that ordered New York to stop the practice.
In the ruling, Justice Joseph Harris of State Supreme Court ordered New York  to stop placing two inmates in maximum-security cells built for one, a practice  begun earlier this year in what the state called an overcrowding emergency.


Golden Gear Crumbles As Jess C's Whirl Wins
They call it the Fall Highweight Handicap because it is run in the fall, the  best horse must carry high weight of 140 pounds and it is a handicap for any horse to lug that much weight and try to sprint six furlongs.
They ran it again yesterday at Aqueduct, and the high weight of 140 was assigned to Golden Gear, a 4-year-old colt who finished ninth in the Breeders' Cup Sprint last month.
He didn't appreciate the extra weight, and finished sixth.


New Radio Station Recognized
Burlington County College's radio station is only 10 months old and already it's winning awards.
WZBC-FM, which began broadcasting Jan. 24, was named "Station of the Year" by the National Association of College Broadcasters.
WBZC, which broadcasts at 88.9 on the FM dial, was the youngest station to ever win the award and the first county college station honored, the A.P. reported.


Ex-Official of Science Agency Is Fined for Theft
A former official at the National Science Foundation who pleaded guilty to stealing nearly $20,000 from a grant he approved has been fined $10,000.
At the sentencing on Tuesday by Judge Emmett G. Sullivan in Federal District  Court in Washington, the official, Russell Aiuto, also was given three years probation, four months' restriction to court-approved activities with an ankle bracelet and ordered to do 1,000 hours of community service in public schools and refund the stolen money.


Primrose Bordier, Linens Designer, 66
Primrose Bordier, a French designer known for her colorful and innovative home textiles, died on Tuesday at the Cochin Hospital in Paris.
She was 66 and lived in Paris.


Abortion Ban Protects Health of Mothers
To the Editor:
"Outlawing an Abortion Method" (editorial, Nov. 4) attacked the partial-birth abortion ban, calling it "harsh and intrusive."


Israel Cohen, 83; Led Market Chain
Israel Cohen, the chief executive officer of Giant Food Inc. and chairman of  its board of directors, died at his home here on Wednesday, company officials said today.
He was 83.
The cause was complications associated with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a spokesman said.


Chilean Jail For Officers Is Gracious, But Still Jail
They were two of the most feared men in Chile during the 1970's when they ran the notorious secret police under the dictatorship of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
Today, they are Chile's most expensive prisoners, convicted of ordering the assassination of Orlando Letelier, an opposition leader who was killed in 1976 by a car bomb in Washington.


Fraud on Skid Row Is Cited
More than 200 elderly and disabled homeless people were recruited off Skid Row to enter care homes that took most of their assistance checks and then abused them, Federal authorities said.
Some people may have been kept against their will once they agreed to move into the homes, in Los Angeles and Tulare Counties, officials said.
A homeless man who was found dead last week in the Hancock Park neighborhood may have been  trying to flee one of the homes under investigation, officials said.
Officials did not give the cause of death or say whether the homeless man may have been killed.


Painter and Subject, Forever United in a Portrait
While the creation of art is a process of distillation and compression, art history is often anything but.
It excavates and reconstructs what artists elide, digging beneath the artwork's surface and sifting through its maker's life and times -- marshaling evidence to convey the how, why and wherefore of the thing created.
When that thing is a portrait, the possibilities double: two lives are  distilled onto the canvas, and the art historian gains, as it were, a second body to exhume.
"The Butterfly and the Bat: Whistler and Montesquiou," at the Frick Collection, benefits from just such a multiplication.
In captions, paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs, artifacts and memorabilia, it tells the often-scintillating tale of one painting: James McNeill Whistler's "Arrangement  in Black and Gold: Count Robert de Montesquiou-Fezensac," a dark, velvety full-length portrait of the French aristocrat, art critic and poet in evening dress, which evolved over the course of scores of sittings in 1891 and 92.


Art in Review
Gerhard Richter Selected Works 1963-1987 Luhring Augustine 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Jan. 13


Maddux Is A.P. Choice
GREG MADDUX added another award yesterday, becoming the first pitcher selected the Associated Press Baseball Player of the Year.
Maddux, who was 19-2 with a 1.63 earned run average, received 30 votes in nationwide balloting by sports writers and broadcasters.
Cleveland outfielder ALBERT BELLE was second with 24, followed by Boston first baseman MO VAUGHN with five and Seattle pitcher RANDY JOHNSON with three. (AP)


Rating Agencies Facing Lawsuits For Low Grades
Rating agencies that grade the financial strength of companies and local governments are accustomed to lawsuits by investors who say that the ratings failed to alert them to serious problems.
But the agencies are not used to being sued by the entities they rate.
Now, agencies ranging from the giant Moody's Investors Service in New York, a unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, to tiny Weiss Group, of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., are learning that they are vulnerable to suits from companies or  governments who say that their ratings were so low as to be libelous.


Chain Must Pay Male Sex-Harassment Victim
In the first case involving sexual harassment of a man by a woman ever brought to trial by the Federal Government, a Federal judge has ordered the Domino's Pizza chain to pay a former employee more than $237,000 in damages.
According to the verdict, issued last Friday by Judge Henry Lee Adams Jr. of  Federal District Court in Tampa, the former employee, David Papa, was repeatedly harassed in 1988 by his supervisor, Beth Carrier.


Rams Release Hurst After Failed Physical
Cornerback MAURICE HURST failed his physical after being claimed off waivers  by the St.
Louis Rams and was released yesterday.
The team promoted linebacker PASCHALL DAVIS from the practice squad.
Hurst, a seven-year veteran, was waived by the New England Patriots on Monday.
His agent, DOUG SUNSERI, said his client has been playing with a herniated disk in his neck that bothers him when he turns his head to the right.


Hyundai Plans Joint Auto Factory in India
The Hyundai Motor Company, South Korea's largest auto maker, says it will build a $1 billion plant in India in a joint venture to assemble 200,000 passenger cars annually by the year 2000.
A Hyundai spokeswoman said the company would retain 60 percent of the joint venture, with the remaining 40 percent taken by a local partner, which has not been selected.
She said the company was considering a few Indian companies.


Federal Study Would Weigh Costs of Gambling's Spread
Betty Whittington and Bill Walsh have come down on opposite sides of the argument over gambling in this gritty Black Hills mining town, which voted to legalize casinos in 1989.
Although both fought to pass the legislation, Mrs.
Whittington now strongly opposes the casinos, which have all but wiped out the town's retailers, while Mr.
Walsh, who owns a casino and a hotel, says gambling has helped revive what had been a dying community.
But the two agree on what is becoming one of the most critical issues for the dozens of communities across the country that have considered proposals for gambling.
Mrs.
Whittington and Mr.
Walsh say that before the vote, they had no idea what the casinos would do to the town and that they would have done things  differently if they had.


Chechen Insurgents Take Their Struggle To a Moscow Park
In a chilling new demonstration of just how committed Chechen separatists are to their war against Russia, a television news crew here today was directed by a rebel commander to a large radioactive parcel buried near the entrance to one of Moscow's biggest and most heavily used public parks.
The parcel, discovered late this afternoon in Izmailovsky Park in eastern Moscow, was buried exactly where Shamil Basayev, Chechnya's most notorious rebel military leader, told journalists from the Russian Independent Television Network to look.


Sounds Around Town;Pairing Punk Rockers
Rocket From the Crypt and the Peechees, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Listening to the new albums by San Diego's Rocket From the Crypt and Berkeley's Peechees, it's difficult to tell which took less time to record.
But one thing is certain: both bands thrive on being careless and sloppy.
Rocket From the Crypt plays horn-infused pop-punk that isn't about getting mad but about getting loose; the Peechees bring punk rock back to its origins in the garage rock of the 60's, adding pinched and whiny but somehow very appropriate vocals.
The concert is Sunday at 9 P.M.; admission is $7..
N. S.


Fatal Clashes in Haiti Slum After Child's Death
Several people died today in violent clashes that broke out in Haiti's worst  slum after the police fatally shot a child, officials, witnesses and local radio reports said.
"There was an incident between a Haitian National Police officer and a bus driver," said Jean Yonel Trecile, spokesman for Haiti's interim police force.
"The officer fired a shot during the altercation that killed a 6-year-old girl and that set off the community."


RESULTS PLUS


Peres Was Next Target, a Suspect Reportedly Says
A prime suspect in the killing of Yitzhak Rabin told interrogators that Prime Minister Shimon Peres had been next in line for assassination, a police representative said today in a hearing at the Tel Aviv Magistrate's Court.
The suspect, Dror Adani, a student from the West Bank settlement of Beit Hagai, is accused of plotting to kill Mr.
Rabin with the confessed assassin, Yigal Amir, and his brother, Hagai Amir.
Mr.
Adani denies the charges.


About SportsFriday And Business Day
To accommodate holiday weekend news and advertising, SportsFriday starts on page D1 today.
Business Day begins on page D9.


The Case of Alisa: A Child Dies, and the Questions Abound
Authorities have yet to assemble a definitive portrait of Alisa Izquierdo's six years on this earth, but they know this much, and related it yesterday in voices trembling with outrage: The girl lived her final weeks, and probably several years before that, in agony and horror.
Her corpse told the secrets that she apparently could not tell.
From head to  toe, she was pockmarked with cigarette burns, about 30 in all, the police said.
They said the bruises were just as ghastly, and made clear that whatever tortures she endured in her family's apartment in the Rutgers Houses project on  the Lower East Side of Manhattan, she had suffered them for some time.


TV Ads Misjudge Pat Robertson
To the Editor:
Please allow me to clarify the position of the Christian Broadcasting Network concerning its opposition to television advertisements produced by Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, or P-Flag (letter, Nov. 19, and news  article, Nov. 12).


Private Plane Crash Kills Pilot
A single-engine airplane crashed shortly after takeoff from Atlantic City International Airport yesterday, killing the pilot, a Federal Aviation Administration official said.
The privately owned plane took off from Atlantic City's Airport about 4 P.M.  and crashed about one and a half miles away at an Air National Guard base, Holly Baker, a spokeswoman for the F.A.A. told The Associated Press.


Hess's Annual Pep Talk Includes Hopeful Message for 2-9 Team
His team is 2-9. As owner of the Jets, Leon Hess knows this only too well.
But today, making his 19th straight appearance at practice on Thanksgiving Day, there was an upbeat air.
The 81-year-old patriarch delivered an old-fashioned pep talk to the players huddled around him.
Then, putting the best possible interpretation on last Sunday's near-comeback against the Bills, he said: "A game like that gives you hope. A year ago, I had four or five players come to me and talk about finger-pointing, that the guys were caving in. I had to make a change. A game like last Sunday shows that they're not caving in."


Patient's Death Investigated
The Monmouth County Prosecutor is beginning a criminal investigation into the recent death of a 64-year-old patient at the Marlboro Psychiatric Hospital.
Hospital officials said Regina Killen of Maplewood fell early on the morning  of Nov. 1, and died a day later.
But the autopsy report listed three broke vertebrae, seven broken ribs and a spinal cord injury, along with hemorrhaging and bruising from her chin to her knee.


Get Back
No one who was conscious in the early 1960's could mistake the sound that opened last Sunday night's segment of "The Beatles Anthology." The communal squeal of Beatlemania became an aural icon for the baby-boomer generation.
Now it is obvious that the screamers, despite the silliness of that momentary hysteria, were essentially right.
The Beatles were the most creative rock 'n' roll band of all time.
The Beatles were great because they took the material around them -- the music, the politics, the grist of the counterculture -- transformed it and sent it back.
The surprise here was that four working-class kids from Liverpool  made art as they climbed the pop charts.
By the end of their career, they had converted even the parents and grandparents of their screeching devotees.
Those  left cold by the raunch of John Lennon's classic version of "Twist and Shout" could not resist the grace and erudition of "Eleanor Rigby."


Opportunity's Sweet Smell: Car Fumes and Roses
ANTONIO GUERRA left his small town near Acapulco, Mexico, for New York armed  with advice.
His great-grandmother cautioned that she didn't get to be 98 years  old by living with taxis, underground trains and skyscrapers.
A neighbor boy told him he had better wear a tough face on the streets or get mugged, maybe worse.
Fortunately, Antonio, who just turned 18, moved in with an American uncle who paved the way.
As soon as Antonio arrived, four months ago, his uncle started giving him long lessons on the ways of this strange new world.


William Myers, Stage Actor, 74
William Myers, a versatile supporting actor seen on and off Broadway, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said Robert Rodriguez, a friend.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bank Guidelines Prepared For Traders Who Gamble


Movie Reviews Come With a Special Feature: Moral Authority
When it comes to movie making, officials of the Roman Catholic Church have long made it clear that they thought Hollywood could do better at including uplifting messages in mass entertainment.
Pope John Paul II has said as much, most recently in an address last May.
About that time, Catholic officials in Washington released the results of a Gallup Poll indicating that a majority of Americans felt that many movies did not reflect their moral values.


Liberal Urging Has Given Way To Eerie Hush
With the Republican Congress moving to slash many Federal social programs, an odd hush has fallen over Washington: the sound of liberal advocacy groups that have been unable to create much of a clamor against the most drastic cuts in decades.
"If you compare what's going on now to the health care debate two years ago,  you can't help but wonder why there is such an eerie silence on issues that are so central to so many people's lives," said Alan Ehrenhalt, the executive editor of Governing magazine.
"There's so many important things going on in Congress, with Medicaid, Medicare and welfare reform. I read the paper, and I think, Where's the noise?"


Overrun by Deer, States Recruit Women and Children to Hunt
With abundant deer munching shrubs and crumpling cars, state governments are  working to lure women and children to hunting, and are even promoting hunts in the way that tour companies plug cruises.
For example, Louisiana teaches "Beginning Shotgun" and "Rifle Markswomanship" at its "Becoming an Outdoors-Woman" program, which has been copied by several states.
A program in New York pairs adult mentors with teen-agers for hunts and  game dinners.
North Carolina offers an annual "Youth Deer Hunt," and South Carolina gave caps to one hunt's participants.


Critic's Choice/Film;A Tribute to an Enchanting Dancer
The English movie musical may never have achieved the giddy heights of Busby  Berkeley's Hollywood extravaganzas or the high-romantic gloss of the best Astaire-Rogers romps, but it certainly had its moments.
One of the most memorable is Jessie Matthews's frothy, swirling solo performance of Rodgers and  Hart's "Dancing on the Ceiling" in the 1934 movie musical "Evergreen." In this gauzy boudoir reverie, the English musical-comedy star deliriously gives herself over to a fantasy of an elusive dream lover who visits her at night as she spins through an immaculate white-on-white English country cottage.
Matthews, an enchanting dancer and singer, who resembled a cross between Clara Bow and Liza Minnelli, is being remembered in a six-film retrospective, "Jessie Matthews: England's 'Dancing Divinity,' " at the Walter Reade Theater, which starts on Sunday and runs through Thursday.
With her heart-shaped face and slightly goofy smile, Matthews epitomized a glamorous Depression-era flapper with a streak of innocent mischief.
In "Evergreen," directed by Victor Saville,  she plays the daughter of a famous retired vaudeville star who is talked into impersonating her mother by an ambitious publicity agent.
The hoax succeeds, and she makes a spectacular comeback.
But her triumph is jeopardized by threats of blackmail by a figure who emerges from out of the past.


Sounds Around Town;Harlem Hip-Hop
Das Efx, the Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, (212) 749-5838 or (212) 864-0372.
When it comes to boasting in rhyme, the rap group Das Efx doesn't let bad taste hinder it.
Take a look at this mouthful from its recent single, "The Real Hip-Hop": "Connecting rhymes like Lego/So leggo my Eggo/I'll burn you like Waco." Rap's master raconteur, Kool G Rap, is also on this tour of East Coast hip-hop, along with Junior M.A.F.I.A., Blahzay Blahzay and the Lost Boyz.
The concerts are tomorrow at 7 and 11 P.M.; tickets are $20, $25 and $30.
NEIL STRAUSS


Watches That Time Hasn't Forgotten
Imagine a new car powered by a steam engine -- a superb steam engine built from modern materials, but still a variation on a 19th-century design.
Imagine that the car is a delight to the eye, but hardly up to modern performance standards.
Now imagine that it is manufactured in limited numbers, priced at $10 million and heavily advertised with the hope of attracting conspicuous consumers, speculative investors and collectors with nostalgia for a time when they understood how machines worked.
Hardly a viable marketing strategy, you say?
A nearly identical one is working nicely for the dozen or so Swiss companies that are using computerized design systems and space-age materials to create outrageously expensive mechanical timepieces in an age of cheap, accurate quartz watches.
Indeed, while most high-end watchmakers, including Audemars Piguet, Breguet, Patek Philippe, Rolex and Vacheron Constantin, do not make their earnings public, all are apparently doing very, very well after near-death experiences in the early 1980's.


On Stage, and Off
Mamet on Priestley


Art in Review


Plan to Put Part of West Side Highway Underground Suffers Setback inCongress
Congress has dealt two blows recently to the plan to relocate a newly rebuilt section of the West Side Highway, stalling for at least a year -- and perhaps forever -- an already-troubled part of Donald J. Trump's Riverside South development.
The question now is whether the actions by Congress, added to the concerns from the Giuliani and Pataki administrations about the cost of moving the highway, signal trouble for the overall $2 billion apartment and retail complex, planned on the old Penn Central rail yards.


Yeltsin Dismisses General Over Finances
President Boris N. Yeltsin dismissed a general overseeing Russia's military budget today and barred power companies from cutting off lights, heat and phones at military bases that do not pay their bills.
Mr.
Yeltsin issued the orders in two separate decrees from the Moscow hospital where he is recovering from an episode of heart disease.
He also held talks there with the Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev on NATO, the rebel  Chechnya region and Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:


Resettling Refugees: U.N. Facing New Burden
With the initialing of a Bosnian peace agreement, the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is gearing up to help several million people uprooted by ethnic fighting in the Balkans.
But aid officials acknowledge that it will be impossible for everyone to go home, not only because strangers now occupy their houses, but also because of the brutality with which they were evicted.
That means that the United Nations commission must help them find other places to live.


Fewer Foreigners Are Choosing U.S. Colleges
Marcel Kurniawan, an 18-year-old Indonesian student, did not think twice about traveling from Jakarta to study manufacturing engineering at Boston University.
"If you want to learn how to farm, you go to a farmer," he said.
"If you want to know about technology, you go to the U.S."


Restaurants
My father would have loved Felidia.
Any man who ate at Luchow's twice a week  would.
I can almost feel him next to me as I savor the homemade cotechino.
"What sausage!" he'd say slathering that tasty piece of highly spiced pork with mustard sauce, scooping up the lentils and rejoicing in every bite.
"You certainly don't find sausage like this every day!" I hear him saying.
You certainly don't.
Dad is with me as I eat the venison osso buco, too, the plate piled high with spatzle, quince and cranberries.
I like the richness of the meat against the faint citric flavor of the fruit, but it is the spatzle that would appeal to Dad.
He'd point out that the little nuggets of dough are so soft and light they  seem to float off your plate into your mouth.
When they are gone, I imagine him  finishing the meat and picking up the long, thin spoon and burrowing into the bone seeking every last bit of the marrow.


The Wounded Giants of Japan;Its Bank System Is Reeling, but How Serious Is the Pain?
Japanese banks are the titans of the international financial system, towering over Citicorp and BankAmerica like sumo wrestlers over a kindergarten class.
But now, to hear some people talk, the titans are about to topple with a crash that  would devastate financial markets around the world.
Some analysts, regulators and business executives worry that a financial meltdown in Japan, home to the world's 10 biggest banks, could be set off by a ballooning burden of bad debts and a loss of confidence abroad.
Even American officials have tried to avoid actions that would further endanger the Japanese institutions.


Parade Leader Can Never Show Deflation
Greeting yesterday's blustery dawn with a general's determination, Jean McFaddin drove out to inspect her troops.
She powered her golf cart past human bowling pins, assorted clowns and two cross-eyed dragons, before stopping to speak in code with a lieutenant.
"I hear there's a little Big Apple problem," she said to the aide.
"If it falls through, we'll move to Mother Goose."


Diner's Journal
The name of Erizo, which occupies the space vacated by Vucciria, is Spanish for sea urchin, which is sold by the piece at the new restaurant.
The sea urchins come in the shell, on ice and with three sauces and as far as I'm concerned are worth a visit to the restaurant all by themselves.
But there's much more to like in this casual restaurant that was just opened  by Alex Garcia, the former sous-chef at Patria.
Mr.
Garcia's version of the Peruvian papas huancainas, for instance, is a gorgeous assemblage of potatoes, shrimp, cheese sauce, onions and olives served in a triangular dish.
His lobster paella is, as the waiter explained, "really more like a risotto."


Sounds Around Town;Beat Out That Rhythm
Carl Allen, Iridium, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan, (212) 582-2121.
Carl Allen, a young drummer, sounds better and better every time out, either as band  leader or sideman.
He leads fiery bands, with smart compositions and arrangements.
The front line includes the saxophonist Vincent Herring and the trumpeter Nicholas Payton; when Mr.
Payton is playing carefully, he carves well-edited solos out of the last 80 years of jazz improvising.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 8:30, 10:30 and 12; no midnight show on Sunday.
There is a $17 cover and a $10 minimum.
PETER WATROUS


High-Tech Maps Guided Bosnia Talks
The hard-fought boundaries in the Bosnia peace accord were drawn up by Pentagon mapmakers with the aid of computers whose high-technology programs will also allow NATO commanders to view each hill they will patrol before they go.
Using satellite imagery and terrain elevation information, the Defense Mapping Agency created a virtual-reality version of the Bosnian landscape that allowed negotiators to sit in front of a computer terminal and examine geographic features, from mountains to streams to roadways, down to two yards in detail.


U.S. Shows to Be Cut On Canadian TV
The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation said today that it would drop all American shows from its prime-time television schedule in an effort to protect its identity and bolster home-grown production.
The move, to take effect next fall, coincides with the biggest budget cuts ever faced by the CBC, which is publicly financed.
It is under orders to cut one-sixth of its expenses in the next 18 months.


CHRONICLE
On Monday, ROBERT J. MILANO, Deputy Mayor for Economic Development in the Koch administration, will have his name attached to a school.
The New School for Social Research is renaming a graduate school the Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy, in honor of Mr.
Milano, 83, who is a trustee.


Who's Out of Step?
To the Editor:
Your news article "Vatican Says the Ban on Women as Priests Is 'Infallible' Doctrine" (front page, Nov. 19) includes an astonishing assertion that you attribute to the Rev.
Richard P. McBrien of the University of Notre Dame.


INSIDE
Another AIDS Clue


Lions and Vikings Eat Up Yardage; One Savors It More
Wow! Eighty-two points!
How about that 66-yard strike down the left sideline from Warren Moon to Jake Reed just before halftime?
Or that sneaky 55-yard punt return into the end zone by David Palmer at the end of the third quarter?
Or that soft, picture-perfect, 18-yard toss and catch performed by Scott Mitchell and Brett Perriman early in the fourth quarter?


Five Police Officers Suspended, Most for Off-Duty Allegations
The New York City Police Department suspended without pay a detective and four police officers for a variety of unrelated offenses including sexual abuse  and assault, officials said yesterday.


Gunman Seeking Convicted Ex-Officer Is Slain
A gunman demanding to see Stacey C. Koon, the former Los Angeles police sergeant convicted in the Rodney G. King beating, burst into Mr.
Koon's halfway  house here today and killed a hostage before being shot to death by sheriff's deputies, the authorities said.
The man, Randall Craig Tolbert, 34, of Rubidoux, wounded two people in the halfway house where Mr.
Koon lives, in this unincorporated area of Riverside County, before calling the authorities and several television stations to say he would kill hostages if Mr.
Koon did not return.


Sports of The Times;Iverson's Second Chance
THE small white patch over his left eye indicated that this was a rough business for Allen Iverson who, by the grace of the legal system, John Thompson  and the perceived necessities of commerce, is a sophomore point guard for Georgetown University.
At one point in Georgetown's semifinal game against Georgia Tech on Wednesday night in the National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden, Iverson, the 6-foot, 19-year-old Hoya who is as wiry as a coiled spring, let loose a 3-point shot.
It caromed off the rim and ended up out of bounds but still Georgetown's ball.


Nuclear Agency to Use Internet to Receive Ideas for New Rules
On the Internet, people can check on airplane or train schedules, shop for Christmas gifts and gather images of everything from tropical fish to nude models, and, beginning in January, they can help make safety rules for nuclear power plants.
The Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission has created what might be the first "virtual hearing room" on the World Wide Web.
Baptized "Rulenet," the Web site is being promoted as an electronic forum in which the commission can gather comment and ideas nationwide from electric utilities, reactor manufacturers, safety groups, and anyone else who wants to weigh in.


Goff Wins Georgia Finale
Kanon Parkman's 34-yard field goal with 47 seconds remaining capped a comeback from a 14-0 deficit and gave Georgia an 18-17 victory over Georgia Tech today in the farewell game for the Bulldogs' coach, Ray Goff.
Goff was carried off the field on the shoulders of his players.
He was dismissed last Saturday because the Bulldogs (6-5) failed to show the "significant improvement" mandated by Athletic Director Vince Dooley, a former head coach at Georgia, when he kept Goff on the job after last year's 6-4-1 record.


Mr. Peres's Strong Start
Israel moved impressively from tragedy to transition this week as the Knesset voted its confidence in Prime Minister Shimon Peres and his revised Cabinet.
With the Likud opposition abstaining in a conciliatory gesture, only eight negative votes were cast against the new Government.
The Nov. 4 assassination of Yitzhak Rabin by a right-wing religious zealot has temporarily muted Israel's passionate internal debate about peace with the Palestinians.
It has also strengthened the peace forces that Mr.
Peres, like his martyred predecessor, represents.


Sounds Around Town;Improvising Brassily
Eddie Henderson, Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
Eddie Henderson's newest album, "Inspiration," shows why the trumpeter is one of the more respected players in New York's jazz world.
His playing brims with ideas, he suggests all sorts of avenues for improvisation in his solos, and he leads bands that swing and take chances.
He's joined by the vibist Joe Locke, the pianist Kevin Hays, the bassist George Mraz and the drummer Billy Hart, a virtual furnace of swing.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9, 11 and 1.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum at the tables; the $12 cover at the bar includes one drink.
P. W.


Southeast Asia Drug Lord Plans To Retire (Before U.S. Gets Him)
Khun Sa, one of the world's most notorious drug lords, says he is retiring to raise chickens and grow vegetables.
Mr.
Khun Sa, 61, formally tendered his resignation as head of the ethnic Shan rebel group on Wednesday at his headquarters in Homong, Myanmar, 50 miles west of Mae Hong Son, in northern Thailand.


Sounds Around Town;Guitar Rock
Li'l Ed Williams, Chicago B.L.U.E.S., 73 Eighth Avenue, at 13th Street, West  Village, (212) 924-9755.
Li'l Ed Williams is a house-rocking guitarist with a rough country style.
Boogies and shuffles are his territory, and at times he calls up the sounds of Hound Dog Taylor or J. B. Hutto.
He's paying a rare visit to New York, and is sure to try to prove himself to a new audience.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30, 11 and 12:30.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.
P. W.


Police Still Stymied on Identity Of Body in Kingston Basement
The authorities in Kingston, N.Y., said yesterday that they had been frustrated in their effots to identify a dismembered body found buried in the cellar of an apartment building where a 25-year-old grocery clerk had lived until his arrest several months ago for another killing.
The clerk, Larry Whitehurst, has not been charged in the latest slaying.
But  officials said they consider him a prime suspect, in part because he has already been charged with committing a similar crime last September: kidnapping  and killing a 7-year-old girl.


Art in Review;Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:
KENNY SCHARF, Yoshii Gallery, 24 West 57th Street (through Dec. 2).
With paintings and a few examples of commercial illustration, this show of works from the artist's high school and college years indicates his pre-Jetson precociousness and innate flair for Pop-flavored Surrealism (Roberta Smith).
JIM HODGES, CRG Gallery, 93 Grand Street, SoHo (through Dec. 2).
In two large installations -- one involving fabric flowers dissembled petal by petal to form a big lacy curtain, another using small store-bought canvases to conjure a  padded room, or Egyptian tomb -- Jim Hodges makes a bid for monumentality without sacrificing the air of fragility and intimacy for which he is known (Smith).


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19


A Guilty Plea in Mail-Order Bacteria Case
A man accused of illegally obtaining bubonic plague bacteria through the mail has pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud.
The man, Larry Harris, was scheduled to stand trial on Monday on three counts of wire fraud and one count of mail fraud for ordering the freeze-dried bacteria from a Rockville, Md., laboratory last May.


In the Opposite Corner: The Princess of Wales
You've read the stories and heard the hype ("What she says is dynamite!" tooted Barbara Walters); now see the interview that sent half of Britain weeping or giggling into its ale.
"Masterpiece Theater" -- oops, it's not Sunday, this can't be PBS.
No, it's "Turning Point" and "20/20" that bring us most of the famous Princess Diana confessional, split up for no better reason than to keep you watching two ABC newsmagazines in one sitting.
It's a cozily appointed room in Kensington Palace, Her Royal Highness's digs  these days, with family pictures on a table within camera range.
The Princess, looking somewhat wan, goes knees to knees with a BBC interviewer named Martin Bashir, who does his job in respectful, even deferential, fashion, yet manages to ask the question everyone is waiting for: Is it true about those men?
No and  yes.
The Princess concedes bedding only one of the gents with whom her name has  been associated.


West 57th: A T-Shirt For Every Theme
No one ever said West 57th Street had charisma.
On the long list of fabled Manhattan thoroughfares, it sits well toward the bottom, far below Broadway and  Fifth Avenue, nowhere near Park and several slots below even the Bowery.
West 57th Street is broad and it is straight.
That's about all there is to say about  it.
But something strange has happened to the stretch of 57th Street that runs from Fifth Avenue to Eighth Avenue.
In the last several years, the grand boulevard has sprouted a succession of restaurant and retail fun houses that have transformed it into an entertainment center that acts as a powerful magnet, especially for visitors staying in the hotels that line Central Park South.


PRISONS FOR PROFIT: A special report;Jail Business Shows Its Weaknesses
Two years ago, the owners of the red cinder-block prison in this poor mill town threw a lavish party to celebrate the prison's opening and show off its computer monitoring system, its modern cells holding 300 beds and a newly hired  cadre of guards.
But one important element was in short supply: Federal prisoners.


Market Place;Investors get some fast thrills on a superconductive roller coaster.
ONE of the latest stark examples of volatility in the high-technology sector  is not a biotech company or an offspring of the Internet, but Illinois Superconductor, one of a handful of publicly traded companies striving to exploit the strange physical phenomenon known as superconductivity.
The six-year-old company, based in Mount Prospect, Ill., is racing to demonstrate -- before it runs out of money -- the commercial value of its high-efficiency device for filtering radio waves at cellular telephone stations.
The filter is intended to allow phone companies to provide clearer reception for more cellular customers and, because it is much smaller than existing equipment, give the phone companies more flexibility in where they build cell sites.


Fast-Start Knicks Await True Test
As Patrick Ewing was explaining how he and the Knicks had put Don Nelson's ire to good use in the second half in Cleveland on Wednesday night, someone couldn't help bringing up the H-words: Houston.
Hakeem.
Ewing smiled.


Can a Mosquito Endure Winter?
How is the Asian Tiger mosquito, a particularly aggressive insect, going to deal with New Jersey's winter?
That's the question on the minds of members of the state Mosquito Control Commission.
The Asian Tiger mosquito, making its way north from Texas, first appeared here last summer.


Smith's Knee Spoils a Nice Day for the Cowboys
It was the best against the best.
The Kansas City Chiefs entered the game with a 10-1 record and leading the pack in the American Football Conference.
The Dallas Cowboys came in at 9-2 and were the kings of the National Football Conference.
Well, the Cowboys (10-2) proved their superiority in the National Football League with a convincing 24-12 victory today over the Chiefs (10-2) before a home crowd of 64,901.
But it came with a huge price tag.


Kansas Doctor Is Accused in Fire That Killed 2 of Her Children
A doctor who escaped a fire that destroyed her family's $400,000 house a month ago has been arrested and charged with arson and murder in the deaths of two of her children, who died in the blaze.
Dr.
Debora Green was arrested on Wednesday at a Kansas City, Mo., theater where she had taken her surviving daughter, a 10-year-old ballerina, to practice for her role in "The Nutcracker."


Officers' Slowdown in Writing of Tickets Is Said to Be Ending
After costing the city more than a million dollars in lost parking ticket revenue, a two-week-old wildcat work slowdown by police officers appears to be sputtering to a halt, police officials say.
The slowdown in issuing parking and traffic summonses -- to protest Gov.
George E. Pataki's veto of a police arbitration bill that would probably have led to higher pay for officers -- had become an embarrassment for the Police Department.
It began as a protest in a few precincts, but accelerated around the city early last week after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani threatened to dismiss any officer who joined the work action.


UConn Women Get A Lesson on Travel
For the Connecticut women's basketball team, traveling to Hawaii is more than a chance to rebound from a season-opening upset and soak up some sun.
The defending national champions, who go up against Northern Arizona on Friday at 2  P.M. in the Wahine Classic, are also getting a lesson in living on the road.
Coach Geno Auriemma said traveling to Hawaii for the tournament, in which the Huskies will play three games, is important for developing off-court chemistry and coping with distractions that come with life on the road.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stock prices were lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 24.61 points, or 0.13 percent, at 18,215.23.
On Thursday, the Nikkei was closed for a holiday.
Many investors and dealers were sidelined after the holiday and were looking ahead to Monday, the last day for trades that can be settled by the end of November.
In addition, brokers were awaiting the earnings results of several large banks.


Drug Crackdown Is Believed to Sap Colombia's Economy
As the authorities arrest leaders of the Cali drug cartel, seize their properties, close their bank accounts and destroy cocaine-processing laboratories, the organization is facing an economic crisis that many say has affected sectors of the national economy.
In recent weeks, investigations into donations by drug traffickers to President Ernesto Samper's 1994 campaign, have caused nervousness among investors and sharp declines in the stock market.
While the trends have been attributed by some to Mr.
Samper's difficulties, others say the weakening of the cartel cannot be ignored as a factor.
In any event, drug power and drug money seem to be the root of the uncertainty.


IN REVERSAL, SERBS OF BOSNIA ACCEPT PEACE AGREEMENT
The Bosnian Serbs agreed this evening to abide by the peace accord reached in Dayton, Ohio, removing an obstacle to sending American troops to help enforce the peace.


Market Closings
All markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Thanksgiving.
But most markets overseas were open.
Today, the stock and bond markets and the commodity markets in Chicago are open but will end trading in the early afternoon; the commodity markets in New York are closed.


A Splendid Museum Gets a New Star
On the night the ball drops in Times Square and announces the 21st century, New York will be a different city.
There will be new people, new gains, new losses and, probably, new problems.
But there will also be changes in four great city institutions, and all of them for the better.
Three were announced earlier -- a renovated and enlarged Museum of the City of New York, a considerably improved New York Botanical Garden and a six-and-one-half-acre, gorilla-inhabited rain forest at the Bronx Zoo.
The fourth was announced this week by the American Museum of Natural History, and it is spectacular.


Study Puts the Risk of H.I.V. In Young U.S. Men at 1 in 92
One in 92 American men ages 27 to 39 may be battling the AIDS virus, according to the most precise estimates yet of the epidemic's toll.
Those estimates, from a study by Philip S. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute, show that minorities have been especially hard hit, with H.I.V. infection in 1 of 33 black men in that age group.


Mt. Saint Michael Gets A Share of First Place
C.H.S.F.L.


No Headline
In my 22 years of service, this has been the worst case of child abuse I've  ever seen." -- LIEUT. LUIS GONZALEZ, of the Seventh Precinct in Manhattan. [B1:2.]


CHRONICLE
Will the saxophonist WAYNE SHORTER give KING BHUMIBOL ADULYADEJ of Thailand a private music lesson in March, when Mr.
Shorter visits Bangkok with the pianist  HERBIE HANCOCK and the drummer THELONIUS MONK JR.?
They will be there to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the coronation of the king, who is a jazz musician.
"That may very well happen," said Thomas Carter, president of the Thelonius Monk Institute of Jazz, a nonprofit group in Washington, which also sponsors the Institute of Jazz Performance in Boston.
Each year, the group chooses seven young jazz musicians and sends them to Boston to study for two years with more experienced musicians, including Mr.
Shorter and Mr.
Hancock.


Hoyas' Defense Worries Arizona
After Arizona's 86-79 victory over Michigan on Wednesday night in the semifinals of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden, Coach Lute Olson of Arizona returned to his hotel and watched the second half of Georgetown's 94-72 rout of Georgia Tech.
He was duly impressed.
"I think they defend better than anybody in the country," Olson said yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Last week, when JUDITH REGAN , publisher of Regan Books, bought "The Babe in  Boyland," the story of NANCI DONNELLAN , a radio talk-show host known as the Fabulous Sports Babe, she paid $225,000 plus bonuses for the book without a written proposal, said Jennifer Rudolph Walsh, the Babe's agent at the Virginia  Barber Literary Agency in Manhattan.
For Ms.
Regan, written proosals aren't always necessary; she published Howard Stern and just signed Christopher Darden, the O. J. Simpson prosecutor, neither  of whom submitted a proposal.


Richter Is Getting Older and Better
Mike Richter will not argue with those who say he is not the same goaltender  he was two seasons ago.
Richter will tell you he thinks he is improving, however.
And, after watching his play against the Pittsburgh Penguins on Tuesday and Wednesday nights, it would be hard to argue with him.


Banking Guidelines Suggest Limits on Traders' Bonuses
Responding to this year's trading scandals at Barings P.L.C. and other banks, Federal banking regulators have drafted guidelines to limit pay for traders who  take excessive risks, Government officials and traders said.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency plans to include the guidelines in instructions to bank examiners.
One set of guidelines, for trading in emerging markets, is scheduled for release next month.
The other, to be released early next year, would cover derivatives trading, Douglas E. Harris, the senior  deputy comptroller for capital markets, said today.


TRANSACTIONS
Football


A Saxophonist Veering Between Poles
The Knitting Factory became Anthony Braxton's backyard this week, with the saxophonist and composer setting up a residence that began on Tuesday with a solo concert and ends on Sunday with his Tricentric Ensemble, a group of 35 or so musicians.
At the second set on Tuesday night Mr.
Braxton, in front of a full house, showed why he has over the years maintained a position of controversy; he veered between technical sloppiness and conceptual brilliance.
Mr.
Braxton put together a long set that matched tunes by Charlie Parker, standards, blues and his own compositions.
His improvising often referred to jazz, and at various times the sounds and rhythms of the saxophonists Warne Marsh, Lee Konitz, Albert Ayler and Eric Dolphy wafted through his playing.
On "You Go to My Head" he built eight bars of melody worthy of Mr.
Marsh; on other  compositions he burred and ruffled his tone and shouted like Mr.
Ayler.


Britain to Review Utility Acquisitions
In a surprise move, Britain called yesterday for an antitrust review of two proposed acquisitions by power generation companies for regional electric companies.
Ian Lang, Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, said he referred National Power P.L.C.'s L2.8 billion ($4.4 billion) proposed acquisition of Southern Electric to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
PowerGen P.L.C.'s L1.95 billion bid for Midlands Electricity was also referred, he said.
The announcement shocked analysts, who had expected the Government to approve the mergers.
The bids were the first proposed takeovers of power generators by regional electric companies in Britain's turbulent utility sector.
"This just raises all sorts of questions and makes no sense whatsoever," said James Hutton-Mills, an analyst with SGST Securities Ltd.
"There is just no logic to be found."


Opel in Talks For Plant in Poland
The car maker Adam Opel A. G., which is based in Germany, said yesterday that it was talking to the Polish Government about building a $390 million factory that could produce up to 100,000 medium-sized cars in 1998.
Opel's president, David Herman, told reporters that he hoped Opel, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, could complete negotiations on the project by the end of January.
"The fact that we want to finish these talks by the end of January shows how serious and important this project is for us," he said.


Inquiry Clears Suffolk District Attorney
A state inquiry into allegations that the Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson, abused his power by threatening to investigate five other Republican county officials in recent years has found insufficient evidence to warrant criminal charges or proceedings to remove him from office.
The investigation of allegations by commissioners, the Presiding Officer of the County Legislature and other officials, who said that Mr.
Catterson had tried to intimidate them into agreeing to various demands, found witnesses who contradicted one another and no "clear and convincing" proof of wrongdoing.


Account of Therapy For Nicole Simpson Brings Suspension
A state panel has suspended a therapist's license for speaking publicly after Nicole Brown Simpson's death about her counseling sessions with Mrs.
Simpson.
The therapist, Susan J. Forward, was among the first to come forward after Mrs.
Simpson's death to disclose her history of abuse at the hands of O. J. Simpson.
Ms.
Forward had two sessions with Mrs.
Simpson in 1992, the year the Simpsons divorced.


25 and Under
A Complete 'Look'


Russian Military Seeks Louder Voice By Putting Officers Up forParliament
With the support of President Boris N. Yeltsin, Russia's military is trying to influence parliamentary politics in a highly unusual way, running a slate of  officers in the Dec. 17 election for the lower house of Parliament.
Mr.
Yeltsin's loyal Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, has organized 123 officers, including 23 generals, to run in the head-to-head local constituency contests that will fill half the 450 seats.


South Korea Economy Up 9.9% in 3d Quarter
South Korea's economy grew 9.9 percent during the third quarter of this year  from a year earlier, up from 7.3 percent for the corresponding period of last year, the Bank of Korea said yesterday.
The central bank said the economy, measured by gross domestic product, grew fast mainly because of an increase in exports and plant investment by corporations.
The bank estimates the G.D.P.  growth for this year at 9.3 percent, assuming a 7 percent gain in the fourth quarter.
The G.D.P. grew 8.4 percent last year.
(Bloomberg Business News)


For Children
'Harvest Ceremony' National Museum of the American Indian 1 Bowling Green Lower Manhattan (212) 668-6624 Recommended ages: 4 and up Today through Sunday


A Canadian Diamond in the Rough
Prospectors for a small company in Vancouver, British Columbia, did not find  the diamonds they were searching for in Labrador in September 1993, but they did stumble on something else: a vast cache of nickel.
And almost overnight, this serendipitous discovery vaulted the company, Diamond Fields Resources Inc., into the ranks of the world's major mining companies.
The discovery, of course, has vastly increased the wealth of the company's founder, a penny-stock promoter named Robert M. Friedland.
And it may also help his reputation, for he is in trouble with American authorities after the collapse of one of his earlier enterprises.
He faces a possible civil suit from  the Environmental Protection Agency over toxic waste that was left behind.


Emanuel Pisetzner, 69, Engineer Relied On by Leading Architects
Emanuel Pisetzner, a retired structural engineer who helped create the underpinnings and skeletons of prestigious architectural projects from New York  to Singapore to Boston to Lyons, died on Tuesday at Rosary Hill Home, a hospice  in Thornwood, N.Y.
He was 69 and lived in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The cause was multiple myeloma, tumors of the bone marrow, his family said.


Session Is Short and Quiet, But Treasury Prices Go Up
Treasury prices ended higher yesterday in a quiet and abbreviated session.
Without fresh economic data, market participants took their cue from strong buying in Asian and European markets early yesterday before the opening of the New York market.
Most trading desks were thinly staffed as many participants extended the Thanksgiving holiday to a four-day weekend.


Rubin Leads Off in Fed Cup
Chanda Rubin tried to find something positive about her match Saturday with Conchita Martinez in the opener of the Fed Cup finals.
"It will be nice going right off the bat in the first match," said the 19-year-old Rubin.


CREATIVE TECHNOLOGY ENDS TALKS WITH REVEAL COMPUTER
Creative Technology Ltd., a maker of sound, video and multimedia products for personal computers, said yesterday that it had called off a merger with Reveal Computer Products Inc. after the deal was frowned upon by analysts and certain major shareholders.
Creative Technology, a Singapore-based company, announced plans in October to acquire Reveal Computer, which makes personal computer peripheral equipment, for up to $65 million.
Investors reacted negatively because of the large amount of debt involved and the perceived demands on management resources, Creative Technology said.


STAFF BUILDERS' SHARES FALL 23% ON 2D-HALF FORECAST
The shares of Staff Builders Inc. fell 23 percent after the home health care  service provider said it expected second-half net income to fall short of analysts' estimates.
Staff Builders shares fell 93.75 cents, to $3.125, in holiday-shortened trading of 1.1 million shares.
The company, based in Lake Success, L.I., said its Medicare business, which represented 60 percent of revenue in the second quarter, was growing faster than its other businesses.
Staff Builders said it will take a charge of $2.5 million, or 10 cents a share,  in the third quarter to discontinue two unprofitable businesses and to record a  reserve as a result of a change in the method used to allocate overhead expenses.


Opposed to P.L.O.
To the Editor:
Henry Siegman (letter, Nov. 14) misrepresents the positions of the Zionist Organization of America.
The Z.O.A. has led the effort to persuade Congress to tighten the linkage between United States aid and Palestine Liberation Organization compliance with the Israel-P.L.O. peace accords.


Dow Sets Another Record In a Short Trading Session
Blue-chip stocks advanced yesterday to a record high for a third consecutive  session in abbreviated post-Thanksgiving trading.
The gain was fueled, analysts said, by strong overseas markets and a surge of money into equity mutual funds.
It was also bolstered by the covering of short sales, or buying by investors to limit losses on shares they had borrowed and sold in the hopes of buying them back at lower prices.
Stocks jumped at the opening and remained in plus territory for the rest of the day.


LaFontaine Isn't Eager To Rejoin the Islanders
The way it sounded, Pat LaFontaine, trade rumors swirling about him, would show up if the Islanders were to reacquire him in a trade.
But he would probably not be too happy about it.
LaFontaine, who joined the Islanders after playing for the 1984 United States Olympic team and became a fan favorite on Long Island, forced a trade from New York in October 1991, when the owner, John O. Pickett, and Bill Torrey, then the general manager, refused to renegotiate his contract.


Bosnian Serb Leader Signals Acceptance of Peace Plan
In his first public statement since a peace agreement was reached, Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said this evening that his government had accepted the agreement and the fact that the military struggle that began nearly four years ago is over.
"We accept the peace," Dr.
Karadzic said in a televised interview this evening.
Although the Bosnian Serbs are not happy with many of the provisions of the Washington-brokered agreement, Dr.
Karadzic said, "the time has come to switch to political ways to achieve our goals."


Affirmative Action Levels Playing Field
To the Editor:
I am concerned that a quotation attributed to me in "Not Just a White Man's Game: Blacks in Business Master the Art of Networking" (Business Day, Nov. 9) may have been misinterpreted.


Hofstra in Playoffs Today
Hofstra, which has made a successful move from Division III to Division I-AA  over the last three seasons, gets another chance to prove that it belongs with the bigger boys today.
In fact, it is the chance the Flying Dutchmen wanted a year ago.
In 1994, Hofstra followed a 6-3-1 season with an 8-1-1 record but was not invited to the eight-team I-AA playoffs.
Today, the Flying Dutchmen will take their 10-1 record to the University of Delaware, also 10-1, for a first-round playoff game.
The winner will play the winner of the game between Idaho and top-ranked McNeese State next week.


Rich or Poor, Most Feel Cuts in City Services
Antoinette Leonard says her high school has become so overcrowded that in some cases 39 students are packed into a class.
Alvin Berk worries that a decline in tree-pruning by city crews will lead to the death of handsome old trees in his neighborhood.
But Rocio Proano says the city services she cares most about, particularly the public library, have actually improved -- despite a year of extraordinary spending cuts by the city and state.
New Yorkers speak in many voices when asked how the governments' retrenchment has affected them.
But interviews with three dozen New Yorkers from a variety of economic and social backgrounds did produce some significant common threads.


Don't Look Away
The death of any child is sad enough.
The news that a child has been beaten and tortured to death while neighbors -- and possibly responsible officials -- looked the other way is almost beyond bearing.
The mutilated body of 6-year-old Alisa Izquierdo was found the day before Thanksgiving in her mother's apartment on Manhattan's Lower East Side.
Her body  was completely covered in bruises and wounds.
An autopsy showed many previous injuries.
Several of her fingers were broken.
A friend of the family recalls seeing the child with a broken arm in a makeshift sling that was made of rags.


Patients Notified in Fertility Clinic Inquiry
Officials of the University of California at Irvine this week notified 38 patients of the defunct U.C.I.
Center for Reproductive Health that eggs and embryos might have been taken from them without their permission.
Last week, 58 women were told about the questionable practices.
Of those patients, 16 have made appointments to discuss their cases.


A Museum for Self-Taught Artists
The first clue that something has changed along the southern edge of the Inner Harbor in Baltimore is the huge, colorful contraption of spinning ice-cream scoops, milkshake canisters, air-filter cups and who knows what else,  twirling in the wind just east of Federal Hill.
But with its whimsical parts dancing every which way and back again, the "Whirligig" created by Vollis Simpson, a 76-year-old mechanic from North Carolina, is more than a fresh landmark.
It is also an invitation to the equally joyous works on exhibit just beyond, in the American Visionary Art Museum, a museum that opens to the public on Friday.


TIMBERWEST FOREST TO ACQUIRE MACKENZIE BUSINESS
TimberWest Forest Ltd. said yesterday that it would acquire the Mackenzie wood product business of Fletcher Challenge Canada Ltd. for $167 million (Canadian), or $123.3 million (United States).
The transaction by the two Vancouver forest product companies includes two sawmills, timber cutting rights  and related logging operations near Mackenzie in the northern part of British Columbia.
The operations TimberWest plans to acquire currently harvest about 1.5 million cubic meters of wood annually.
With the Mackenzie operations, TimberWest estimated it would harvest a total of about 4.3 million cubic meters  of wood.
The final price of the transaction could be adjusted depending on changes in lumber and wood chip prices.


Turning the Radical Playful
With lightning speed, at the tender age of 24, Thomas Ades has established himself as one of the most fascinating young British composers.
He may be more than that, a voice of commanding originality in a confused musical climate; it is too soon to tell.
He takes after the most radical figures in 20th-century music, making particular use of the polyrhythms of Conlon Nancarrow and the shimmering textures of Gyorgy Ligeti.
But in his hands, the experimental becomes lucid, playful, shockingly colorful.
Mr.
Ades's "Living Toys," a chamber-orchestral work that Parnassus played at  Merkin Concert Hall on Monday night, is an overwhelming onslaught of invention.
Rhythms and fragmentary melodies whirl like particles in an electric field; bits of waltzes, fanfares, funeral marches and Spanish dances flash like hallucinations; anarchic free-for-alls give way to poignant lyric interludes.
The central theme is little more than "Three Blind Mice," but it is given heroic Straussian garb.
Like Strauss, Mr.
Ades can weave disparate materials into an entrancing musical story.


Geest Shares Surge
Shares of Geest P.L.C. surged yesterday after the company, a British distributor of fresh produce and convenience foods, said it was in talks that might lead to the sale of its banana business.
Fyffes P.L.C., based in Dublin. quickly said it had formed a joint venture with the Windward Island Banana Development Company to bid for the business.
Shares of Geest closed at 145 pence ($2.26), a gain of 28 pence, on the London Stock Exchange.
Bloomberg Business  News


Bronx Detective Held In Assault at Party
A Bronx narcotics detective was suspended without pay yesterday after he was  accused of hitting a man at a Thanksgiving party on Thursday night, the police said.
Detective Raymond Byrne, 34, was agitated when he arrived uninvited at a party on East 207th Street in the Olinville section about 11 P.M., said Officer  Debra Kearns, a Police Department spokeswoman.
"He was apparently looking for an ex-girlfriend," she said.


Kicking the City's Habit Of Neglecting Housing
WHEN Mary Mays walks through her narrow apartment, stepping past chunky piles of fallen plaster, stained and bulging walls and holes in the ceiling, she is reminded of a crack house.


Company Briefs
MARQUETTE ELECTRONIC INC., Milwaukee, a medical electronic diagnostic equipment  maker, received Goverment permission to buy E for M Corp.
Torrance, Calif., which makes cardiology, patient monitoring and clinical information systems, for $12 a share in cash, or $89 million.


WHITE HOUSE SETS BUDGET PRIORITIES
With a new round of budget negotiations set for next week, the Clinton Administration today sent Congress a "set of principles" that the President would demand in a balanced-budget agreement, including maintaining Medicaid as a program of guaranteed health coverage for the poor and protecting Medicare beneficiaries from new premium increases.
Leon E. Panetta, the President's chief of staff, set down the guidelines in a letter to Speaker Newt Gingrich; the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, and the chairmen of the House and Senate budget committees.
The letter, which the White  House made public, was prompted by a letter from Republican Congressional leaders this week that called for Mr.
Clinton to submit "specific recommendations" on how to balance the Federal budget in seven years.


Reorganization At British Telecom
British Telecommunications P.L.C. announced a major reorganization yesterday  in which Sir Iain Vallance will remain as chairman but give up the duties of chief executive.
The company said Peter Bonfield, chairman and chief executive of ICL P.L.C., the British computer company owned by Japan's Fujitsu Ltd., would become chief executive on Jan. 2.
Analysts said the shake-up was unexpected, but they welcomed the appointment of Mr.
Bonfield, who is seen as having built an unimpeachable reputation at ICL.
In other moves, the managing director, Michael Hepher, will leave the company, while Sir Colin Marshall, chairman of British Airways and a nonexecutive director at British Telecom, will become deputy chairman, succeeding Paul Bosonnet, who is retiring.
Reuters


Korea May Charge Ex-Presidents In the 1980 Killings of Protesters
Confronting an incident that has haunted South Korea for 15 years, President  Kim Young Sam called today for the prosecution of the country's former military  rulers in the massacre of pro-democracy protesters in 1980.
A proposed law is likely to lead to prison sentences for two former South Korean Presidents -- in theory they could face the death penalty -- and also to  heightened scrutiny of allegations about American military complicity in the killings.


JAZZ
Mixing Waltz and Swing And Other Tricky Works Victor Lewis, drummer Sweet Basil


Lots of Cash Pays Off, a G.O.P. Candidate Finds
If George Herbert Walker Bush was born with a silver spoon in his mouth, Malcolm Stevenson Forbes Jr. was born with a complete place setting.
Money -- by the bucketful -- is at the core of Mr.
Forbes's candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination.
It may not buy him love from the voters, but it is certainly buying him attention, to say nothing of a respectable standing in the polls.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5


Corrections
A listing in the Last Chance column in Weekend yesterday misstated the times  for the drama "Old Wicked Songs" at Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
Performances are today at 2 and 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2 P.M.


Classical Music in Review


Investigation Of Share Trading
A Rome magistrate's office is investigating possible insider trading in shares of Ferruzzi Finanziaria S.p.A. that occurred before the announcement in late October that the stock market regulatory agency Consob would require the merchant bank Mediobanca to make a public offer for an additional stake in Ferruzzi.
The Consob announcement was made after the end of the trading day on Oct. 31, after Ferruzzi shares had gained strongly that day, perplexing many market participants.
In addition, a group of Ferruzzi's largest shareholders are balking at a capital increase proposed by the company.
Monte dei Paschi di Siena S.p.A., Banco di Napoli S.p.A. and Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino S.p.A. have all refused to participate in the planned rights offering.
Dow Jones


B.C. Rally May Be Bad Ending for Graber
With their high hopes of winning seasons and bowl bids long since dashed, Boston College and Rutgers closed out their seasons today in a game meaningful only in their lowly standings in the Big East.
But although it lacked impact, it had plenty of action.
Boston College rallied from a 10-point deficit to score two touchdowns in a span of 1 minute 11 seconds late in the fourth quarter and beat the Scarlet Knights, 41-38.


Police Fingerprint System Is Reviewed After Killing
More than 99 percent of the time, New York's fingerprint system can tell whether a crime suspect has an arrest record, the man who runs it said yesterday.
Two weeks ago, the computer system made a mistake and partly because  of it, a Queens woman was killed in her home.
Those were the conclusions yesterday as the Queens District Attorney's office and the head of the State Division of Criminal Justice Services reviewed the slaying of Marguerite Curtin, who was clubbed to death in the bedroom of her South Ozone Park home late Monday or early Tuesday.


Modest Steps Toward Free Trade
The meeting last week of leaders from 18 Asian Pacific countries in Osaka, Japan, ended with what seemed like a whimper.
The leaders committed their governments to voluntary measures that would be announced at next year's gathering to lower barriers to foreign trade and investment.
The commitment appeared small next to the bold declarations at last year's Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum that its members would create a free-trade zone by 2020.
But it was obvious then that some leaders did not mean what they had said.
Malaysia, Japan and several other countries lobbied successfully in Osaka for a  loosely worded agreement that perpetuated disagreement over key questions, such  as whether APEC had agreed to a binding deadline for eliminating protection from agriculture and other sensitive industries.
Free trade is a pleasant goal, but for these countries it is simply premature.


Ulster Foes Rule Ghettos With Fear
John Hegarty, a 19-year-old Roman Catholic, was at a friend's house in a town south of here one night this month when five masked men burst through the door,  surrounded him and beat him over the head with hammers and iron bars.
He said they tied his hands and legs, threw a hood over his bloodied head, dragged him outside and put him in the trunk of a stolen taxi.
After driving him into dense woods, they tied him to a tree and threatened him for the next 24 hours before abandoning him, still bound, in the freezing cold.


E.P.A. IS CANCELING POLLUTION TESTING ACROSS THE NATION
In the past several weeks, the Environmental Protection Agency has canceled hundreds of pollution inspections at factories, water treatment plants and other sites nationwide because of budget cuts imposed by temporary spending legislation.
Senior officials in the agency say that the reduction in inspections, which began when stopgap spending bills reduced the agency's budget last month, is likely to intensify if Congress has its way.


F.C.C. Still Operates With Speed and Efficiency
To the Editor:
"A Bitter Feud Fouls Lines at the F.C.C." (Business Day, Nov. 20), on the intemperate remarks made by some of my fellow commissioners, might mislead readers into thinking the Federal Communications Commission is not doing its job.


Dollar Up in Asia and Europe; Many U.S. Traders Off for Day
The dollar edged higher against most leading currencies yesterday in Asia and Europe.
Many American currency traders were taking a long Thanksgiving holiday weekend.


Haitian President Is Hinting That He Might Not Step Down
In an ambiguous speech delivered in Port-au-Prince to some of his most loyal  supporters, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide appeared today to endorse their longstanding demands that he ignore a pledge he made to the United States and remain in office for three more years.
"If you want three years, I will not turn my back on you," Mr.
Aristide said  in an address at the end of a weeklong conference on national unity.


Nuremberg Trials Won't Be Repeated
To the Editor:
Re "Nuremberg Isn't Repeating Itself" (Week in Review, Nov. 19): I fully agree with your quoting Bernard D. Meltzer, a former assistant prosecutor at Nuremberg, that the Nuremberg trials remain "essentially a product of its special time and circumstance." Lacking that "special time and circumstance," the Nuremberg trial cannot be repeated 50 years later at The Hague, notwithstanding the valiant and noble efforts of its chief prosecutor, Richard Goldstone.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.


Stores Full, But Shoppers Seem Wary
Tom Luzod was determined to find the bargains, but it took some effort.
By 6  A.M. yesterday, he was already at Michaels Arts and Crafts in San Jose, Calif.,  cleaning up at its "50 percent off" sale.
By 7, he was at Mervyn's department store, where he was one of the first in line so he could scoop up a limited edition Joe Montana collectible trading card.
Not a bad morning's work, but Mr.
Luzod, 44, was barely started.
He arrived at Big 5, a sporting goods store, by 7:30.
It was not open yet, but it let him in anyway, lest he lose his momentum.


Photo Industry Strikes Back;New Cameras and FIlm To Counter the Camcorder
No more blank film when a camera's been loaded wrong.
No easy-to-lose strips  of negatives.
Pictures made wider or narrower at the push of a button.
Fewer photos ruined by bad lighting.
It sounds like the amateur photographer's impossible dream, but the camera industry is promising all that and more, with new cameras and film it plans to start selling next year.


ORNDA IN HOUSTON NORTHWEST ACQUISITION PACT
The Ornda Health Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire a controlling stake in Houston Northwest Medical Center Inc. from the hospital's employee stock ownership plan for about $154 million.
The deal would make Houston Northwest Medical Center, a 498-bed tertiary-care hospital, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ornda.
Ornda already owns preferred stock and mortgage debt of the medical center valued at $73.8 million as of Aug. 31.
Ornda, based in Nashville, is the nation's third-largest investor-owned hospital management company.


Takeover Battle Looms in Britain
Two British construction companies -- Amec and Alfred McAlpine -- and Kvaerner A.S., a big Norwegian shipbuilder, drew up battle lines yesterday as a  three-way takeover fight loomed.
Amec steeled itself to fight off a possible bid by Kvaerner while moving swiftly to lure its smaller rival, McAlpine, with a takeover offer that would give McAlpine shareholders two Amec shares for each McAlpine share.
Kvaerner, which raised its stake in Amec to 12 percent on Thursday, said it  was pondering its next move but would not make a bid at more than 100 pence ($1.56) an Amec share.
AMEC's shares closed yesterday at 95 pence, down 4 pence, on the London Stock Exchange.
Reuters


Executive Changes
ACME UNITED CORP. , Fairfield, Conn., appointed Walter C. Johnsen president and  chief executive, succeeding Dwight C. Wheeler 2d, who will become vice chairman  of the board.
Acme United makes surgical instruments and accessories.


Bridge
One of the world's best partnerships added to its large collection of titles  at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here Thursday night.
David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., won  the Blue Ribbon Pairs, their sixth national victory together.
Berkowitz celebrated his birthday by winning the event for the second time.
It was Cohen's fourth Blue Ribbon win, tying the record.
These were the standings:


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Brooding and the Brashness Of a Shostakovich Violin Concerto New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


$190 MILLION IN WIRELESS CABLE LICENSES TO BE ADDED
Pacific Telesis Group has agreed to buy wireless cable licenses for up to $190 million from Transworld Communications Inc. and Groupe Videotron, James Boyle, an analyst at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc., said yesterday.
Pacific Telesis, a regional Bell operating company, plans to use the licenses to deliver video services in parts of Southern California.
The San Francisco-based company has already taken steps to expand into wireless cable.
In April, Pacific Telesis agreed to buy Cross Country Wireless Inc. in a $175 million transaction.
The Pacific Telesis acquisition was reported yesterday in The Wall Street Journal, but Sylvia Morin, spokeswoman at Groupe Videotron, said reports of an agreement  involving the three companies were premature.


A Juror's Lot Begins to Improve
To the Editor:
The frustration expressed by Susan H. Llewellyn ("How Do I Get Off This Juror Treadmill?" letter, Nov. 18), which I know is widely shared, is understandable.
I hope these four points help to abate it.


Federal Deficit Fell 27.4% In a Month of Budget Debate
The Federal deficit in October, the start of a new fiscal year, was 27.4 percent lower than in the corresponding month a year ago.
The amount of the deficit was smaller than analysts had expected, but Cynthia Latta, an economist at DRI-McGraw Hill, a forecasting service in Lexington, Mass., said the October decline mainly reflected smaller appropriations approved by Congress during the budget stalemate.


America Needs No Language Law
Eighteen senators and close to 200 members of the House are co-sponsors of a  bill to make English the official language of the United States.
It would require the Federal Government to conduct virtually all its business exclusively in English.
No one disputes the importance of a common tongue.
In this country,  and now even in cyberspace, that tongue is English.
But to require it is blatantly unfriendly, un-American and perhaps an unconstitutional abridgment of  free speech.
The English-only movement is obviously popular.
English has been adopted as the official language for state government business in 22 states, mostly in the  past 15 years.
Three states have adopted it this year, but the Governors of two  others -- Maryland and Georgia -- vetoed it.


Smithsonian Packs Up Its Show to Hit the Road
In scenes reminiscent of an emergency evacuation, workers at the Smithsonian  Institution are wrapping up some of the organization's treasures and preparing to take them out of town.
There is no budget cut or natural disaster behind the move, though.
Rather, the pieces are the centerpieces of a celebration: the Smithsonian's 150th anniversary exhibition.


To Tally Foot Traffic, Study Midriffs;Counter Clicks for Each One, as New York Swarms Blindly By
High noon in Herald Square, and the concrete landscape seethes with people of every size, shape and description.
Some stride boldly, some flow in schools like fish, some bubble by in baby carriages.
Hundreds rush by each minute.
Lawrence Howard stares straight ahead, his brow furrowed in the intense concentration common to billiard parlors.
In his hand, he holds a small clicker.
As each person passes, his right thumb snaps down.
Click . . . click, click, click . . . click.
Babies are counted, dogs aren't.
Bicycle messengers are clicked if they are on the sidewalk but not if they're on the street.


Starlight Melody
To the Editor:
The crew of the shuttle Atlantis may have thought that their Russian colleagues on the Mir space station were playing "a Russian version of the song  'Those Were the Days' " (news article, Nov. 19).
In fact it was Gene Raskin's 1962 version of a 1920's Russian song, "Dorogoi Dlinnoiu" ("Over the Long Road"), by Boris Fomin and Konstantin Podrevskii.


KAHLER REALTY STUDIES ASSETS SALE, LIFTING ITS STOCK
The shares of the Kahler Realty Corporation rose yesterday after the company  said it was mulling over strategic options that could include a sale of all or part of its assets.
The company, a hotel concern in Rochester, Minn., also said  it might sell shares to the public at the same time it converted to a real estate investment trust.
The company has retained Montgomery Securities as its financial adviser to help explore its options.
Kahler also said it might simply continue to operate in its present form.


CHRONICLE
More than 400 guests including JONATHAN PRYCE, MAGGIE SMITH, DIANA RIGG and PLACIDO DOMINGO gathered at the Savoy Hotel in London yesterday for the presentation of the 41st annual Evening Standard Awards for Drama.
The Royal National Theater picked up the lion's share of the awards.
Competition in some categories was stiff in a stellar year for London theater.
In a year rich in new plays by playwrights like Sam Shepard, David Hare, Tom Stoppard and Alan Ayckbourn, the award for play writing went to DAVID EDGAR for  "Pentecost," which is set in the former Yugoslavia.
The award for best musical went to "Mack and Mabel" by JERRY HERMAN and MICHAEL STEWART.


No Headline
The person who volunteered in the past doesn't exist anymore.
That was an individual who worked in the home and had some extra time.
Everybody is working  now outside the home and has far less discretionary time.
Yet they still have a  need and a want to support the community." -- PHILIP L. COLLYER of Greater D. C. Cares. [11:2.]


Minnesota Coach, 12-31, Will Get an Extension
JIM WACKER knows how lucky he is.
He knows how easy it would have been to be  out of a job by year's end.
Yet despite his 12-31 record as Minnesota's football coach over the last four years, Wacker will stay on for three more pending board of regents approval.


Strike Shuts Down Much of France


Lopez Finds His Touch And Leads St. John's
There is someone else now with the title, attention and pressure of freshman  phenom.
Felipe Lopez will have to earn what he gets from now on with a career to be assessed strictly on performance, not reputation.
He seemed rushed, impatient yesterday in the early minutes of his sophomore season at St.
John's.
While the Red Storm was pounding inside for seven opening baskets against Niagara, Lopez threw up a couple of wild, jackknifing shots, drew a travel call and a rebuking seat on the bench.


SYSTEM SOFTWARE STOCK FALLS FOLLOWING UNIX FEARS
The stock of System Software Associates Inc. fell 12 percent yesterday on fears that the company's Unix software product might not be all that it advertised.
These fears stemmed from reports on Wednesday that Owens-Illinois Inc. of Toledo, Ohio, had filed suit contending that System Software misrepresented the capabilities of its Unix software.
The suit also seeks the return of money paid under a 1994 order for the product.
Owens-Illinois had hoped to use the software to convert certain software applications from a mainframe to a system of small and mid-size computers.
Industry insiders estimated Owens-Illinois had paid about half of the $11 million to $12 million contract.


Hasek Is Equal to Task Against the Islanders
Before tonight's game with the Islanders, General Manager John Muckler of the Sabres said that he would make any deal.
He later amended that to say that the one person he does not want to trade, if he can help it, is Dominik Hasek.
The Dominator, as Hasek is known, then went out and showed why.


Kohl Says Other Nations Must Help Bosnia
Chancellor Helmut Kohl warned other members of the European Union today that  Germany expects them to shoulder a large part of the cost of rebuilding Bosnia.
Mr.
Kohl said he expected a "real battle" over each country's share when he meets the other leaders in Madrid next month.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


2,000 Inmates Near a Cutoff Of Legal Aid
Wanted: Private law firm willing to represent 2,000 inmates at New Hampshire  State Prison in 20-year-old class action.
Trial starts Dec. 11.
That is a summary of the all-points bulletin issued by New Hampshire Legal Assistance in its scramble to find a replacement before the end of the year when the agency, like 1,200 other federally financed Legal Services Corporation offices, will probably be barred from representing prisoners.


Cowboys Relieved to Hear News of Smith's 'Mild' Sprain
The Dallas Cowboys, holding their breath since running back Emmitt Smith went down with an injured left knee during Thursday's victory over the Kansas City Chiefs, let out a sigh of relief yesterday when they learned that he had suffered only a mild sprained medial collateral ligament.
The Cowboys (10-2) are listing Smith, who is scheduled for more tests on Monday, as "probable day to day." Smith has some time to recover before the Cowboys' next game, Dec. 3 against the Washington Redskins at Texas Stadium.


Making Volunteerism Easier For Busy Workers of Today
From Atlanta and Miami to San Diego and Seattle, a new brand of youthful volunteerism is flourishing, nurtured largely by a network of organizations devoted to providing varied and flexible opportunities for busy young professionals to serve their communities.
The movement began in 1986 in a living room on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where six friends gathered to discuss their frustrations with established volunteer agencies in New York City.
Their meeting led to the formation of New York Cares, a clearinghouse designed to connect service-minded  New Yorkers with dozens of projects around the city.


Legal Aid Society Insures the Right of Poor People to Counsel
To the Editor:
Charles Millard (Op-Ed, Nov. 17) offers unpersuasive support for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's attempt to discontinue the Legal Aid Society's representation of New York City's accused indigent.


Arizona Comeback Hurts Arizona State Bowl Hopes
Arizona 31, Arizona State 28


Hong Kong Tycoon Faces Crisis on Debt
Gordon Y. S. Wu, the man who brought superhighways to China, power stations to the Philippines and who recently promised a $100 million bequest to Princeton University, is in trouble.
With several major projects struggling with weaker-than-expected earnings, or foundering in bureaucratic red tape, Mr.
Wu is faced with an anemic cash flow and mounting debt.
His bankers are pressing him on the $1.2 billion they have lent him.
Shares of the company he heads, Hopewell Holdings Ltd., and its subsidiary, Consolidated Electric Power Asia, have tumbled. (All dollar figures  are United States dollars, unless otherwise noted.)


Coaches Can Guide Student-Athletes
To the Editor:
Re "Success in the Classroom Means Little on the Court" by Malcolm Moran (column, Nov. 19) and "College Athletes, Still Exploited" (editorial, Nov. 21):


Rift in Santa Fe Over Black Police Chief
Lounging on a low adobe wall overlooking this city's plaza, Councilman Frank  Montano surveyed what looked like a tableau of racial harmony.
As a young black man peddled newspapers, white tourists inspected turquoise jewelry offered by Navajo Indians, who silently lined a shaded arcade of the 17th-century palace of the Spanish colonial governor.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Saturday about trading in the credit markets  the previous day omitted the name of a lead underwriter on a debt deal for ITT Destinations.
It is Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, which is managing the deal along with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Fuji Photo Film Posts Lower Earnings
The Fuji Photo Film Company said yesterday that its earnings for the six months ended Sept. 30 had been hurt by price declines and the strong yen's erosion of export revenues.
Fuji's pretax profit came to 56.17 billion yen ($556 million) for the period.
Because the company changed its fiscal year, year-on-year comparisons are not exact.
Compared with the half-year through Oct. 20, 1994, Fuji's pretax profit fell 14.9 percent.
Sales for the current half totaled 395.48 billion yen.
Price declines, touched off by discounting by the German film company Agfa-Gavaert, lopped off about 25 billion yen in revenues, said Masayuki Muneyuki, senior managing director.
Color film and paper prices have fallen about 10 percent from a year ago, he said.
Bloomberg Business News


Alisa's Story: A Girl Trapped, Neglected, Tormented, Dead
From the moment Alisa Izquierdo entered the world at Woodhull Hospital in Brooklyn in February 1989, she was a child of ill fortune.
Relatives said that she was born with cocaine in her blood, transmitted from her mother, and had to  stay in the hospital for several days while medical workers cleansed the drug from her system.
At that point, child welfare workers paid heed, relatives said.
They said that Alisa was taken away from her mother, Awilda Lopez, and that the girl spent the next four or five years in the custody of her father, Gustavo Izquierdo, until he died of cancer.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 16 about an investigation of illegal dumping by communications students at Middletown High School in New York misspelled the name of the town where the dump is.
It is Wallkill.


A Plain-Speaking Conservative
This 60-second commercial is one of nine that Steve Forbes is broadcasting in Iowa, New Hampshire and other states.
ON THE SCREEN -- Close-up photographs of Mr.
Forbes with Ronald Reagan, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and his family, and then Mr.
Forbes speaks  to the camera.
PRODUCER -- Our Town Films, Paul Sanderson.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Boogie-Woogie Mozart As a Debut Encore Fazil Say, pianist 92d Street Y


Pack Leads Bullets Past Heat
Bullets 110, Heat 94 Robert Pack scored 13 of his 21 points in the third quarter, and Juwan Howard added 18 points as the Washington Bullets beat the visiting Miami Heat, 110-94,  last night.
Gheorghe Muresan had 19 points and 15 rebounds for the Bullets, who  won consecutive games for the first time this season.


NASA Cancels Launching
The space agency canceled Thursday's scheduled launching of an Atlas rocket that was to carry an American-European observatory on a $1 billion mission to study the Sun.
A spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said he could not provide details of the trouble with the rocket that forced the cancellation a few hours before the scheduled liftoff.
A new launching date was  not set.


A Plea to Avoid Stereotypes
More than 3,000 Orthodox Jews from all over the world are gathered for a four-day conference at the Hilton to address, among other topics, perceptions of the Orthodox after the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin by a gunman claiming to act in accordance with Jewish law.
"We are horrified at the stereotyping of the entire Orthodox community because of the actions of one individual," said Rabbi Shlomo Gertzulin, chief financial officer for Agudath Israel of America, the Manhattan-based Orthodox group sponsoring the conference, which ends Sunday.
"The impression that the media is trying to present that all Orthodox Jews are extremists and prone to violence is not only offensive, it is also hurtful because our teachings are precisely to the contrary."


Enron Plant Is Target Of India Dissidents
Angered by renegotiation of a $2.8 billion power project with the Enron Corporation, dissidents in a right-wing party denounced their leader today and warned the United States company to quit India.
It was one of the few public protests against the stand of the Bharatiya Janata Party, which shares power in the government of Maharashtra state, where Enron plans to build a huge power generation plant.


Pope Says Tenets Are Firm
Pope John Paul II said today that church tenets form a "solid base" that cannot be shifted.


Pirating of Albums Is Put at $2.5 Billion
Copyright pirates plunder $2.5 billion a year from the world's record industry and one in four albums is now counterfeit, the leader of an industry watchdog agency said today.
China and Bulgaria are suspected of being the biggest counterfeiters of compact disks, said Mike Edwards, director of operations of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry.


Irish Voting In Close Race On Divorce
After weeks of probably the bitterest, meanest, most emotional national debate in modern Ireland, this overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country voted today on whether to remove its constitutional ban on divorce.
The results will not be known until Saturday, but both sides agree on the accuracy of polls that show the country almost evenly split.


Breaching Protocol, Senior U.S. Aide Castigates Warring 'Clans' inKremlin
Violating a long-recognized if unspoken diplomatic tradition, a senior American official here has published a lengthy and unflattering article that portrays the Kremlin as a warren of rival cliques struggling to hang on to their power and privileges.
The Russian Government today lodged an official protest with the United States Embassy and demanded a public explanation.


Sports of The Times;Tradition And Teflon In Miami
DON Shula arrived at work Wednesday morning to hints and headlines suggesting that he consider ending his 26-year reign as head coach of the Miami Dolphins.
One writer gently urged the 65-year old coach to consider whether the abuse he is taking from fans is worth the aggravation.
Another said more bluntly that  it was time for Shula to step aside while his winning image is still intact.


METRO DIGEST
DRUG RING TENSIONS SPAWN VIOLENCE Tensions among some of New York's most powerful Colombian drug rings have spawned a series of murders and kidnappings in Queens, even as violent crime is  dropping almost everywhere else in the city, the police and Federal agents say.
Even those who have dealt with many cases of child abuse said the horrific details of her torture had left them shaken and outraged.
As her mother, Awilda  Lopez, was arraigned on second-degree murder charges, details of Alisa's life and history of abuse began to come into sharper focus. [1.]


U.S. Says 4 Died in New York Eating an Alleged Aphrodisiac
Four men in New York City died between January 1993 and this spring and a 17-year-old was sickened after they ate a purported aphrodisiac sold at New York shops, Federal officials said today.
The substance was supposed to be applied to the genitals but was not labeled, and when the victims ate it, they began vomiting and their hearts beat erratically, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said.
The substance  is no longer legally available in the United States.


Browns Lose Round in Court
An Ohio judge issued a preliminary injunction today, blocking the Browns from moving to Baltimore until a trial is held in the city's lawsuit.
In a five-second hearing, Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Judge Kenneth Callahan announced that he had ruled in favor of the city.
Callahan heard three days of testimony earlier this week on the city's request for the injunction.


Poland Begins Privatization Program


Sending a Protest Message High Up


Woman Injures Two Officers
Two police officers suffered minor wounds yesterday in a gun battle with a mentally ill woman who had been threatening family members with a rifle, the authorities said.


Religion Journal;Tackling Faith's Role, From Elvis to Holocaust Museum
At first glance, this might seem a simple question: Just what is it that scholars of religion talk about when they get together?
But the answer runs to well over 150 pages.


DANCE
An International Program Of Varied Colors and Moods Movement Research Judson Memorial Church


Tables Turned on Ex-Husband
A Dover man told the police that his 3-year-old child had been sexually assaulted by the new boyfriend of the child's mother.
Not true, the police said  yesterday.
In fact, the police say that Daniel J. Donovan decided to make up the accusation after arguing with the boyfriend at a tavern last week.
They say Mr.
Donovan, who has been charged with filing a false police report, has admitted persuading the child to tell the authorities he had been assaulted.


CHRONICLE
Elton John, the Pretenders, K. D. Lang and Tina Turner are expected to perform on Dec. 3 at the VH1 Fashion and Music Awards.
The show, which will be held at the armory on Lexington Avenue at 26th Street, will be televised live on the VH1 cable channel.
The actors Billy Baldwin and Mariel Hemingway are scheduled to be among the presenters, along with the designer Isaac Mizrahi and  the models Jerry Hall, Veronica Webb and Christy Turlington.
"There's a historical link between fashion and music," said LINDA CORRADINA,  the senior vice president of programming at VH1.
"There's Elvis and the gold lame jacket, the Beatles and the Nehru jacket, the Who and the mod suits."


On-Line Stars Hear Siren Call Of Free Agency
Just as the old Hollywood studios lost their iron grip on the stars they nurtured, the traditional on-line studios like America Online and Compuserve are starting to lose their singular hold on the stars of cyberspace.
These stars of today are the popular special-interest sites on the on-line services, typically started by young entrepreneurs in the last couple of years.
The hot sites are crucial assets to the big on-line networks, keeping keyboard-tapping customers on the line, running up metered time and revenues.


Soccer Player Freed
DUNCAN FERGUSON, the first British professional soccer player to be jailed for on-field violence, was released yesterday.
Ferguson, a Scottish striker, served six weeks of a six-month sentence for butting an opponent last season while playing for Glasgow Rangers.
He later transferred to Everton for $6.2 million and the sentence was imposed while he was playing for the English Premier League club.


Onbancorp Urged To Sell or Merge
Onbancorp, which operates banks in New York and Pennsylvania, has received a  shareholder proposal calling on the board to sell or merge the company.
Onbancorp's returns have suffered in the last two years because of a strategy of investing more in government securities than in loans, said Michael Cook, president of Berkshire Asset Management, which made the proposal.


Cajoling Wife and Layabout Husband
It has been 70 years since Sean O'Casey wrote "Juno and the Paycock," and the world seems to be in even more a "terrible state of chassis" than when Capt.
Jack Boyle first made the observation, lying flat on his back drunk amid the chaos of his life.
While one may hope that this century's strife over Ireland is staggering to an end, there are enough nationalist Die-Hards around the world to make O'Casey's searing play resonate to modern audiences.
The Irish Repertory Company has mounted a revival that only partly realizes the play's abiding power.


To Ring In the Holidays, and Some Donations, Too


Cornerback's Grievance
Cornerback MAURICE HURST and his agent were preparing a grievance against the Patriots after a battery of physicals showed the player released by New England  this week was physically unfit to play for the St.
Louis Rams.
Hurst's agent, DOUG SUNSERI, said the seven-year veteran had been playing with a herniated disk in his neck that bothers him when he turns his head to the right.


Bad Boy Meets Good Girl, And Then Sparks Fly
Sam Giancana, Chicago mob boss, was untouchable until 1960, when he met Phyllis McGuire, lead singer of the popular McGuire Sisters.
Deftly eluding the  Justice Department, the F.B.I. and rival mobsters, the murderous gangster was helpless in the hands of the wholesome, virginal singer he first saw in Las Vegas.
That, at least, is the premise of "Sugartime," an HBO movie "suggested by" the unlikely love story of Sam and Phyllis.
The real Ms.
McGuire, who refused to cooperate with this production, is already on record in TV Guide as being furious with the production, especially a love scene with diamond bracelet that she finds "lewd and garish." Welcome, Ms.
McGuire, to the often reckless, seldom reliable world of dramatized television biography.
Among the facts ignored in this movie: when Sam was murdered in 1975, it was not primarily because of his attention-attracting relationship with Phyllis.
He had broken off with her by that time.


Junior Walker, Musician, 53; Led All Stars
Junior Walker, one of popular music's premier saxophonists and leader of the  Motown group Junior Walker and the All Stars, died on Thursday at his home in Battle Creek.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, the Perry Mortuary said.


Rig Count Drops by 5
The number of oil and gas rigs operating in the United States dropped by five this week, to 774, Baker Hughes Inc. said.
In the corresponding week a year ago, there were 842 rigs operating nationwide.
Because of Thanksgiving, this week's count was through Wednesday instead of Friday.
Of the rigs running this week, 436 were exploring for natural gas and 327 for oil.
Eleven rigs were listed as miscellaneous.
The rigs in the count are those actively exploring for oil and natural gas.


Topsy Returns to Confront Another Century's Legacy
The great characters of literature are by nature a rebellious lot.
No matter  what their authors' intentions, they tend to shake off thematic and didactic bridles and assume rich lives of their own, like Tolstoy's Anna Karenina or Milton's charismatic Satan.
Or, less obviously, like Topsy, the wily, unloved slave child invented by Harriet Beecher Stowe 143 years ago.
Reincarnated with ferocious vitality by the actress Michele Morgan, she is newly asserting her autonomy these days at the Hartford Stage Company in Robert Alexander's "I Ain't Yo' Uncle: The New Jack Revisionist Uncle Tom's Cabin," a lively but erratic dissection of the Stowe classic.


Strikers at Boeing Point to Top Management's Stock Options
For all their talk about job security and declining health benefits, probably no issue has angered striking production workers at the Boeing Company more than an age-old conflict over sharing the profit pie.
On Tuesday, the very day that the machinists stunned the leadership of their  union by voting down a new contract proposal that the leaders favored, top Boeing executives became eligible for stock options, tied to their success in raising the price of the company's stock, that are worth as much as $5 million to each.


HIGH SCHOOL REPORT
P.S.A.L. Semifinals


Twist Afleet Is Unfazed By Stumble at the Start
It may be the time of year when valuable race horses are headed south for some sun and sleep.
But a pretty valuable one named Twist Afleet was still on stage yesterday at Aqueduct, giving a powerful performance after almost falling  on her face at the start.
She won the Top Flight Handicap, a Grade I stakes, for her fourth straight victory, sixth in seven races and the 11th in 13 career starts.
Twist Afleet, who has never run out of the money, stumbled leaving the gate and crossed sharply to her left, nearly throwing Mike Smith and suffering cuts on her legs.
But she recovered and seized the lead, held it every step of the way and outran Chaposa Springs with Jerry Bailey riding.
As they crossed the wire, Twist Afleet was a length and a quarter in front of Chaposa Springs, who had the same margin over Lotta Dancing in third.
It was half a length back to Allen Jerkens's Incinerate.


10-Minute Gargoyles


Westinghouse Completes CBS Acquisition
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that it had completed its acquisition of CBS Inc. for $5.4 billion.
The transaction combines the CBS radio and television networks and broadcast-programming operations with Westinghouse's Group W broadcasting subsidiary, creating the nation's largest broadcast company.


Move Carefully on Managed Care
Every top official from Washington to Albany to City Hall has endorsed the idea of moving millions of poor New Yorkers on Medicaid into managed care.
But now the push to transform Medicaid into a managed care program is plagued by new disclosures about substandard care at many big health maintenance organizations  and doubts about their capacity to absorb large numbers of Medicaid patients.
These problems should serve as a warning against moving too quickly on a program that could, if done right, save money and improve health care for the poor.
For Gov.
George Pataki and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York City, the main  incentive to move the bulk of the three million state residents on Medicaid into managed care is to save money.
By emphasizing preventive care, curbing the unnecessary use of specialists and easing the use of hospital emergency rooms, managed care is expected to cut costs and improve health care for the poor.


HAMBURGER HAMLET IS CLOSING A THIRD OF ITS STORES
Hamburger Hamlet Restaurants Inc. said yesterday that it was closing a third  of its stores and would file for Chapter 11 reorganization in a move to return to profitability.
The restaurant chain also said it had reached a tentative agreement with its bank to finance "certain near-term working capital needs." It did not provide details.
On Nov. 9, the company reported a widening loss and said it could not draw on the remaining $1.8 million of a bank credit line because it had violated part of its loan agreement.
The restaurant chain said it was closing 12 restaurants, effective yesterday, leaving it with 19.


City Workers Deeply Split On Contracts
New York City's municipal labor unions are bitterly divided over the five-year agreement that would cover 140,000 non-uniformed city workers, and the leaders of three of the largest union locals have vowed to fight its ratification.
Many labor experts predict that a higher percentage of municipal workers will vote against the agreement than in any such ballot in city history, although labor leaders, including some who oppose it, forecast that the agreement will still win ratification.


SHARES OF COTT SLIDE 14.5% AFTER DEFICIT IS REPORTED
The shares of the Cott Corporation fell 14.5 percent yesterday after the company disclosed a surprising third-quarter loss on Wednesday and announced plans to cut jobs, sell assets and put international expansion on hold.
Cott, a  Canadian company that makes private-label soft drinks, said it would report restructuring expenses totaling $40 million (Canadian), or $29.6 million (United States), in its third and fourth fiscal quarters.
Cott said it would cut about 230 jobs, reduce store-delivery service, consolidate its United States bottling  program and take other measures to save about $35 million (Canadian) a year.
The company also plans to sell noncore assets.


INSIDE


Bears-Giants Game Should Be Heavy on the Offense
In past seasons, a Bears-Giants matchup would conjure up visions of a brutal  struggle between two good defenses trying to stuff the other team's running game.
No fancy stuff.
Nobody trying to fake the other one out.
Just smash-mouth  football at its best.
Not this year.
Sunday's 1 P.M. game at Giants Stadium figures to be a wild, win-at-all-costs affair in which wide-open offenses will try to exhaust each other's defense.


CHRONICLE
Fans of FRANK SINATRA will be able to bid on bits of his life when some of the singer's possessions are auctioned on Friday at Christie's.
The Associated Press reports that among the items to be sold are a metal mailbox labeled "F. Sinatra," Mr.
Sinatra's Bosendorfer grand piano, 1930's-era  radios, a 1976 Jaguar coupe, engraved goblets, a John Wayne statue, jade figurines and a collection of American Impressionist paintings.
There is even a golf cart with the inscription "Ol' Blue Eyes" and an estimated value of $4,000 to $6,000.


Eluding the Computer
More than 99 percent of the time, New York State's fingerprint-identification system can tell whether a suspect in a crime has a record of prior arrests, the  man who runs it says.
But two weeks ago, the computer system apparently made a mistake, law-enforcement officials said.
And that mistake may have been a factor in the death of a woman who was slain in her home in Ozone Park, Queens.
Article, page 26.


Israel Cohen, 83, Who Helped Pioneer the U.S. Supermarket
Israel Cohen, whose family helped develop the concept of the supermarket, died in Washington, his hometown, on Wednesday, four months after taking a medical leave of absence as chairman and chief executive of Giant Food Inc.
He was 83.
The company, based in the Washington suburb of Landover, Md., said the cause  of death was complications from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.


Phony Bills Keep Popping Up
Five months after a sharp-eyed prostitute led the authorities to dozens of counterfeiters who had been using fake $100 bills at casinos, the ring that supplied them continues to operate in Las Vegas and Atlantic City.
Five members  of a Brooklyn family have been arrested on charges of passing the bills, the authorities announced yesterday.
Robert Pochopin, agent in charge of the United States Secret Service office  in Atlantic City told the Associated Press that the source of the money had not  been found.
The Secret Service says the operation has passed more than $750,000  in fake $50 and $100 bills in Atlantic City alone since last May.
The bills are  accepted by slot-machine bill changers; a prostitute who had been paid with three phony $100 bills first alerted the police to the ring.


Pilot Error Cited in Crash
Investigators have ruled out weather, mechanical failure and turbulence as causes of a single-engine plane crash Thursday.
Instead they think the pilot may have died because of an error he made.
An investigator with the National Traffic Safety Board, Alan Yurman, told the Associated Press that the pilot had talked with air traffic controllers shortly after taking off from Atlantic City International Airport, telling them  that a rear cargo door was open on his Beech 36 Bonanza and that he would circle around and land.
Instead the plane nose-dived into a grassy lot about a mile and half from the runway.
The dead pilot, the plane's only occupant, was identified  as Avi Limor, 52, of Delray Beach, Fla.


A Deep-Pocket Candidacy
Money -- buckets of it -- is at the core of the presidential hopes of Steve Forbes, the New Jersey multimillionaire who helped shape Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's tax-cut strategy.
In the nine weeks since he announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination, Mr.
Forbes has spent $7 million of his personal fortune to bombard New Hampshire, Iowa and other pivotal states with television and radio advertising.
Such a blitz so early is unheard of, but it seems to be paying off. [Page 1.]


Louis J. Soffer; Endocrinologist, 90
Louis J. Soffer, a medical educator, clinician and pioneering researcher on the body's glands, died on Monday in a nursing home in Stamford, Conn.
A longtime resident of Manhattan, he was 90.


Aching Iverson Scores 40, but Georgetown Falls
Arizona was obviously tired, but it found a way to win the Preseason National Invitation Tournament last night in Madison Square Garden.
When favored Georgetown overcame a 17-point deficit and tied the score at 63-63 midway through the second half, Arizona discovered new energy, pounced on loose balls and sank enough free throws to win, 91-81.
In the third-place game, the freshman Stephon Marbury led Georgia Tech to a 77-61 victory over Michigan.


2 Israeli Boys Held for Nazi Poster of Rabin
Two teen-age Jewish brothers have been arrested for allegedly printing images of Yitzhak Rabin in Nazi uniform for a poster that has become a symbol of extremist opposition to the Prime Minister, who was assassinated on Nov. 4.
The suspects, ages 15 and 16, worked on the photo montage at their Jerusalem  home and at the Jewish seminary where they studied, Jerusalem's Police Chief, Arieh Amit, said today.
The boys were arrested on Thursday on suspicion of incitement and sedition and ordered held for six days.
Their names were not disclosed because of their age.


Knicks Enter Rematch on Lookout for Secret of Rockets' Success
Maybe it is the glare of two championship rings.
Or their sparkling 10-1 record to begin the season.
Whatever the case may be, the Houston Rockets had eight players in double figures the other night and their fast break in November is already worth a Polaroid or two.
If their peers are not in awe, they are at least envious.


Journal;Banned From Broadcast
It was a year ago this Thanksgiving that Todd Jennings was trying to rescue a suicidal correspondent on the Internet.
Mr.
Jennings is a businessman in Greenwich, Conn., and the father of three teen-agers.
His E-mail pal was an alcoholic gay teen-ager in West Virginia whose mother was dead and whose father  had rejected him.
Mr.
Jennings's mission was not a success.
This week, as its first anniversary rekindled "very sad memories," he documented the case history for me, by way of  explaining why he is a booster of an organization called P-Flag -- Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays.
"Please don't give up just because I  failed," wrote Mr.
Jennings's correspondent in his final message.
P-Flag, which  was created by parents whose gay children had been physically attacked, tries to combat such tragedies with education and hands-on support.
It has more than 55,000 membership households and 380 local affiliates nationwide.


BUSINESS DIGEST
E.P.A.
Cuts Inspections As Its Budget Is Reduced The E.P.A. has canceled hundreds of inspections for pollution because of budget  cuts imposed by Congress.
Agency officials say the reduction in inspections is likely to intensify if Congress imposes even deeper reductions.
A Republican-backed bill would cut spending on environmental enforcement by more than 20 percent.


Nintendo Shows 64-Bit Machine
The Nintendo Company, the video game giant seeking to revive sagging fortunes, today displayed the first 64-bit game machine to be produced by a major game maker.
Nintendo said the machine, twice as powerful as 32-bit machines sold by its rivals Sony and Sega Enterprises, would revolutionize the game market by providing much clearer graphics and more realistic images.


New Delhi Journal;Fowl Fight Over Flies Sends India Into a Stew
Since health inspectors arrived two weeks ago at Kentucky Fried Chicken's first restaurant in the Indian capital and filed a report that was used to justify closing the outlet, wags here have had a name for the episode: the Tale  of Two Flies.
Other Indians are not sure whether to laugh or cry.


In Queens, Deadly Echoes Of Colombia's Drug War
Tensions among some of New York's most powerful Colombian drug rings have spawned a series of murders and kidnappings across northern Queens when violent  crime is dropping almost everywhere else in the city, the police and Federal agents say.
Coming after the arrests of six of the top seven kingpins of the Cali drug cartel in Colombia, the surge in violent crime suggests that discipline is eroding in the upper levels of the Colombian cocaine distribution system that supplies New York, New Jersey and much of the Eastern Seaboard, officials say.


Spain Would Keep Control Over Repsol
The Spanish Cabinet approved a measure today to retain state control over key management decisions in the oil company Repsol S.A., after a stock sale that would cut the Government's stake to 14 percent from 21 percent.
According to a 1994 law on state asset sales, the Government has the right to retain management control over companies in which it previously held more than a 25 percent stake and is reducing its shares to less than 15 percent.
The industries must be deemed strategic to the national interest.


New to Index, PP&amp;L Gains
Shares of PP&amp;L Resources rose nearly 11 percent yesterday after the Standard  &amp; Poor's Corporation said it would add the company to its 500-stock index.
A stock moved to the index is almost guaranteed a rise in price because of the large number of mutual-fund companies and institutions whose funds and investments try to mirror the performance of the index.
When a company is added  to the index, these investors typically buy the stock.
Standard &amp; Poor's said it would swap the stock of PP&amp;L, a utility in Allentown, Pa., for that of CBS Inc. at the end of trading yesterday.
PP&amp;L shares closed at $25.875, up $2.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Iowa Holds Off UConn
Iowa 101, Connecticut 95


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the number of foreign students attending universities and colleges in the United States misstated the trend.
As the accompanying article reported, their numbers have leveled off, not declined.


Transactions
Hockey


Mexican Plot: Salinas Family, Swiss Bank and $84 Million
A corruption scandal involving the family of the former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, has widened further with the arrest of his brother's wife in Geneva on charges she used false documents to withdraw funds from Swiss accounts reportedly holding $84 million.


Jets Find Futility Dwells in the Final 20 Yards
For the Jets, football's lowest-scoring team, the red zone has been more like a red brick wall.
They can't get over it and into the end zone.
Their offensive problems could be compounded Sunday in Seattle, when three rookies will start and for much of the game four players in their first year will perform.
In fact, with the benching of center Cal Dixon, the Jets will suit up only five starters who have played every game as designated first-teamers: wide receivers Charles Wilson and Wayne Chrebet, guards Roger Duffy and Carlton  Haselrig and fullback Brad Baxter.


GREAT FINANCIAL TO BUY LFS BANCORP FOR $75.5 MILLION
The Great Financial Bank Corporation will buy LFS Bancorp for $19.50 a share  in cash, or $75.5 million, the two companies said yesterday.
Great Financial, based in Louisville, Ky., said the acquisition of LFS would give it an expanded  presence in the Lexington, Ky., market.
LFS operates Lexington Federal Savings Bank, which has four branches.
LFS shares rose 12.5 cents to close at $19 in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The news was released after the stock market closed.
LFS said on Oct. 31 that it was considering a $19.50-a-share takeover offer.


Russians Assert Radioactive Box Found in Park Posed No Danger
Anxious Russian officials assured people today that there was nothing dangerous in the radioactive container removed on Thursday from a Moscow park where it apparently had been placed by Chechen separatists.
The 30-pound box containing radioactive cesium was found buried under snow near the entrance to Izmailovsky Park, one of Moscow's most popular recreation areas, after Chechnya's best-known rebel leader, Shamil Basayev, told Russian television reporters where to find it.


Vaske Hit Brings Suspension
Los Angeles Kings left wing Eric Lacroix was suspended indefinitely yesterday for checking Dennis Vaske of the Islanders from behind in a game two nights earlier.
The league scheduled a hearing on the incident for Monday.
Lacroix missed yesterday's game against Boston and will miss tomorrow's game against Florida.
Vaske sustained a concussion and forehead laceration in the incident, which occurred in New York's 5-2 victory Wednesday at Nassau Coliseum.
Vaske was clearing a loose puck in his own zone when Lacroix hit him from behind.
Vaske went face first into the boards and fell down.


To Put Asunder or Not?


Hunting the Antebellum Way, Sort Of
Hounds yelped across the fields of a plantation here in southeast Virginia today as burly men and eager boys gobbled grits, hash browns and sausage in the  barn before heading out to hunt.
Kerosene lanterns threw shadows on six cured hams dangling from the rafters.
Hay bales flanked the burlap-covered tables.
Although the setting was meant to conjure up the atmosphere of the 19th century, the hay bales hid a propane heater, decaffeinated coffee was on hand and a local restaurant had stocked the breakfast bar.
The hunters were not gentlemen farmers; they were participants in an agrarian fantasy catered by the  state.


Florida-Florida State: The Incentive Is Fierce
In a rivalry as passionately contested as the one between Florida and Florida State, it is difficult to tell whether the Gators or the Seminoles have the most to gain when the teams meet at noon on Saturday.
When the stakes are this high and the dislike runs this deep, motivation cannot be reduced to rational thought.
This is the simple part: For Florida, a victory would clear its last difficult hurdle to a spot in the Fiesta Bowl and a chance to play for the school's first national championship.
But for once-beaten Florida State, a victory would carry as much emotional meaning, and not only because the Seminoles could cling to their limited championship hopes.
The most satisfying immediate reward a victory would bring to the Seminoles and their fans is that they would not have to deal with the possibility of a Florida national championship.


Louis Malle, Film Director Equally at Home in France and America, IsDead at 63
Louis Malle, the eclectic French director of films including "Pretty Baby," "Lacombe, Lucien," "Atlantic City," "My Dinner With Andre" and "Au Revoir les Enfants," died on Thursday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 63.
The cause was lymphoma, said Pat Kingsley, press representative for Mr.
Malle's wife, the actress Candice Bergen.


Corn Surges on Report by U.S. Of Strong Demand From Abroad
Corn prices surged on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Government reported larger-than-expected weekly export sales, suggesting that rising prices were not deterring purchases by foreign buyers.
On other markets, wheat and pork bellies climbed, contributing to a rise of 0.08 point in the Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities, which closed at 241.31.
Trading volume in Chicago commodities was low during a shortened session, while New York commodities exchanges were closed.


Classical Music in Review
Some Classicism, Some Jazz And a Lot of Originality String Trio of New York Miller Theater


The Language of Postwar Composers
The composers of Luciano Berio's generation are by necessity both writers and linguists, sculptors and geologists, painters and chemists.
Past artists have had inherited languages to work with.
Postwar musicians, legatees of an exhausted tradition, find themselves not only creators of music but also scientists searching for new ways to convey it.
Writing beautiful music sentences seems now only part of the composer's job description.
Inventing new grammars and vocabularies to couch them in is the rest.
Freedom like this, as the wildly varying results have shown, is exhilarating, dangerous and often debilitating.
Mr.
Berio, now in the middle of an extended 70th-birthday party, was in New York again on Tuesday night, overseeing an interesting semantic exploration of music.
Each of four pieces at the Kaye Playhouse used people and electronic machines; all four asked with different degrees of directness where music ends and noise and human speech begin.


Abbreviated Trading
The stock and bond markets and the Chicago commodity markets were open yesterday, but trading was light, ending in the early afternoon.
The New York commodity markets were closed.


Hostetler to Miss Game
Oakland Raiders quarterback JEFF HOSTETLER will sit out Monday night's road game against the San Diego Chargers, Coach MIKE WHITE announced yesterday.
The right-handed Hostetler, who has a bruised left shoulder and a broken bone in his left hand, started against Dallas last Sunday but did not return after being hit by defensive lineman CHAD HENNINGS late in the second quarter.
VINCE EVANS, at 40 the oldest active player in the National Football League, will make his second start of the season in place of Hostetler.
Evans led the Raiders to a 30-17 victory over Indianapolis on Oct. 22.
BILLY JOE HOBERT, a seldom-used three-year N.F.L. veteran, will back up Evans.
Hostetler will be the emergency quarterback.


Sharp's Profit Gains
The Sharp Corporation, one of Japan's top makers of consumer electronics and  office automation equipment, said yesterday that its pretax profit rose 19 percent, to 42.91 billion yen ($430 million), in the six months that ended on Sept. 30, up from 36.16 billion yen last year.
Sales rose 2.5 percent, to 802.73 billion yen.
Analysts said that while the results were strong, they were mostly  in line with market expectations.
Dow Jones


Japan Banks Post Big Rises In Earnings
Japan's 11 major commercial banks, aided by a low cost of funds and lucrative bond trading, today reported strong increases in earnings for the six months ended Sept. 30 but warned that results would slow in the second fiscal half, with some of the institutions likely to fall into the red.
The banks made little progress in reducing their big supply of bad loans in their first half but were expected to take big write-offs at the end of the current fiscal year.
Nine of the 11 plan to write off all their loans to Japan's seven troubled housing lenders, and some said they would do so even if it meant  reporting a loss or skipping a dividend payment -- steps the banks have been loath to take.


Travel Advisory;Quilts and Rugs At Textile Museum
Contemporary quilts and 19th-century rugs are being spotlighted this fall and winter at the Textile Museum in Washington.
The 30 quilts on display in "Quilt National: Innovation and Impact" through March 3 represent artistic expressions rather than functional bedcovers.
The quilt -- defined as two or more layers of fabric fastened at intervals with stitching -- has been updated with innovative techniques and diverse materials,  from computer-generated images to small plastic toys.


Homeless Children, Then and Now
Between 1854 and 1929, more than 150,000 homeless children were shipped from  New York City to farm families in the Midwest on what became known as the "orphan trains." Tomorrow night, "The American Experience" on PBS will document  those children's experiences.
Although its approach has obviously changed, the organization that oversaw the orphan trains -- the Children's Aid Society -- is still very much in business, struggling to provide security for thousands of New York children who  have no stable home.
It is also one of the agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Musicologists Roll Over Beethoven
THERE was once a time when commentators used to describe classical music using fantastical imagery, imagining blood dripping from a wound, a panting lover yearning for his beloved, drug-induced dreams, pacts with demons, angelic  visitations, symphonic salvations.
No more.
Now, a commentary about Beethoven or Elgar or Verdi is likelier to be about "phallocentric archetypes," the interests of the bourgeoisie, the "emotionally and intellectually underdeveloped" musical images of non-Europeans, the "normatively masculine subject" and "homoeroticism."


Back to Basics
To the Editor:
In the essay "Back to Whose Basics?" (Oct. 29), Marjorie Garber dances an intricate two-step around the very issue that continues to divide literary academicians.
In an attempt to defend various scholarly approaches to literature (women's studies, ethnic studies, gay and lesbian studies), she elevates them to the level of a genre of art.


A Guessing Game In Yankee Stadium
Don Mattingly decided not to decide.
The man who has occupied first base at Yankee Stadium for 13 seasons (and who has occupied a rarefied place among his peers and his fans for almost as long) advised the Yankees last week to find another first baseman because he is unsure if he wants to play in 1996.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 12 about Fair Lawn, an Art Deco park in Dallas, misidentified a building on the grounds.
It is one of several massive, unnamed columned structures along the park's esplanade, not the Hall of State.


Ah, November, When Accidents Are Just Waiting to Happen
BREATHE a sigh of relief: the last Friday of November has passed.
But until the month ends at midnight Thursday you may still want to stay out of heavy trucks -- especially in Mississippi and Arkansas and particularly from 4 to 8 in the afternoon.
November is the most dangerous month to travel on the nation's roads, according to statistics compiled by the National Safety Council, a private nonprofit group that tracks accidental injuries and deaths from all causes, and  Friday is the worst day of the week.
Late afternoon to early evening is the most unsafe time of the day.


Guns and Roses


Mr. Aristide's Deadly Rhetoric
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti hints he may go back on his pledge  to the United States and try to extend his term past its scheduled end next February.
He has also alarmingly reverted to the demagogic political style that  scarred his Presidency before the 1991 military coup that forced him into exile.
That earlier performance, which included incitements to mob violence, planted reasonable doubts about his commitment to the rule of law and fanned suggestions he was not fit to run the country.
Mr.
Aristide's latest outburst, earlier this month, has already cost at least 10 lives and threatens to destroy Haiti's best chance ever at democracy.
The United States, which sponsored Mr.
Aristide's return with some 20,000 American troops, must now send an urgent message making clear that unless such provocative behavior is repudiated at once, Washington will be forced to cut off future assistance.


Once a Communist, Always a Pol
LECH WALESA'S defeat in the Polish presidential election at the hands of a telegenic "former Communist" raises in the starkest terms yet the question of what, if anything, that label really means.
Former Communists have taken power in Bulgaria, Slovakia and Russia, and had  prevailed in Poland's 1993 Parliamentary elections.
But the fall of Mr.
Walesa,  the man most associated with Communism's demise, had special poignancy for many  who had struggled against The Party.


At the Casinos
What's happening onstage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place


Travel Advisory;F.A.A. Limits Rights Of 5 Foreign Countries
The Federal Aviation Administration's continuing assessment of the aviation safety standards of other countries has added five nations to its list of those  that do not meet international requirements.
The countries -- Ecuador, Israel, Jordan, Peru and Venezuela -- got "conditional" ratings in the F.A.A.'s study of countries with airlines that fly to the United States.
This means that airlines from these countries may continue limited operations into the United States, under more intense F.A.A. surveillance, while efforts continue to improve safety standards.
The aviation agency's most recent report, on Nov. 2, said that five other countries -- Australia, Hungary, New Zealand, Romania and Western Samoa -- met the international standards set by the International Civil Aviation Organization, a United Nations agency.
The F.A.A. judges on world standards, which are less stringent than the F.A.A.'s, which apply to United States airlines.


No Headline
There is going to be no end until we are dead.
The Russians will never leave, and we will never let them stay.
I thought everyone was tired of all the  killing.
But in Chechnya nobody ever gets tired enough to stop." -- MALKHA AGAYAVA, of Grozny, Russia. [1:2]


At the Mike With the Guru of Glib
LIKE a pianist stretching her fingers or a singer clearing his throat, Marty  Glickman has his own way of limbering up, but it has little to do with basketball or football or any of the myriad other sports he called in his five-decades-plus career.
"Once upon a midnight dreary while I pondered weak and weary over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore," Mr.
Glickman intones, rapidly but  without slurring a single syllable, in a deep-timbrred voice that suddenly seems to fill the room.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION
A STORY ABOUT MR.
SILBERSTEIN By Erland Josephson.
Hydra Books/Northwestern University, $24.95.


Poland's President-Elect, Under a Cloud, Pledges to Be Impartial
In a conciliatory move intended to heal deep political and emotional rifts after Poland's elections, President-elect Aleksander Kwasniewski resigned today  from the political organization he created six years ago on the ashes of the Communist Party.
As he handed in his membership card, No. 13, he told applauding supporters of the Social Democracy Party that he wanted there to be no doubt about his ability to treat all Poles in an "equal way."


Volunteers Tallying Public Works of Art
Someone stole Andrew Jackson's stirrups at Lafayette Square.
Revolutionary War hero Thaddeus Kosciusko, the Polish patriot who shares the park near the White House, is without saber and hat.
But all is not lost.
Blocks away, Joan of Arc is a new woman thanks to a wash and wax and replacement of her battle sword.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about a site on the Internet's World Wide Web listing charity benefits and parties misstated its address.
The address is:
http://www.stempler.com/randall/


Springsteen Concerts Test New Ticket Scalping Law
Bruce Springsteen's current tour has created a ticket scalpers' heaven, said  one man who said he was hired to stand in line for tickets at the State Theater  in New Brunswick on Tuesday night before the opening of the Springsteen "The Ghost of Tom Joad" tour.
He and others in line who were similarly employed declined to give their names or say how much they were being paid, but they -- or their bosses -- were taking advantage of the fact that an extremely popular performer was having a limited number of shows in very small spaces.


Chile's Leader, Accused of Yielding to Military, Defends Record
Since taking office in March 1994, President Eduardo Frei has focused much of his energy on expanding Chile's ecomomy.
But in a recent confrontation between the military and the civilian Government, he has been widely accused of failing  to rein in the armed forces and to resolve human rights abuses committed during  the rule of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
Mr.
Frei's critics said his failure to gain more legislative control over the military allowed it to defy a Supreme Court ruling in June that Gen.
Manuel Contreras Sepulveda, the secret police chief under General Pinochet, go to jail
for the assassination of the opposition leader Orlando Letelier in 1976.


Billie's Variations
To the Editor:
We write to answer some of the questions posed in Ned Rorem's review: "One Lewis Allen is cited as the author of 'Strange Fruit,' but did he compose both words and music? (Mr. Nicholson is ambiguous.) Indeed, who was he? Was he black?"


Women Recovering From Compulsive Gambling, Step by Step
ON a recent Friday evening five women gathered at a wooded psychiatric complex not far from the bright signs off Sunrise Highway and Route 110 in Amityville.
After a ritual reading of a 12-step program's goals and purposes, they began speaking quietly of their compulsion.
One by one they described how gambling in its myriad forms became a habit at  church-sponsored bingo parlors; at bars with the state's new video keno game, Quick Draw, or at candy stores and supermarkets, where they bought instant lottery tickets.


Savory to Sweet, Charlottes for Dessert or to Dress Up a Stew
KING GEORGE III of England experienced the humiliation of losing the American colonies.
His wife, Queen Charlotte, had a better time of it, giving her name to a dessert, the charlotte, as in apple charlotte or charlotte Russe.
A charlotte consists of a mold lined with buttered bread, filled with a fruit mixture and baked.
A lining of sponge cake or lady fingers can take a chilled mousse filling.
A savory charlotte, also made with a bread lining, is an excellent way to dress up ratatouille, especially if picked up from a catering shop.


Speed Limit Restrictions May Fall by the Wayside
Western states are painting new speed limit signs, confident that next week President Clinton will sign what friends and foes call "the pedal-to-the-metal bill."
If signed into law, the National Highway System Designation Act would abolish Federal control of speed limits, first imposed as a fuel-saving measure in 1974.


Three Battered Islands Recover
TREES at Dickenson Bay on Antigua looked like porcupines, their branches all  pointing up as if scared.
St.
Maarten's Simpson Bay Lagoon remained a boat junkyard, with bows rammed into one another, masts sticking out of the water and no evidence of salvagers.
On St.
Thomas, drivers looked through shattered windshields or the plastic that replaced them.
Above a mountain road, they could still see a mattress folded over a sagging utility cable and shudder from the memories of 130-mile-an-hour winds.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Yanks Losing Leaders As Well as Key Players
George Steinbrenner must have an elaborate plan for restructuring the Yankees.
Right?
The team is his most significant investment so he must have a well-conceived plan for guiding the Yankees into the post-season again.
Right?
The exodus of three classy players last week will become a footnote after the Yankees finally implement their splendid strategy.
Right?
Wrong.
Even if Steinbrenner turns his vault into a 24-hour automatic teller machine  and attracts the free agents Fred McGriff, David Cone, Jack McDowell and either  Roberto Alomar or Craig Biggio, the Yankees lost a tremendous presence once Mike Stanley, Randy Velarde and, for now, Don Mattingly became former Yankees.
Initially, the threesome could be irreplaceable.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Correction
The Jersey column last Sunday misidentified a school district where high school teachers, in a job action last month, refused to write college recommendations.
It was Verona, not Vernon.


Stewart Starts Over Again, in Athletics' Front Office
Dave Stewart revived a dead career in Oakland; now he's beginning a new career there.
After stringing together four successive 20-victory seasons and pitching in five World Series, Stewart retired last July 23.
Less than four months later, he was helping interview candidates for the job of Athletics manager.


Q. &amp; A.
The Drips Keep on Dripping


The Council And How It Really Works
Over and over, Councilman Victor L. Robles pounded his fist on the smooth oak desk in a Council hearing room.
"I will never," he shouted, "support a budget with drastic cuts in youth services."
But a few days later, Mr.
Robles, whose constituents are mainly black and Hispanic residents of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, again raised his voice - this time to join 44 other Council members in approving Mayor Giuliani's $31 billion spending plan, which stripped $14.7 million, or 22 percent, from the $66.6 million for youngsters the year before.


Computer Messages in the Reagan Years: History Mixed With Voyeurism
On the morning of Nov. 6, 1986, as news of his secret role in the arms-for-hostages deals with Iran first cascaded onto the world's front pages, Oliver L. North sat at a computer terminal in his third-floor office at the National Security Council and tapped out an electronic message.
"Oh, Lord," he wrote to a co-worker, sounding pained.
"I lost the slip and broke one of the high heels. Forgive please. Will return the wig on Monday."


China Steps Further Back From Democracy
Just as relations between the United States and China were returning to normal after last summer's rupture over Taiwan, the Chinese Government took a step last week that seemed anything but conciliatory.
The state prosecutor's office charged Wei Jingsheng, the country's most prominent pro-democracy dissident, with attempting to overthrow the Government.
Having arrested Mr.
Wei on April 1, 1994, and having held him without charge for the past 19 months, China's Communist Party leadership was under increasing pressure to either release him or bring charges against him.


So Much Genius, So Little Talent'
NIGHTWOOD The Original Version and Related Drafts.
By Djuna Barnes.
Edited by Cheryl J. Plumb. 319 pp.
Normal, Ill.: Dalkey Archive Press. $23.95.


CREATURE COMFORT
As an adult, I've relied on all kinds of stress-reducing activities, from running to yoga to drugs, but none compares to the utter peace of simply sucking that thumb -- and none are as benign (not to mention cheap).
I say, let your son suck his thumb in peace.
Think of it as his time for daydreaming and contemplation.
When he wants to stop, he will.
MEGAN NEWMAN New York


Karen B. Green, Steven Markowitz
Dr.
Karen B. Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Green of Elmsford, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
Steven M.Markowitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Markowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Paul Siegel is to officiate at the Rye Town Hilton in Ryebrook, N.Y.
The couple work at New York University Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, she as a hematologist-oncologist and he as a fellow in cardiology.


INVESTING WITH: Donald A. Yacktman -- Yacktman Fund
WHEN the technology stock bubble bursts, as it eventually must, what group of stocks will take the market lead?
If the country is indeed in the late stages of an economic expansion, as many economists suggest, the big consumer stocks may be poised to have their day.
These stocks tend to hold up well even when growth  slows, because people always buy certain items, like food, shampoo, underwear and cigarettes.
For Donald A. Yacktman, the manager of the Yacktman Fund, such a shift in market sentiment would be good news.
Though he disdains investing based on market and economic cycles, he employs a style of investing that tends toward big consumer goods companies whose stocks are undervalued.


A School Plan Flunks Out
When Education Alternatives Inc. took over nine Baltimore schools in 1992, it promised cleaner schools and higher test scores.
The schools quickly became a test of what for-profit managers could do for public education -- a question that has beguiled any number of educators and politicians in cash-squeezed public school systems across the country.
In Baltimore, at least, the numbers never added up for the city's teachers union and other critics wary of the profit motive.
The company's schools cost $1 million more apiece each year than others in the district, and they performed no better, a study found.


Rediscovered Once More
THE DIARIES OF DAWN POWELL 1931-1965.
Edited by Tim Page. 513 pp.
South Royalton, Vt.: Steerforth Press. $32.


A Still-Stompin', Still-Fiddlin' 70-Year-Ole
LOOKING LIKE SOME GHOST OF THE Opry past, 84-year-old Bill Monroe, released from the hospital just four days earlier after a struggle with pneumonia, shuffles onto the Grand Ole Opry stage to note his 56th anniversary as a member  of the live radio show.
That musical nod takes form as "Mule-Skinner Blues," the first song Mr.
Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys played on the Opry back in 1939.
"Mule-Skinner Blues" is hard-driving country music, a string-band stew of blues, swing and field hollers punctuated by the Alpine tenor of Mr.
Monroe, the Opry's senior member.


After Lull, War Revives in Chechnya's Ruins
There was actually a time this summer when Malkha Agayava thought she might die in peace.
The nights grew quiet in her mortar-scarred, eighth-floor apartment.
She found a man willing to carry water up the broken stairs each day.
The Red Cross fed her, and the dull ache of fear started to fade away.
Then the war came back.
First it came back at night, the deep rumble of artillery shaking her awake.
Then it came during the day, with car bombs and daring attacks on the guard posts of sad-eyed, frightened Russian soldiers.
Now  it is here all the time, and like many people in Chechnya, the 72-year-old Mrs.
Agayava believes that it is back for good.


Elissa R. Savid, Gregory M. Weinhoff
Elissa Robin Savid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Savid of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Gregory Mark Weinhoff, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Weinhoff, also of Woodmere.
Rabbi Saul Teplitz performed the ceremony  at the Seawane Club in Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Weinhoff, 24, is a biology teacher at the Thomas Edison Middle School in Boston.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in education from Adelphi University.
Her father is the tax director in New York for the United States holdings of Polygram, the music recording and film company in the Netherlands.
Her mother, Linda Savid, is a special education teacher at Forest Hills High School in Queens.


A Last Act: Taking Whimsy To School
THE ARCHITECT CHARLES Moore, who died in 1993, was his profession's Pied Piper of the playful, its chief celebrant of the casual.
His relaxed, brightly colored work was the antithesis of formality, surely the least buttoned-up buildings produced by an architect of international renown.
Whatever your view of his work, Moore would seem like the last architect you would choose to design a business school.
They do not always do things by the book at the University of California, Berkeley, however, and so when it came time to design a new home for Berkeley's  Walter Haas School of Business, the university went right to Moore and his Santa Monica firm, Moore Ruble Yudell.
It was an iconoclastic decision that has to be  considered one of the brilliant moments in the history of architectural commissioning.


Hunkering Spinespits!
ZOD WALLOP By William Browning Spencer. 278 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $21.95.
IMAGINE dropping acid with Dr.
Seuss.
Oh, the places you'll go!
Maybe to Zod Wallop.
Not that Zod Wallop is a place, or even a thing.
William Browning Spencer never states exactly what the Z and W words mean in his remarkably loopy third novel, "Zod Wallop," but the plot concerns a novel that is also called "Zod Wallop," written by Harry Gainesborough, a popular children's book author.
In Mr.
Spencer's book, some mental patients are given a drug that allows them all to hallucinate the world of Harry Gaines borough's book, all at the same time.
And in that world there are castles and lords and Ralewings, flying stingrays that eat people's faces and steal infants.


Correction
An article on Oct. 29 about Marion Barry and Newt Gingrich referred incorrectly to the Progress and Freedom Foundation, a political research group.
It is not "Gingrich's" foundation.
Though associated with it, Newt Gingrich has  never been its board member, officer or employee.


Golden Oldies Lead Toy Parade
WILL life imitate art this Christmas?
Will toys based on Buzz Lightyear and Woody, the stars of the Walt Disney Company's holiday movie "Toy Story," edge out yesterday's favorites for a prime spot under the tree?
It will be tough.
The Buzz and Woody figures are new toys made to look old, as if they had come out of a 1960's toy box.
The dolls ($22.95) talk, a la Chatty Cathy, when strings are pulled in their backs. (Other versions are also available.)


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR By David Grossman.
Translated by Betsy Rosenberg.
Riverhead, $13.


Picking The Right Mover
MOVING? No problem!
Just reach for the telephone book, pick a mover from the hundreds that are listed, pack the dishes in boxes, load the kids in the car and you're gone.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Florida Looks Ahead as Ohio State Looks Away;Gators Banish Ghost Of a 1994 Collapse
In the unexpected chill of The Swamp, the Florida Gators were suddenly threatened by a far more uncomfortable sensation.
As they moved closer to the possibility of a Fiesta Bowl berth and a chance to play for a national championship, the Gators suddenly had to deal with a bitter year-old memory at the worst possible time.
From here to Tallahassee, 12 months of reminders followed the 28-point lead that vanished in the fourth quarter of last year's tie with Florida State.
Now here it was again.
Florida's 21-point third-quarter lead was down to 11.
Florida State had the ball, the momentum and more than enough time to execute a comeback for the ages.


Shops in Terminal to Close During Construction Years
After 72 years of repairing watches and selling last-minute birthday and anniversary gifts to commuters on the run, Grand Central Jewelry will go out of  business on Dec. 31.
The store is one of nearly three dozen at Grand Central Terminal, including the Flower Cart, Grand Central Books, the Cafe at Grand Central and Holiday Liquors, that will close to make way for renovations at the terminal.
Some will close at the end of the year, while others may remain open through January.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials say they do not know which stores will be offered new leases after the two-year project is complete.
In the interim, the merchants will either be out of business at the terminal or moved to other locations.
Some merchants, including Zaro's Bread Basket, which will be relocated, have complained about the inconvenience.


Helen S. Rattray, Christopher Cory
Helen Seldon Rattray, the editor and president of The East Hampton (L.I.) Star, was married yesterday to Christopher Thayer Cory, the director of college  relations at Connecticut College in New London.
Deborah Kooperstein, a town justice in Southampton, L.I., performed the ceremony at the Maidstone Arms, an East Hampton inn.
Ms.
Rattray, who is keeping her name, was the widow of Everett T. Rattray, the former editor of The Star.
She is a graduate of Douglass College and the daughter of Yetta Seldon of East Hampton and the late Abraham Seldon, who was a  sales agent in Jersey City for Prudential Life Insurance.


OUT OF FOCUS
Max Frankel has interpreted the impact cameras had on the O. J. Simpson case  precisely backward (Word &amp; Image: "Out of Focus," Nov. 5).
If Simpson is really  innocent, it is primarily because of the televised trial coverage that we have any truly informed basis for believing him.
If he is guilty, televised coverage  has not "ravaged justice" but exposed injustice.
Frankel seems to believe that the way to preserve the "majesty of the law" is by deferring to the jury, however foolhardy, wrongheaded or potentially racist we may believe it to have been.
So much, then, for all the past (and, alas, precamera) analysis and criticism of the Sacco and Vanzetti verdict, the Leo Franks verdict and all the trials of all the unjustly acquitted white Southern sheriffs who murdered black men and were absolved by all-white juries earlier in the century.
To preserve the "mystery" of the law, it is not necessary to stand  mute at its failures.


The Art of Being an Honored Guest
THE members of the princely family of Monaco are, of course, highly skilled as guests.
They know how to enter a room, receive others and converse at dinner  with unimpeachable conviviality.
But recently, at the Princess Grace Foundation  benefit at a performance of the audience-participation dinner-theater production "Pomp Duck and Circumstance," they were put to the test.
"Look! It's Rainier," said Corey Shank, an actress playing a waitress, as she helped stage a cocktail hour in a tent in a park in Hell's Kitchen.
Ms.
Shank had not followed the protocol of waiting for a formal introduction.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
In checking the credits for the 800-pound Microsoft gorilla on your cover, I  see there is a stylist.
My compliments.
It's a helluva coif.
DICK SEARS Jupiter, Fla.


Once, She Considered Herself Invincible
Last Jan. 24, as Molissa Fenley stepped onto the stage of the Joyce Theater before a packed house on the opening night of her weeklong season, injury was the farthest thing from her mind.
In her 20-year career, much of it spent as a solo performer, the choreographer and dancer had never missed a performance and  had never been seriously injured.
As she herself put it recently, "I considered  myself invincible."
So when she felt an odd tightening around her left knee about eight minutes into her first solo, she thought her stretchy velvet costume was to blame.
And when the knee started to buckle, she assumed she would be all right if she subtly shifted her weight to her right leg as she danced.
But 20 minutes after the first twinge, Ms.
Fenley suddenly collapsed in agony, curled up like a pretzel.


The Sky's The Limit
If you've already taken a dive at the North Pole, it seems only natural to fly south for a dive at the other one.
And since no one really owns the South Pole, you can even wrap the trip in the bunting of universal brotherhood.
An international sky-diving expedition to the South Pole could display "the solidarity of nations in a place that belongs to us all." So says Nicholas D. Hetzer of Forum International, a travel company in Pleasant Hill, Calif., that in January will take about 20 aspiring peacemakers to Antarctica and propel them out the plane door toward the polar icecap 8,000 feet below.


Hofstra and Delaware Rematch Turns Out to Be No Match at All
This was Hofstra's biggest football game in history.
Unfortunately for the Flying Dutchmen, they gave their most dismal performance of the season in the opening round of the Division I-AA playoffs.
In a rematch of last season's stirring regular-season finale -- a 41-41 tie -- Hofstra, ranked No. 9, was thoroughly dominated today by No. 7 Delaware, 38-17, before a boisterous crowd of 13,295 at Delaware Stadium.


The State Has Strong Roots As Well as Strong Writers
To the Editor:
Reading Bruce Weber's article ("To See Ourselves as Writers See Us," Nov. 12), I was surprised to find no mention of "New Jersey" (Atheneum, 1986), the third of four novels by Joseph Monninger, a graduate of Westfield High School.


Linguistic Games, Theories of Art
CAN "Pentecost," David Edgar's amazing play, which is having its American premiere at the Yale Repertory Theater, wind up with a major New York production, given the nonessential state of serious theater in the marketplace,  on and off Broadway?
Such speculation is beside the point of one regional theater's overflowing production of a limitlessly provocative work.
Which is precisely the point.
"Pentecost" sets the brain spinning in the highest gear; there's no controlling  where wonderment will fly or land.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A BEDFORD CHRISTMAS


Toward Safer Boxing
To the Sports Editor:
Your article about Gerald McClellan ("A Boxer's Darkness," The Times, Nov. 12) underscores the need for boxing to adopt better safety measures.


Bad Behavior
FIVE MEN AND women from the university community were convened in a campus conference room to decide if my friend Stephen Dobyns -- a distinguished poet and novelist and a tenured creative-writing professor -- was guilty of sexual harassment and should be dismissed from his job.
The tone was one of such civility and high moral seriousness that I could only assume I was the only person in the room tuned in to the disturbing static beneath all this calm inquiry: the only one hearing echoes of Victorian melodrama, of badly overacted  student productions of Arthur Miller's play "The Crucible."
Perhaps my alienation came from my peculiar role -- as a character witness for the alleged sexual harasser.
I think of myself as a feminist.
I write about  "women's issues." I teach in writing programs and am painfully aware of the pressures facing young (and older) female writers.
I find myself more often than not taking the woman's side.
I believed Anita Hill.


Holly L. Bowen,Andrew Lehman
Holly Leigh Bowen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Sheets Bowen of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Barry Taylor Lehman, the son of Gwendolyn  T. Lehman of Naples, Fla., and Ellis Barry Lehman of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald R. Cutler performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church in Rye.
Mrs.
Bowen Lehman, 31, is an account executive at Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp;  Osborn, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the chairman emeritus of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, another New York advertising agency.
Her mother, Leigh Stander Bowen, teaches adult and continuing education in the Greenwich, Conn., school system.


At the Campaign Office of a Presidential Candidate, an ApparentBurglary
The New York City campaign headquarters of Steve Forbes, the millionaire Republican Presidential candidate, was apparently broken into yesterday, the police said.
Gretchen Morgenson, a spokeswoman for the Forbes campaign, said that computers in the office were turned on and disks were riffled through.
It was unclear if disks containing vital information or other documents were missing, she said.
The police said a fax machine had been taken.


Rake, Clip, Mow, Repair, Neaten and Mulch
THE outdoor gardening season is pretty much history, but don't be too eager to put a lock on the tool shed.
There still are some important things to do and  laggards, as most of us are, may just need a little prodding to get on with it.
Some deeds can be put off until the end of next month.
But some can't.
The first thing on everyone's minds is leaves.
They are magnificent while shrouding the fall landscape.
But as soon as they start to fall on the lawn, the charm fades.


Streetscapes: Tudor City;Landmarks Won't Let a Co-op Fiddle With Its Roof
OVER at Tudor City it's not freedom of expression they're fighting for, its freedom from expression.
The co-op board at 45 Tudor City Place -- a landmark building that was put up in 1928 as Prospect Tower -- wants to get rid of the once-illuminated "Tudor City" sign that remains on its roof.
The board says the sign is rusting and unused.
But the Landmarks Preservation Commission says the sign is a piece of history and has to stay.


Some Landlords Struggle Despite New City Policies
For Dottie Calhoun, a Brooklyn landlord, owning property sometimes feels like treading water with pockets full of stones.
"Sometimes it seems like no matter how hard you try, you can't stay afloat,"  said Mrs.
Calhoun, the beleaguered owner of a three-family house in Bushwick.
"Something is always keeping you down."


62 Mittens? Big Classes And Few Aides
Once a week Cheryl Bica gets a teacher's aide to help her manage the 31 5- and 6-year-olds who squeeze into her kindergarten classroom at Public School 232 in Howard Beach.
The other days, Ms.
Bica is left on her own to teach lessons, help the children on with their coats and mittens and do all the other tasks that she says needs two adults.
Ms.
Bica said that forces her to sacrifice the personal attention her young charges need.
"That one-on-one means so much," she said, as she cut out letters  and numbers for her next lesson.
"Otherwise, it's just a mass of children."


Co-op Boards Take Larger Role
WHEN Frederick W. Peters assumed the board presidency at the White House, the grand old prewar building at 262 Central Park West, he immediately found himself in the hot seat.
"The real estate market was terrible, times were hard," he said.
"There were  a few people who were six to eight months behind in their maintenance -- not just investment bankers, but one was in the jewelry business, one was an attorney -- clearly these were people whose businesses were having a tough time."


Pain Is a Common Thread in an Exhibition Promoting Rape Awareness
THE message on the T-shirt seemed to scream.
"POW," it said in purple letters.
"I won't say he never gave me anything."
Another shirt pinned to a gallery clothesline at Purchase College here was covered with imprints of a hand.
"Stop touching my innocence." Beneath the message, the word "Pain" appeared with an X drawn through it.


Will They Reform Medicare Out of Existence?;Public Interest?
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 15 article on medical privacy identifies the Center for Democracy and Technology as "a public interest group." While center officials so describe  it, it gets more than 70 percent of its funds from large private computer, telecommunications and data-bank corporations.


Not Just Soup in This Kitchen
It has been 23 years since a soup kitchen called C.H.I.P.S., for Christian Help in Park Slope, served its first cup of soup in a Sixth Avenue storefront that cost $55 a month.
The soup was from a Lipton package and was heated on a hot plate.
The soup kitchen has come a long way since then.
C.H.I.P.S., a non-sectarian  group that now serves a midday meal to 300 people each day and shelters 12 homeless women each night, recently bought its own building at 200 Fourth Avenue.
The group raised money for the down payment with mailings, pasta dinners and prayer services.


Library In Texas: A Shade Too Much?
The talk of San Antonio is visible from the expressways, from the air, from almost any downtown street.
It is not the size that stands out but the radiant color scheme -- the vivid orange-red, the indigo and the dazzling sunflower yellow.
This object of both delight and derision is San Antonio's bold new $38 million central library, designed by the Mexican architect Ricardo Legorreta.
The building has been praised by one architecture critic who called it "an instant international landmark" and belittled by another as "the loudest library in the country."


The Search for a Missing Model Leads to a Mountainside Grave
Investigators exhumed the decomposing body of a blond woman today from a shallow forest grave, and the family of a missing model, after viewing photographs, identified the remains as hers.
Sheriff's Deputy Jim Hellmold said, "The actual identification will come from the coroner's office after the autopsy." A criminal anthropologist was called in to help.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 In Marty Glickman's day, broadcasting a game was like being in the game.
These days, it's often like being Marty Glickman.
Tips from the guru of glib.


They're Not All Just Merry Little Reruns
December holiday programming can be dreary instead of cheery, if the schedule seems crammed with too many shows repeated from years past.
How many times does  anyone really want to watch "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer"? (Tuesday at 8 P.M., CBS)
And while it's difficult to find that animated classic "Mr. Magoo's Christmas Carol," with its memorable music and unlikely hero (Fox showed it Thanksgiving morning), families with cable can watch another classic, "Dr. Seuss's How the Grinch Stole Christmas" four times this month.


Amazing Grace
VOLUNTEERING is work you don't have to do and don't get paid to do, work that helps somebody.
After that, it's anything.
You might occasionally drop by Drumthwacket, the Governor's mansion in Princeton, while your toddler is down the street at nursery school, and stuff some dinner invitations into envelopes.


'Endless Dreariness'
To the Editor:
I am growing weary of Herbert Muschamp's periodic sneering at efforts to restore character to public design in New York, most recently in his article "New York Is Reaching Backward to Find Itself" [Oct. 29].
From buildings to street lamps, he seems to denigrate as unworthy campiness efforts by the business improvement districts and others to reintroduce a sense of caring to the urban environment.


Of a Shy Worm's Turning And a Bully's Comeuppance
To the Editor:
With regard to the Coping column of Oct. 22, "My Bullied Days: A Smart Fat Kid's Story," when I was a smart shy kid, a boy in my class used to chase me home from school.
My mother's advice: If you don't run, he won't chase you.


Trouble Spots to Avoid on the Highways if You Can, This Week, This Month and Into the New Year
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 Between Green Street and Teterboro.
Two westbound lanes maintained tomorrow and Tuesday, 7 to 10 P.M.
One westbound lane maintained from 10 P.M.
Tuesday to 5 A.M.
Wednesday.


Final Respects for a Young Skater


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5/ Is the Dow industrial average too high?
A ratio devised by a Yale economist that values assets suggests it is.
By Anthony Ramirez.


Surprised to Find Diploma Mills in State, Wyoming Cracks Down
For people who wanted a college degree without years of study, scores of Wyoming colleges had, until recently, an answer.
In exchange for a check, the institutions would serve up a degree without a student having to endure the encumbrances of classrooms, teachers, libraries or laboratories.
Of course, the institutions were not colleges in the traditional sense; they were diploma mills, their campuses by and large post office boxes.


Troubled Neighbors to Meet On Rwandan Refugee Crisis
International peace efforts hardly raise an eyebrow anymore in Rwanda, where  four have already foundered and the region inches toward another refugee-relief  crisis and the possibility of renewed warfare.
So when Jimmy Carter flew here this week and announced another try, a meeting of the region's leaders on Tuesday in Cairo, it was greeted with skepticism by the United Nations and by Western diplomats, and with outright pessimism by the  Rwandan Government.


When Your Temperature Is 104, and the Plane Leaves in 2 Hours
WHY would anyone buy travel insurance?
For the same reason you might insure a family antique.
The coverage won't get your lost vacation back, but it might buy you a fairly good substitute.
Or, put another way: unless you can afford to lose the cost of your 60-day trip to the Far East, or the price of your Mediterranean cruise, you might want to safeguard the money you have spent against the possibility that you never get the trip.


Tasks for the Off-Season
THE outdoor gardening season is pretty much history, but don't be too eager to put a lock on the tool shed.
There are still some important things to do, and laggards, as most of us are, may just need a little prodding to get on with it.
Some deeds can be put off until the end of next month.
But some can't.
The first thing on everyone's mind is leaves.
They are magnificent while they shroud the fall landscape.
But their charm fades as soon as they start to fall on the lawn.


Corrections
A chart on Nov. 12 listing the lowest air fares for Dec. 17 to 23 included an outdated entry.
The lowest restricted round-trip fare between New York and Atlanta during that period is $228, on Continental and Kiwi.
The $219 fare on Continental is not available after Nov. 30.


Tests Detect Heart Problems In People Who Seem Healthy
Half of the 600,000 Americans who have heart attacks each year have no symptoms beforehand.
As many as 30 percent of heart disease patients do not even have any obvious risk factors, like high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, diabetes or a family history of heart disease.
In fact, only a minority  of such patients have a clear-cut risk, like greatly elevated cholesterol levels.
Sergei Grinkov, a two-time Olympic gold medal skater who collapsed and died of a heart attack on Monday in Lake Placid, N.Y., had a family history of heart  disease, and may also have had high blood pressure.
In the later stages of his disease, standard tests would have picked up the danger to his life.
But researchers in cardiology say that a new generation of predictive tests might have helped him by finding his disease even before his arteries became clogged.


Anteaters Overcome Reign of Red Storm
For 20 years, the Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament had one constant: St.
John's always won.
But after 41 consecutive victories, the streak came to a sobering halt yesterday in a second-half collapse that left the Red Storm confused, inattentive and unresponsive to a Cal-Irvine team with a decidedly Eastern flavor -- both East Coast and Eastern bloc.
While the Red Storm (1-1) repeatedly missed open shots, remained unsettled at point guard and crumbled against a token press designed more to speed up the game than disrupt it, Cal-Irvine played as imaginatively as its Anteaters nickname suggests in winning the tournament, 83-77, at Alumni Hall.


Programmed for Unhappiness


Indochina, Mon Amour


Rail Workers in France Strike for a Second Day
Rail services in France were disrupted again today as employees of the state-owned system prolonged a nationwide strike over Government budget tightening that began on Friday.
Four trade unions called on employees to pursue their strike at least until Monday to protest plans to cut back the country's generous welfare system and to reduce Government employees' pension benefits.


Life Sentence
Like an addled senator on a drunken filibuster, the narrator of Bohumil Hrabal's DANCING LESSONS FOR THE ADVANCED IN AGE (Harcourt Brace, $14) bears no  interruptions and finds no leap of logic too daunting to attempt.
Fortunately, there is no need for an edgewise word.
The old man is telling the tale of his life, and it is a life well lived and well told -- in a single rambling sentence that runs the length of this slim volume.
To an audience of young lovelies, the narrator recalls his bawdy adventures as a soldier, brewery worker and cobbler (or, as he euphemistically puts it, an "engineer of human feet"), but mostly talks of his undying devotion to appreciating the "European Renaissance," which means, for the most part, chasing skirts.
"A real man trembles like a frog about to leap whenever he sees a beautiful woman," he says, "which is why art drives so many writers mad." As translated from the Czech by Michael Henry Heim, the anecdotes fall out like cards from a well-shuffled deck: a story about a dead Austrian officer leads to a recollection of a dream about a monkey, which leads to a remembrance of a fight between a clergyman and a drunken sexton, which leads to rumors of a Prince of Lichtenstein's sexual dysfunction.
Is there a point to the old man's tale?
Perhaps not, but then it is enough to be charmed  by the thread of his verbosity.
TOBIN HARSHAW


Get a Job
Sometimes the jobs listed in the help-wanted section of the paper are a little more challenging than intended.
Here's a sampling from the Boston area:
Tudor clinician.
Exciting work with children and adults with reading problems including dyslexia.


Commercial Property: 570 Lexington Avenue;The Aura Is of Another Era -- But So Is the Space
IT is said so often, it is practically a mantra: There are not enough large blocks of contiguous space available in good midtown buildings.
It is why some developers are ready to put up new buildings, why landlords are tightening up on concession packages, why would-be subletters are ratcheting up rents on big chunks of excess space.
But landlords with a plethora of small spaces are in no such catbird seat.
According to ReLocate, which tracks vacancies, there are 488 spaces of 5,000 to  20,000 square feet available in Class A buildings between 50th and 59th Street alone.
Add in available sublets, and there are 604 spaces looking for tenants.


The Sweet Sound Of Success
To the Editor:
While reading Bernard Holland's article "A Pathetic Living at the Symphony"  [Nov. 5], my blood boiled when I got to the part about the $76,000 salary for new members of the New York Philharmonic.
Overpaid crybabies?
Yes.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review


Debutantes and Bachelors Preparing to Meet, and Be, the Elite
The line of clean-shaven and dark-blazered young manhood stretched the length of Le Club's darkened reception room yesterday, each scion's right hand extended manfully again and again in a "Damned glad to meet you" clasp.
"Hi, Gloria, I'm Michael," said Michael Tabrizzi, a 25-year-old pharmacy student at St.
John's, as he made dutiful eye contact with the tall blonde in a  deceptively simple shift who had shaken her way down the gantlet to his position at its end.


Ms. Flynn, Mr. vonTurkovich
Mary-Ellen Hener Flynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Flynn of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Karl Edward vonTurkovich, a son of Dr. and  Mrs.
Branimir F. vonTurkovich of Jericho, Vt.
The bride's uncle the Rev.
D.
Michael Flynn, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Church in Montpelier, Vt.
The couple graduated from the University of Vermont.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
A HELL OF A LIFE An Autobiography.
By Maureen Stapleton and Jane Scovell.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.


A 'Serious' Composer Lives Down Hollywood Fame
AND NOW A FEW WORDS IN defense of Erich Wolfgang Korngold.
It is, admittedly, a risky proposition, speaking up for a composer scorned both as the unsurpassed  master of Romantic kitsch and as the textbook case of a child prodigy come to nought.
The mere fact that Korngold set foot in Hollywood, let alone made a fortune scoring films like "The Adventures of Robin Hood" and "King's Row" in the 1930's and 40's, is reason enough for diehard modernists to condemn his serious work outright.
The mere sound of his bounding melodies, plush harmonies  and gauzy orchestration drives many others to distraction.
Yet his works have not ended up in the oblivion to which experts consigned them.
To the contrary, they have cropped up in concert programs and recordings with increasing frequency.
Korngold deserves the attention, because he was first and foremost one of the most formidable composing prodigies in the history of music.
His childhood and teen-age creations exceed in sophistication and individuality anything written at an equivalent age by Mozart or Mendelssohn.
By the age of 11, he had nailed down the idio syncratic manner that would characterize his entire output.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
That a place is inhabited by "only" old women is a reason for suggesting its  abolition?
I would like to point out that while old women may be uninteresting to young men, young men are not the only measure of what is interesting in this  world.


Victoria Pesce, Eric R. Elliott
Victoria Pesce, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Pesce of Miami, was married in Discovery Bay, Jamaica, on Friday to Eric Robinson Elliott, the son of Herbert D. Elliott and Leanore R. Elliott, both of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Henry Mignott, a Baptist minister, performed the garden ceremony at Sugar Bay, a home  of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter McConnell, friends of the couple.
Mrs.
Elliott, 29, graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a contributor to the Miami bureau of The New York Times.
Mr.
Elliott, 34, is a partner in Barber &amp; Bronson, an investment banking concern in New York and Fort Lauderdale.
He graduated from the University of Florida.


THE REOPENING OF THE FRONTIER
I hadn't planned to respond to Jon Margolis's article questioning the necessity of North Dakota -- and I won't ("The Reopening of the Frontier," Oct.  15).
However, I was pleasantly surprised to see in the Nov. 5 Letters column that of the four published responses to that story, a whopping 75 percent came from New Yorkers defending the state's existence.
It's great to have friends in high places, and New York City has always been  at the top of my list.
I love New York; in fact, I'll be there over Thanksgiving to get my culture fix.
But you know what they say -- there's no place like home, Toto.
So after five days of Broadway, great food and museums, I'll return  to my home where the buffalo roam.


Mark E. Lesnik and Jill E. Feinberg
Jill Edie Feinberg, the daughter of James and Judith Feinberg of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Mark Elliot Lesnik, a son of Robert and Joyce  Lesnik of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Peter Kasdan officiated at the Hilton at Short Hills.
Mrs.
Lesnik, 25, is a media buyer at Grey Advertising in New York.
She is a graduate of George Washington University.


The Merger Downside
To the Editor:
As a state Senator representing parts of Brooklyn, I have closely followed your coverage of the pending merger of the Chemical and Chase Manhattan banks and the impact it is likely to have on financial services for my district and all New York City ("Stalking the Next Big Takeovers," Investing It, Nov. 5).


Hey, Moscow: Remember Me?
Last summer, when the Chechen commander Shamil Basayev and his rebels stormed a Russian city, killed scores of people there and captured the local hospital, he humiliated a nation that only five years before had considered itself a great power.
He also reminded them that the war for secessionist Chechnya would be hard to win.
Last week, Mr.
Basayev felt another reminder was needed.
Angered that peace talks are going nowhere and that the Russian assault of Chechnya continues, Mr.
Basayev told reporters where they could find a radioactive container planted in  the snow near the entrance to one of Moscow's most popular parks.


Something New Under the Sweltering Sun
THE CLASSICAL-MUSIC business used to work pretty much like our school systems.
People began in the fall, slowed down around holidays and went home at  the end of the spring.
The school calendar is a remnant of agrarian years, when  children were turned loose not to frolic in local shopping malls but to help their parents in the fields.
Music was driven by other concerns.
After a hard season of playing and listening, relief was in order.
Musicians took summer jobs, taught, played out of town, did nothing.
Listeners put their fingers in their ears and went to the  beach.
The two parties would have had trouble getting together even if they had  wanted to.
Concert halls weren't air-conditioned, and sweaty suffering in the name of art, while a virtue at Wagner's Bayreuth, had its limits elsewhere.


A Man Without Luck
FORTUNE'S judgment: Virgil tells Dante that it lies hidden in the grass like  a snake.
Its permutations are swift and know no truce, so numerous are those who must be made and unmade for one tribe to prosper while another languishes.
Virgil is expounding on the punishment the highest wisdom metes out to misers and spendthrifts, but he might as well be speaking about the rise and fall of literary reputations.
Within one generation, celebrity and commercial success are often seen to repose on small artistic merit.
Thus the work of an Eugene Sue (who outsold Balzac, Dumas pere and Victor Hugo) turns into stuff to be cleaned  out of an attic; at most, it survives as a historical curiosity.
Or a change in  taste, without diminishing the respectability of Thackeray or William Dean Howells, deprives them of readers.
Conversely, just such a change may bring Trollope back into fashion and cause forgotten novels and new biographies to be  published posthaste, as though news of Tolstoy's dictum -- that this was among the greatest of English novelists -- had just been received by the general public.
Sometimes an entire genre (19th-century epic poetry) goes into eclipse while another is rediscovered (English metaphysical poetry) or a work later recognized as a masterpiece so offends the current critical canon that for a time it stops an author's career dead in its tracks.
Such was the effect of "Moby-Dick" on Melville.
But individualized rotten luck, more like the bite of a snake in the grass than a majestic revolution of the wheel of fortune, also preys on writers: tuberculosis or insanity; blindness; drug or alcohol addiction.
There may be ostracism, or worse, on account of political views or activities that may be extraneous to the work or central, may be noble or despicable.
The list of notable victims and their afflictions is endless.
Occasionally, tragicomic elements intrude, like the seizure of the first printing of Nathanael West's "Miss Lonelyhearts" by creditors of his publisher, precisely at the moment of peak demand stimulated by a series of rave reviews.


Polishing the Image While Minding the Store
People are said to be sour on politicians these days, disgusted with poll-driven sound bites and the cultivation of image over real governing.
Very few Americans who voted for Abraham Lincoln in 1860 even knew what he looked like, historians say with a wagging finger.
Would we vote for the rail-splitter  today without having assured ourselves that his teeth were properly capped, the  contacts in place, the dye job on his hair at least better than Hubert Humphrey's?


Jets' Douglas Struggles to Handle Expanded Role
Suddenly, football has become more than a game to Hugh Douglas, the Jets' prized rookie pass-rusher.
Suddenly, the big smile has been wiped off his face.
He will perform in his third straight game as the starting right end when the Jets face the Seahawks in Seattle today.
But while he should be beaming about what he has accomplished on a 2-9 team this season, he isn't.
Instead, he's frustrated.


A Gospel Session Honors Beethoven
THE Prayer Tabernacle Choir of Bridgeport will perform a swinging gospel rendition of the final movement of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, "Joyful, Joyful We Adore Thee" with the Greater Bridgeport Symphony on Saturday at the Klein Memorial Auditorium.
"We love singing it -- we sing it every Christmas. And with an orchestra, oh  my, it's just something. The trumpets! It brings a lot of joy," said Bishop Kenneth H. Moales Sr., founder of the Prayer Tabernacle Church of Love and its choirs in the city's East End.
"It's a new sound of gospel with the full orchestra live," he continued, "rather than with all the technology of producing gospel artists; very few of them have sung with a live orchestra."


Declaring Independence In a Managed-Care World
DR.
Jean D. Miller is swimming against the tide.
At a time when most doctors  have joined managed-care organizations, this family practitioner is so determined to be independent that she has spent most of her life savings -- and  part of her parents' -- in an effort to stay that way.
She now heads her own corporation, Body-Centered Medical Therapies, which opened in June in a suite of offices decorated in tasteful pastels at 42d Street and Madison Avenue in Manhattan.
By October, her patient load had grown about 30 percent and it was continuing to rise in November.


Hantavirus Claims A Miner in Nevada
A Nevada miner is the latest victim of hantavirus, a disease borne by deer mice, medical officials say.
The miner, whose name was not disclosed, died on Thursday minutes before he arrived at a hospital here after a 250-mile emergency flight from the Nye County Regional Medical Center in central Nevada.


Report Says Graber Is Out at Rutgers
Doug Graber will be dismissed from his job as Rutgers University's football coach, The Home News-Tribune of East Brunswick reported today.
Graber, who has at least three years left on this contract, told the newspaper he has not discussed his future with Athletic Director Fred Gruninger.


The Super Bowl of Fiction
ON the evening of Nov. 7, the keeper of the Guildhall, the magnificent Gothic building where the Booker Prize ceremonies are taking place, is mostly worried about security.
In acknowledgment of Salman Rushdie's presence, he nervously confesses, 16 armed guards have been hired; and it must be said that the small phalanx of alert-looking men carrying walkie-talkies adds an element of extraliterary suspense to the atmosphere.
Others in the black-tie crowd may have extraliterary worries as well, if they've put their money down on one of the authorial racers.
At this last lap of the race, Britain's leading bookies have billed "The Moor's Last Sigh," by Mr.
Rushdie, as the "hottest Booker favorite ever," with "The Ghost Road," by Pat Barker, close behind.
George Walden, the chairman of this year's Booker jury, is worried about the  state of British culture.
Mr.
Walden, a Conservative M.P., delivers a darkly ironic speech, peppered with literate quotations, in which he contends that "the tyranny of ordinariness" reigns in Britain with a universally dampening hand.


Dedicated Volunteers Have 'Real Jobs,' Too
To the Editor:
In the article about suburban etiquette ("Thou Shalt Not Covet Thy Neighbor's Lawn," Oct. 15), I was struck by the comment from the Glen Ridge resident that volunteering was done "in lieu of having 'real jobs.' "


New Orleans Considers Anti-Camping Law to Deter Homeless
Like cities elsewhere, New Orleans is struggling with the problem of homelessness, trying to find ways to preserve the aura and ambiance of the city's historic French Quarter without trampling on the rights of the unfortunate.
The approach of one City Council member has resonated among a vocal contingent of residents and business people, but even she acknowledged that it had little chance of becoming law.


Above the Alps
If Alpine peaks aren't breathtaking enough, for about $100 (at 9.9 schillings to $1), Kitz Tandem Flights provides a 10- to 15-minute tandem paraglider flight from a mountain in Kitzbuhel, Austria.
Winter takeoffs are accompanied by a trained para glider. (43 664) 1000 580.
JOSEPH SIANO


In Search of Junk and, Just Maybe, Votes
EVEN on a day off, Carlos Lopez was making his rounds in Newark's North Ward.
As his car nosed onto a street near the projects, the drug dealers watched like  birds on a fence, adjusting their bodies slightly to evaluate the intrusion.
Threat or opportunity?
Seeing neither, they returned to position, blowing on their hands against the cold.
A prostitute who looked to be about 14 sashayed up the block.
Flapping on lampposts were tattered handbills advertising cheap car insurance, money for giving blood, a reward for suitable bone-marrow donors.
Around the corner, down a rutted street, old tires, waterlogged mattresses, rusted refrigerators, burned out cars, rat-chewed bags of trash were piled all over.
Mr.
Lopez stopped the car and made some notes.
That night, he would go over his lists, call people he knows who make their living scavenging for junk,  tell them where to find some things and take them away.


The College Sport Of Getting Smashed
Sports floats on a river of alcohol; the TV commercials and the ball park billboards are signposts along the way.
But that's just prose.
A researcher at the Harvard School of Public Health has finally come up with the numbers: College athletes are more likely to binge drink than other students.
Dr.
Henry Wechsler, a social psychologist who is the Harvard study's principal investigator, is disturbed by these findings because of the influence of college athletes on many campuses.
"These are the students who set  the norms," he said.
"These are the socially accepted students who say it's O.K. to get smashed."


What Critters Dare Befoul The Leafy Wood?
WHILE a lot of people have lost interest in Connecticut's forests with the passing of the fall foliage season, for some people this is the best time of year for traversing the timberlands.
Scientists have started long-term forest health surveys and are wandering the woods seeking signs of the hemlock wooly adelgid, spruce bud worm or butternut canker, or to spot deer damage and human-fed harm.


A Onetime Rebel Is Handed a Cause As Likely Successor to Billy Graham
For years, a lively conversation could be provoked in some Protestant circles with a question about one man's mortality: After Billy Graham, who?
Anyone who asked knew that the 20th century's most famous evangelist was still preaching well past retirement age.
But sooner or later he would have to surrender the stage.


At Your Service
THERE are career waiters in high-end restaurants and working-class diners, but in most restaurants, the waiters are students or people in the arts, young folks with a lot of endurance looking for a way to make money and still have time to take a class.
My wife's nieces have waited tables in Manhattan for seven or eight years.
Christina is a dancer, and Cydney is an actor.
We're close with them, and they come over and tell stories of the long hours, the seven-day weeks, the pressures from the kitchen, the capriciousness of the customers.
Sometimes, the stories are of kindness -- if they get an order wrong, and the customer doesn't get all bent out of shape.
The kitchen sounds like a madhouse at times.
If the waiter drops a plate of food, or if the food is ready  and the waiter doesn't pick it up promptly, there can be awful screaming insults.
Much of being a waiter is mitigating the pressure between the kitchen and the dining room.


NEW JERSEY VOICES
Districts propose to spend and do what they want to spend and do.
And when you have that kind of discretion you get disparity, and that is the essence of the problem."
LEO F. KLAGHOLZ State Commissioner of Education, on the difficulty of equalizing spending in rich and poor school districts.


Norway Gives Germany A Palestinian Hijacker
A Palestinian woman involved in the 1977 hijacking of a Lufthansa airliner to Somalia was extradited to Germany today, the police said.
On Friday, Norway rejected an appeal to stop the extradition of the woman, Souhaila Andrawes.
The Norwegian news agency said she was put on a private plane for Hamburg, Germany.


Drab and Forgotten?
To the Editor:
In his meanspirited review of Anne Perry's "Cain His Brother" (Nov. 5), Martin Seymour-Smith takes a gratuitous sideswipe at Josephine Tey, "a drab and  now forgotten Scottish crime writer."


New Owners, New Menu and New Decor
WELCOME BACK," said a waiter at the new Mediterraneo Ristorante in Huntington. "The place looks different, but the food is just as good, maybe even better."
The reassurance was given to regulars of La Riviera, which Mediterraneo replaced.
Many old staff members remain, but the owners, menu and decor are as new as the name.


Moving Teams for Fun and Profit
To: Struggling Sports Club Owners From: Owners Who Have Seen the Future Re: Joining the New Franchise Movement
SO you thought that only players could declare themselves free agents?
Think again.
You've got a sports franchise, a unique, valuable asset.
Use it!
Threaten, wheedle, cajole and blackmail your way to fantastic riches!
You don't  have to sit around in those crummy box seats in that creaky old stadium or smelly arena.
Remember, you're the boss!


Learning to Build a House for Somebody Else (While Watching YourFingers)
IT is 8:20 on a cool, bright, cloudless Saturday morning, and I am about to build a house.
Or, more precisely, to learn how to build a house.
Or, really, to learn how to put up a tiny part of a house: the long wooden studs that sheathe the inside of one living room wall.
Well, you have to start somewhere.
The truth is, I don't know the first thing about building a house.
Along with half a dozen other volunteers recruited by Leadership New Jersey, a public-service group based in New Brunswick, five members of my family -- my wife, her parents, my 9-year-old son and I -- have arrived on North First Street to spend this Saturday helping the interfaith housing group Habitat for Humanity in its most ambitious local project: Habitat  Way, 28 town houses on the site of a burned-down theatrical warehouse at the city's northern edge.


State Plays Internet Catch-Up: A Web Site Is in the Works
New Jersey has long been known as a high-technology state, but when it comes  to the information superhighway, state officials are not exactly ahead of the curve.
They are just now preparing a New Jersey home page on the Internet's World Wide Web -- after some 40 other states have already done so.
By early next year, residents who have access to computers and modems should  be able to tap into a comprehensive New Jersey Web site designed by the State Office of Telecommunications and Information Systems, a branch of the Treasury Department.
The designers are still not sure what the site will offer, but Jane  Rebovich, a spokeswoman for Governor Whitman, says it will most likely provide access to much of the state's public documents and data, from the annual budget  to New Jersey Transit train and bus schedules.


Rising Bosnian Serb Leader Offers Accord Rare Praise
In a marked departure from previous Bosnian Serb attitudes, the man who has emerged as most likely to be the next Bosnian Serb president, Nikola Koljevic, spoke positively today about NATO's role in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The NATO deployment is not only necessary to "impose the peace," he said, but also good for the world, for it will establish NATO as an impartial peacekeeping force.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Surge in Sales of Italian Bags Inspires Plan for Large Store


Who's Been Eating My Nest Egg?
EVERY payday, about 18.5 million Americans take home a check shrunken not just by taxes, but also by an amount they have designated for their 401(k) retirement account.
But not all of the $747 million in 401(k) savings withheld from paychecks each week is invested.
Sometimes the boss steals it.


Edith Haggard, a Literary Agent With Noted Clientele, Dies at 92
Edith Haggard, a New York literary agent whose clients ranged from an important group of proper British writers to the cantankerous Sinclair Lewis, died on Thursday in the Whitney Pavilion of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She was 92 and lived in Manhattan.
In her 30-year career, Mrs.
Haggard, who spent five years with the William Morris agency's literary department before joining the Curtis Brown agency in 1937, became one of the city's best-known agents, representing clients like Adela Rogers St.
Johns, Nunnally Johnson, Phyllis McGinley, Vera Caspary and Ogden Nash.


A Waiting Game on Wall Street
There's always a lot of whooping and hollering when the stock market breaks through some numerical barrier, as it did last week when the Dow industrials skipped past 5,000 for the first time.
Given the cheers, you'd be forgiven for imagining all those Wall Street types grunting in solidarity as they pushed that statistical boulder over the top.


All Is Not Well in This (Animated) Playroom


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Volkswagen Golf GL;Born in Mexico of German Stock
STOPPED at an intersection the other day, I came face to face with an immaculate little Volkswagen Beetle, the kind you used to see everywhere and hardly ever see now.
I pointed it out to my children as if it were a museum piece on wheels.
It is hard to believe it has been 25 years since Volkswagen's heyday in America.
In its prime, the Beetle outsold the best-selling cars of today, like the Ford Taurus and the Honda Accord.


The 'Wild Bill' of History, Here Mostly Made Up
HISTORIANS DON'T SEEM TO know why (Crooked Nose) Jack McCall shot James Butler (Wild Bill) Hickok in the back during a poker game one August day in 1876 in Deadwood, S.D., other than that the young man craved immortality.
And he achieved it.
Among other things, he showed up in 1978 in Thomas Babe's play "Fathers and Sons," opposite Richard Chamberlain's Wild Bill.
In 1986, McCall put in an appearance in Pete Dexter's novel "Deadwood." And in Walter Hill's new film "Wild Bill," opening on Friday, McCall (played by David Arquette) gets a chance to gun down Wild Bill (played by Jeff Bridges) yet again.
Mr.
Hill drew details about the town of Deadwood from Mr.
Dexter's novel, but he went back to Mr.
Babe's play for much of the relationship between Hickok and  McCall -- making the film unusual, in that the screenwriter turned not to the historical record but to two literary sources to shape his story.


Foreign Affairs;Letter To Follow
To: Leah Rabin
From: Hafez al-Assad, President of Syria


Ugly Americans, British Style
Young man, there is America which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners."
Edmund Burke, 1777
THE LOT OF AMERICANS IN British drama is not a happy one, if three recent London plays are any gauge.
While two centuries may have passed since the statesman Edmund Burke made the above remark, it is more applicable than ever to those American characters who have been brought to the London stage this year.
Can this be a nation's revenge for Hollywood's habit of using Britons to embody evil ("The Silence of the Lambs," "The Net," the "Die Hard" series)?
Perhaps.
The fact remains, that Americans seeking a modicum of gallantry or wit  from portraits of their countrymen on London stages will encounter boorishness,  buffoonery, or worse.


Isles, as Usual, Almost Good Enough to Win
He wore No. 1 on the back of his sweater but his name was not stitched to it.
Who was that masked man minding the Tampa Bay net?
The Islanders know him well.
Darren Puppa made 37 saves, many of them of the brilliant variety, to lead the Lightning to a 2-1 victory tonight at Nassau Coliseum.


In Search of the Copacetic Campus
NOW that it's time to get those college applications in the mail, here are some red-hot tips, bound to make the job even more frustrating than it already is:
1.
If your S.A.T.'s really stink, and Uncle Henry will pay your tuition only  if you get into Yale, just move to a state with lots of trees.
Apply to the Yale School of Forestry.
Then transfer.


Back to Basics
To the Editor:
Marjorie Garber had better consider trading in her Captain Marvel decoder ring.
It gave her the wrong story on the American Academy for Liberal Education, of which I am president.
We seem to have raised her fighting instincts -- "Defense, defense," the panic-stricken coach always cries -- by our demand for rigorous courses in mathematics, science, foreign languages, literature and history.
Such standards, her magic ring tells her, are really a "code" for objecting to everything new under the sun.


Sports of The Times;It's These Refs Whose Uniforms Is All Wrong
THE new, pinstriped Houston uniform, designed to capitalize on championships  won back to back, sports a radical, clash-of-colors chic.
The new Knicks uniform, out in time for the Christmas rush, is a more tasteful variation on an  old yet elegant theme.
But Charles Oakley, he of the honey mustard suit, doesn't think a black stripe matches with orange and blue.


Cosmicommunist


Fanning The Flames
Before the Olympic flame shines on Atlanta next summer, the torch bearing it  will spend 84 days in the hands of 5,500 "community heroes" and 4,500 other carriers, winding 15,000 miles through the lower 48 United States.
Well, lower 42.
The Dakotas, Maine, Montana, New Mexico and West Virginia have been unhitched for this marathon relay, and naturally they don't like it.
The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games says it did the best it could, and Hilary Hanson, director of the relay, notes that the torch procession leading into the Los Angeles Olympics in 1984 covered only 9,000 miles in about  the same time.


Professors Leave Home To Live On Campus
At the Van Pelt College House, an undergraduate residence hall at the University of Pennsylvania, the two baby strollers leaning against the building's cinder-block walls are sure signs that the professors are around.
Dr.
Al Filreis, 39, is not just the chairman of the undergraduate English program at the university.
And his wife, Susan Albertine, 45, is not just a visiting English professor.
They are also residents of the Van Pelt dormitory, along with their children, Benjamin, 4, and Hannah, 17 months.


Nightmare Alley
To the Editor:
I was surprised to learn from Mr.
Holland's article that orchestra musicians ranked second only to prison guards in terms of job dissatisfaction.
Having worked as a concert hall acoustician for 35 years, I always thought that orchestra musicians were at the top of the list.


Once Just a Princess, Suddenly a Feminist
HER husband's friends branded her again as an unstable paranoid, an "unguided missile" prone to alarming episodes of depression and self-destructiveness.
But if Princess Diana risked seeming slightly unhinged in her painfully candid interview on television last week, with her tales of self-mutilation, "rampant bulimia" and post-natal depression, she more than held her own.
Not only did she firmly defeat her husband, Prince Charles, in their battle for public sympathy, but she also succeeded in trading her fairy tale-princess image for a new and more contemporary one: feminist role model.


Tasks for the Off-Season
THE outdoor gardening season is pretty much history, but don't be too eager to put a lock on the tool shed.
There are still some important things to do, and laggards, as most of us are, may just need a little prodding to get on with it.
Some deeds can be put off until the end of next month.
But some can't.
The first thing on everyone's mind is leaves.
They are magnificent while they shroud the fall landscape.
But their charm fades as soon as they start to fall on the lawn.


Corrections
A listing of ski resorts last Sunday misstated the telephone number for Big Sky in Montana.
It is (406) 995-5750.


IRISH VOTE TO END THE DIVORCE BAN BY A TINY MARGIN
By a minuscule margin and after a bitter campaign that pitted the Government  against the Roman Catholic hierarchy, Ireland has voted to remove its constitutional ban on divorce and remarriage, ballots tallied today showed.
Because of the closeness of the results in Friday's vote -- 50.3 to 49.7 percent -- an official recount was ordered, but the recount showed that the percentages held.


Cats Wait, Watch and Celebrate
Gary Barnett kept his promise. He's taking the Purple to Pasadena.
Northwestern, one of the biggest losers in college football, is going to the  Rose Bowl.
For this season at least, athletics overshadows academics in Evanston.


A Wild Bear Chase
THE LOST GRIZZLIES A Search for Survivors in the Wilderness of Colorado.
By Rick Bass. 239 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.


No Ordinary Inspirational 'Cripple Story'
Billy Golfus cast a jaundiced eye at the movie-industry types who swarmed around him offering pats on the back and business cards at the Sundance Film Festival last January.
Mr.
Golfus, brain damaged since a motor scooter accident 11 years ago, had just won the festival's Freedom of Expression Award for his debut film, "When Billy Broke His Head . . . and Other Tales of Wonder," a tragicomic documentary about his pilgrimage around the country in search of the meanings and faces of disability.
"Sundance was cute," Mr.
Golfus, 51, said gruffly over lunch recently in his  hometown, Minneapolis, where he lives alone in a modest rented house.
Built like a teddy bear under a mop of graying curls, he paused to try to remember the scene.
"What I saw were a lot of kids in their 20's talking as if De Niro and Dustin don't go to the men's room without phoning them first."


East Side Social Climbers Need Strong Dose of Reality
To the Editor:
Re: the life styles of the rich and brainless.
Your Nov. 5 article "Marrying  Well" about East Side social climbing suggests a new meaning for the word "clubbable." Most of the swells you describe ought to be walloped over the head  with a blunt instrument.


Trouble Spots To Avoid On the Road
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
INTERSTATE 80 Between Green Street and Teterboro.
Two westbound lanes maintained tomorrow and Tuesday, 7 to 10 P.M.
One westbound lane maintained from 10 P.M.
Tuesday to 5 A.M.
Wednesday.


Heat Cut Angers Unions
Thermostats were turned down 6 degrees to 62 degrees at state offices on Friday by economy-minded government officials who had reasoned that most employees would be taking the day off during Thanksgiving weekend.
Angered, the state's Public Employees Federation said it would file an unfair labor practices complaint.


Michael Ovitz: The 5 Million Option Man at Walt Disney
SO just how much will Michael Ovitz make at Disney?
That's been the big question since he stunned Hollywood, where money is a serious topic indeed, by leaving his mighty empire at the Creative Artists Agency.
After all, when Mr.
Ovitz was being courted by Edgar Bronfman Jr., president  of Seagram's, to run MCA, the numbers being tossed about would have made even Bill Gates notice, with the rumor mill putting a possible pay package around $300 million.
But whatever it was, it wasn't enough, and in June Mr.
Ovitz declared that nothing could lure him from his beloved agency.


Several Blacks Sue Beverly Hills, Asserting Bias by the Police
Saying they had been the victims of a callous police force, six blacks filed  suit this week against the City of Beverly Hills, Mayor Allan Alexander, Councilwoman Vicki Reynolds, who is a former Mayor, and the Police Chief, Marvin Iannone.
The plaintiffs include a handyman at a local church, a local high school football player and the mother of two young boys, all of whom say they or their  families were singled out because of their race.


Helping a Family for a Last Goodbye
Genelle Phillip was living in Grenada when she first began losing weight.
Soon there was a high fever, and then the diagnosis: leukemia.
She and her mother came to New York for better medical care, and to spend time with her father.
But after three years of radiation treatments, chemotherapy and a bone-marrow transplant, she felt weaker than ever.


At the Urban Lumberyard, Material for Building Many a New Life
The trucks leave six days a week in the early morning with two-by-fours and Sheetrock, flooring and doors to help create new beginnings all over the city.
And before the sun is high, many of those sky-blue trucks are returning, ready for another load.
By then, the urban lumberyard on 11th Avenue between 45th and 46th Streets is full, with men in worn jeans and flannel shirts sipping coffee and waiting for their orders, making their own new beginnings.


Nude Club Puts Off Last Dance
For months, city and borough agencies and a couple of judges have turned up the heat on Steam Heat, an all-nude nightclub at the northern end of Flatbush Avenue.
But Steam Heat has yet to be sweated out.
Last month, the city's Board of Standards and Appeals ruled that the club's building permit was illegal and ordered it shut down, drawing the applause of Borough President Howard Golden, one of its most vocal critics.
But the dancers  continue to perform every night, pending the resolution of the club's latest appeal.


Question Put Before Court: Is Magazine Smut or Satire?
Two decades after Justice Potter Stewart of the United States Supreme Court defined obscenity by saying, simply, "I know it when I see it," a pair of Washington shopkeepers will stand trial for seeing satire where prosecutors saw  smut.
Ira Stohl, the owner of The Newsstand, a magazine shop and coffee bar here, and the shop's manager, Kristena Hjelsand, are scheduled for trial Jan. 22 in Whatcom County Superior Court, charged with selling an issue of the alternative  magazine Answer Me, that graphically discussed rape.
The shopkeepers say they were given an odd choice: either submit to arrest or promise to never sell Answer Me or anything like it in the future.


Escape at Police Station
A murder suspect escaped from police custody Friday night at the 41st Precinct station house in the South Bronx, the police said.
He was recaptured yesterday morning at his apartment about a block away.
The suspect, Francis Johnson, 18, of 755 Southern Boulevard, had been arrested at 2 P.M. on Friday in a fatal shooting, the police said.
He escaped about 11 P.M. as detectives processed his arrest at the station house, at 1035 Longwood Avenue, a police spokesman, Detective Mark Patterson, said.


A Closed Reception for Project Open Door


Rescue Mission
In the 1850's, a young minister arriving in New York City was apalled by what he saw: thousands of children roaming the streets scrounging for money, food and shelter, prey to violence and disease.
He set out to rescue them - with very mixed results.
Convinced that the solution was to "send them away to kind Christian homes in the country," the minister, Charles Loring Brace, founded the Children's Aid  Society to carry out the task.
Over the next 75 years, more than 100,000 orphaned or neglected children were dispatched by trains to American farmlands and varying fates.


Town Dips Into Its Pockets To Stave Off Rehab Center
Three years after the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation bought a piece of  land in Essex Fells, the tiny, affluent town is on the verge of winning a fight  to keep the institute from opening a rehabilitation center for brain-damaged people there.
Last week, the Essex Fells Town Council approved a $4.75 million bond issue to buy the 12.6 acres from Kessler, which is based in West Orange and also has services in East Orange, Saddle River, Chester, Union and Annandale. (The actor  Christopher Reeve is recovering at West Orange from a horseback-riding accident  in May.) Although the sale has not been made, town officials indicate that it will happen soon.


Presidential Spin
To the Editor:
While "The American President" offers a certain claim to originality in its  parallels to the Clinton Presidency, a close look at its plot reveals that it is nothing more than an updated version of a well-worn Hollywood formula: in this case, President meets girl; President loses girl; President gets girl.


A Calm Oasis Near Broadway
To the Editor:
Writing about West End Avenue ("A Calm Oasis Near the Buzz of Broadway," Nov. 5), Peter Malbin notes many musicians reside there; he overlooks the fact that the street also used to be very popular with doctors, second only to Park Avenue.


Cuba Gambles on Reversing Fall in Sugar Harvest
The sugar cane stood tall and strong as it rippled in the breeze, ready for cutting.
At the September 21 Cooperative here, the mechanics were preparing for  the harvest by replacing the old Soviet-made engines in their tractors and trucks with new Mercedes-Benz motors.
As the workers know, the harvest is probably the most important since Fidel Castro came to power nearly 37 years ago.


Long Wait for a Green Light
On weekends, Ken Dunne, a designer and decorator, looks forward to a morning  repast of eggs and waffles at Bubby's, one of his favorite restaurants in TriBeCa.
But Mr.
Dunne does not relish the thought of walking the two blocks from his Greenwich Street apartment to the restaurant on Hudson Street.
Trying to cross Hudson as it trundles across North Moore Street can take four, sometimes five minutes.
"Cars zoom down the street to get to the Holland Tunnel, going 45 miles per hour," he said the other day.
"And on weekdays around rush hour -- 5, 5:30 -- it's total gridlock."


When a Mole Is Better Than a Cat
We were in agreement with the article "Bidding Goodbye to the Great American  Lawn" (Oct. 22) until we read Diana Balmori's irresponsible suggestion that people solve their mole problems by getting a cat.
Cats -- domestic and feral -- are a serious menace to birds and can unbalance an ecosystem very quickly.


Audience Will Join Singers in 'Messiah'
DON'T let the fallen leaves and leftover turkey fool you: the Christmas season has arrived and with it the usual proliferation of "Messiahs," "Nutcrackers" and other holiday favorites.
The Westchester Concert Singers invite the audience to join the chorus at their annual free sing-along of "Messiah" this afternoon at 3 in the United Methodist Church of Pleasantville.


D'arcy Mastrangelo, Adam T. Stern
D'arcy J. Mastrangelo, a daughter of Anita L. Lange of Windsor, Conn., and Daniel M. Mastrangelo of Jupiter, Fla., was married last evening to Adam T. Stern, a son of Caryl Stern of New York and Dr.
Harold Stern of Woodbridge, Conn.
Cantor Bernard Fitch performed the ceremony at the Angel Orensanz Foundation, an art gallery and former synagogue in New York.
Ms.
Mastrangelo, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance jewelry designer in Nyack, N.Y.
Her father retired as a distribution manager at Eli Lilly, the pharmaceutical company in Indianapolis.
Her mother is a manufacturers' representative in Windsor for the housewares industry.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Black Rock;A Bit of New England In a Troubled City
NINE days ago Bridgeport lost the battle to jump-start its economy when the Connecticut Senate refused to approve a gambling casino for the city.
But in the process, its need for job development was vividly exposed.
The city's resilience in the face of some 40 years of economic and social decay, signaled by municipal recovery from the brink of bankruptcy in 1991 to a $4 million surplus in fiscal '95, as well as the state's resolve to assist in  its future, continue to be reassuring to owners of the fine old homes in desirable neighborhoods that come as a surprise to those who only know the city  because of its well-documented problems.


Shared Decisions Alter Local School Process
LIKE their counterparts in corporations and factories across the country, local schools have moved away from the traditional authoritarian hierarchy to a  shared decision-making model that has radically altered the educational landscape.
As a result of the New York State Board of Regents 1991 Compact for Learning, parents, faculty, support staff, and in some cases even students join with the school administration in reaching decisions about school policy, curriculum and  direction.
This compact required school districts to develop and adopt shared decision-making councils at each building, as well as at the district level.


Inflated Image
To the Sports Editor:
In response to Dave Anderson's "Is Greed Destroying N.F.L. Fans' Devotion?" (The Times, Nov. 12): Yes, the National Football League is getting too big for its britches and has been for years.
I will never forget the 1976 N.F.L.-sponsored essay competition for schoolchildren with the theme, "The N.F.L.'s Role in Our Nation's Bicentennial." A prominent historian declared that "the N.F.L. had no role whatsoever" and the entire pompous affair was quickly and quietly canceled.


A QUESTION FOR: Bill Irwin
Q: What are some of life's big clown questions?


Chrispin C. John, Tess D'Ann Mann
Tess D'Ann Mann, a daughter of Joyce and Albert Earl Mann of Queens Village,  was married on Thanksgiving Day to Chrispin Clay John, a son of Annie John of Antigua.
The Rev.
Dr.
Harry S. Wright performed the ceremony at the Cornerstone  Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
John, 31, teaches humanities and arts at Public School 176 in Cambria Heights, Queens.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's  degree in education supervision from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is an assistant vice president of computer operations at Jennison Associates, an investment concern in New York.
Her mother retired as a librarian at Public School 118 in Hollis, Queens.


Wariness Greets Vatican Doctrinal Claim
A week after the Vatican declared Pope John Paul II's position that women cannot be ordained Roman Catholic priests to be "infallibly" taught, many Catholics in the United States are taking a wait-and-see attitude.
Some who welcomed the statement from the Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith said that they wanted to see if the bishops in the United  States would back it up with sanctions against Catholics who continue to advocate the ordination of women.


Rake, Clip, Mow, Repair, Neaten and Mulch
THE outdoor gardening season is pretty much history, but don't be too eager to put a lock on the tool shed.
There still are some important things to do and  laggards, as most of us are, may just need a little prodding to get on with it.
Some deeds can be put off until the end of next month.
But some can't.
The first thing on everyone's minds is leaves.
They are magnificent while shrouding the fall landscape.
But as soon as they start to fall on the lawn, the charm fades.


Budget Balancers Must Keep Hard Times in the Equation
To the Editor:
Both the Republican seven-year plan and the Clinton 10-year plan for balancing the budget are based on certain economic projections.
Although I am not privy to the exact economic forecasts, I very much doubt that either envisions a severe economic recession.
Should that occur, the timetables are irrelevant.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
As a relatively new consumer of PC software, I'm certainly not mad at Bill Gates -- jealous maybe, but not mad.
Gleick's critique is tiresomely familiar.
Since the accomplishments of the outstandingly successful must have been wrought underhandedly, let's hobble those bad guys: tax them, regulate them, penalize them, subsidize their competitors.
Level the playing field!
We set the example by trying to drag down the Bill Gateses and Ross Perots because they are too successful; by allowing our kids to coast through school with a fraction of the effort required in other advanced societies.
And then we wonder why some other country is beating our brains out in the very fields in which the United States made the initial breakthrough.
Go figure.


STYLE
For icons, returning from the dead can be a good career move.
Take Cindy, Linda, Naomi and Kate.
Having been rejected as too expensive by designers and dubbed kaput by journalists, they made a triumphant reappearance together in Todd Oldham's show last month, like four Eurydices back from media Hades.
In beehive hairdos that extended their divine presence that much closer to heaven,  they walked the runway with a slightly weathered grace.
Some witnesses gasped.
Others cheered like the faithful when the Pope was in  town.
Clearly, the supermodels still inspire a religious kind of awe.
But if they want to continue to be worshiped, they should take a cue from some real religious figures and start making themselves useful on a more regular basis.


A Star Is Born
In 1925, radio was all the rage across America.
And Uncle Jimmy Thompson, a 78-year-old fiddler from Martha, Tenn., ached to break into the fledgling medium.
"I want to throw my music all over the American," he said.
In November that year, Uncle Jimmy got the chance, and country-music history  was made.
At 8 P.M. on Saturday, Nov. 28, in the fifth-floor WSM studio of the National Life and Accident Insurance Company, the white-bearded musician with the oak-tree hands who said he could "fiddle the taters off the vine" inaugurated the WSM Barn Dance by sawing out "Tennessee Wagoner" on his favorite fiddle, Old Betsy.


Stringer Starts With an Upset
Making C. Vivian Stringer one of the highest-paid coaches in women's basketball paid instant dividends for Rutgers.
A year ago, Penn State beat Rutgers, 100-58, tying the largest margin of defeat in school history.
But Stringer, who was hired this past summer at a reported salary of $150,000 a year, said she wasn't about to let that happen and went out and recruited four high school all-Americans.


Savory to Sweet, Charlottes for Dessert or to Dress Up a Stew
KING GEORGE III of England experienced the humiliation of losing the American colonies.
His wife, Queen Charlotte, had a better time of it, giving her name to a dessert, the charlotte, as in apple charlotte or charlotte Russe.
A charlotte consists of a mold lined with buttered bread, filled with a fruit mixture and baked.
A lining of sponge cake or lady fingers can take a chilled mousse filling.
A savory charlotte, also made with a bread lining, is an excellent way to dress up ratatouille, especially if picked up from a catering shop.


Faith E. McEntee, Sean P. Whelan
Faith E. McEntee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. McEntee of Manhasset,  L.I., was married yesterday to Sean P. Whelan, a son of Charles J. Whelan of South Orange, N.J., and the late Muriel Whelan.
The Rev.
Henry Schreitmueller officiated at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Whelan, 28, is a social worker at Catholic Charities Counseling Service  in the Bronx.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Fleet Securities Inc., a municipal bond company in New York.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
James Gleick's "Making Microsoft Safe for Capitalism" (Nov. 5) makes it sound as if Microsoft were doing something wrong by being a strong competitor and by creating innovative software that customers decide to buy.
The PC software business is incredibly competitive.
Prices decline even as products improve dramatically.
The Internet is creating even more opportunities  for competition.
Microsoft must continue to innovate or we will be history.
This is not paranoia; it is simple fact.


Olajuwon and Rockets Rejected and Ejected
With chaos surrounding him, Patrick Ewing took a seat at the press table near midcourt and began laughing uncontrollably.
He slapped the hand of a statistician and looked for all the world like someone who had the answers the day before a midterm exam.
His rival, Hakeem Olajuwon, had just been ejected with 4 minutes 13 seconds left in yesterday's game at Madison Square Garden.
Olajuwon's coach, Rudy Tomjanovich, would follow moments later.
In an often homely affair that featured 3 Rocket ejections, 61 personal fouls, 2 flagrant fouls and a near fistfight, the Knicks ended Houston's seven-game winning streak with a 103-88 victory.


After Gains, Sri Lanka Renews Offer To Separatists
With its troops close to capturing the rebel city of Jaffna after a six-week-old offensive that has seen the bloodiest fighting in 12 years of civil war, the Sri Lankan Government has renewed its offer of a political settlement with the Tamil Tiger separatists.
In an interview published in a Sri Lankan magazine, President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga said the Government was ready for negotiations, but only if the rebels agreed to surrender at least some of their weapons to show that they intended to negotiate seriously.


Margot Murtaugh, Stephen Hopkins
Margot Thorington Murtaugh, a financial executive, was married yesterday to Stephen Finkle Hopkins, a history teacher.
David Cook, a friend of the bridegroom who is a deputy marriage commissioner of Alameda County, Calif., performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Berkeley.
Ms.
Murtaugh, 43, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president of Snyder Capital Management Inc., investment managers in San Francisco.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in library studies from the University of Hawaii.


OUT OF FOCUS
Frankel's article was like a high-powered lens in focus.
Yes, we learn much about trial procedure by having cameras in the courtroom.
I know I do.
But I want even more.
Yes, I want the cameraperson to sit me down in the courtroom, with my beer in one hand and remote control in the other.
I want to know everything about why Susan Smith let her car and two children sink to the bottom of a lake.
I want to be there, damn it.


The U.S. for Japanese
Since last month, passengers on domestic and United States-bound flights of Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways have been getting a videotape introduction to the United States.
Very little on the seven-minute Japanese-language tape would come as news to Americans (except the message that apparently all waiters  and passers-by in the United States are friendly and helpful).
But for first-time Japanese visitors, the tape includes basic advice on driving, banks,  tipping and safety (including the use of 911).


INSIDE
Not Billy Graham's Style


Dust Off the Ramparts
OPPOSING THE SYSTEM By Charles A. Reich. 219 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $23.
WHEN a much celebrated and widely discussed author like Charles A. Reich drops out of public view for nearly 25 years and then re-emerges with a new book, it is always a matter of some curiosity to see how the accumulated experiences of the intervening years have changed his views.
As part of the generation that arrived at adulthood when "The Greening of America" was published, I, for one, look back on the things that I thought and did then with  more embarrassment than nostalgia.
This is not simply because I'm more mature now, but because of changes in the society as a whole.
Then, the chief problem seemed to be stifling conformity; now, a totally asocial individualism has become the norm.


Liberties;The Gaslight Strategy
Newt Gingrich takes movies very seriously.
As a boy, he modeled his behavior on John Wayne.
As Speaker, he said that "Boys Town" was a fine source of welfare policy and that the baseball strike could be solved by making the players and owners watch "Field of Dreams."


Chain-Reaction Pileups in California Are Linked to Fog


Building a Platform for Stores Over a Railroad Line
HISTORIANS have long memories.
Vincent Seyfried, who wrote a seven-volume history of the Long Island Rail Road, had no trouble a few days ago remembering  that there has been no passenger service on the Bay Ridge railroad spur in Brooklyn since 1924.
He also knew that Austin Corbin built the spur in 1867, which was 13 years before he bought the Long Island itself out of bankruptcy.
The spur served as a  link between the old 65th Street terminal, where ferries from Manhattan docked,  and the main line of Corbin's New York-Manhattan Beach line, which ran trains from Greenpoint to the oceanfront community where he had two resort hotels.
These days one lone freight train makes a daily round-trip run on the tracks of  the Bay Ridge spur.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ALL ABOUT CARDS


Miriam Hayon, Richard Frank
Miriam Hayon, a daughter of Anny and Alex Hayon of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Dr.
Richard Carlysle Frank, a son of Nina S. Frank of Port Washington,  L.I., and the late Benjamin Frank.
Rabbi Amos Miller is to perform the ceremony  at the Jericho (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 32, is a manager at the New York Gas Group, a consortium of natural gas utilities in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in computer science from Polytechnic University.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Preseason N.I.T.;Georgetown Outlines a Significant Lesson in Defeat
This was minutes after the championship game of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament in Madison Square Garden.
Georgetown had overcome a 17-point deficit and seemed ready to send Arizona wandering back to the desert.
Instead, Arizona kept its head, refused to fold and pulled away to a convincing  91-81 victory over the favored Hoyas.
John Thompson, the Georgetown coach, was explaining how he felt.


Joanne Levine, Noah D. Sabin
Joanne Kara Levine, a daughter of Adina and Michael Levine of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Noah Daniel Sabin, a son of Esther and Raymond Sabin of East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold S. Turetsky performed the ceremony at the Temple Israel Center of White Plains.
The couple are medical students, she at New York Medical College and he at the State University at Buffalo.


Visitors Venturing Back To San Cristobal
BEFORE New Year's Day 1994, this cobbled city, cradled in a valley surrounded by a pine-rimmed sierra, was a regular stop on the itineraries of certain hardy  travelers.
In Mexico's southernmost state of Chiapas, San Cristobal is the centerpoint of a constellation of Indian villages that display their resilient Maya traditions in the scarlet and indigo dress of the women, the men's ribboned sombreros and in raucous religious fiestas.
Simple Spanish colonial inns provided unhurried lodging for backpackers, academics and other rugged tourists  with modest budgets.


Catholics Defying An Infallible Church
POPE John Paul II didn't need a legalization of divorce by the voters of Ireland this weekend to find out that a large number of Catholics simply ignore  a lot of what he has to say: Italy, a country where 84 percent of the population professes to be Catholic, has the lowest birth rate in Europe, a fact that suggests popular disdain for the church's unbending prohibition against artificial birth control.


Savory to Sweet, Charlottes for Dessert or to Dress Up a Stew
KING GEORGE III of England experienced the humiliation of losing the American colonies.
His wife, Queen Charlotte, had a better time of it, giving her name to a dessert, the charlotte, as in apple charlotte or charlotte Russe.
A charlotte consists of a mold lined with buttered bread, filled with a fruit mixture and baked.
A lining of sponge cake or lady fingers can take a chilled mousse filling.
A savory charlotte, also made with a bread lining, is an excellent way to dress up ratatouille, especially if picked up from a catering shop.


DR. SMITH GOES TO SEXUAL-REHAB SCHOOL
I feel a great deal of sympathy for both the doctor and patients involved.
Dr.
Smith erred by not discussing with the women what he was doing and why he was doing it.
However, the patients were equally at fault for not asking questions.
Part of the problem, no doubt, is that in this day of get-'em-in-and-out-as-fast-as-possible managed care and fancy diagnostic technology, some people may expect machines to do much of what a good "old-fashioned" doctor does in a thorough examination.


Laying Claim to a Tribe's History
THE NIGHT before the bus trip to Washington, Ronald Red Bone Van Dunk went to the sweat lodge and prayed to his Indian ancestors for the strength to convince the Government that his ancestors were Indians.
That may sound like a bit of a paradox, but then, paradox is something Mr.
Van Dunk, chief of the Ramapough Mountain Indians, confronts every day.


It Has Been Done Before
To the Editor:


F.Y.I.
An Aging 'Ballroom'


Miami Proves That It's Down But Hardly Out
Through all the years that the University of Miami football team was shucking and jiving and taunting and flaunting its way to dominance, there was one constant: at home in the Orange Bowl at night, the Hurricanes were all but invincible.
Well, they still are.
The bad boys of college football aren't as bad, but they're back.
After beating Syracuse by 35-24 tonight in front of a smallish crowd of 47,544, Miami probably will get another home game this season in front  of a much larger audience -- against Notre Dame in the Orange Bowl Classic on Jan. 1.


No Reverence, No Reticence In Finishing Mozart's Requiem
MUSIC, LIKE EVERY other art, has its share of incomplete masterpieces, and some are better left undisturbed.
But Mozart's Requiem, the subject of two fine  new recordings, was left in a particularly tantalizing state of incompleteness.
By now, the mysterious circumstances of its creation have been mostly uncovered.
In the midsummer of 1791, Mozart received a letter from an anonymous  patron offering a sizable commission for a Requiem Mass.
Soon afterward, a tall, grim man dressed in gray appeared with an advance; he was a messenger from the patron, Count Franz von Walsegg, a musical dilettante who presented concerts at  his estate and sometimes purchased compositions to pass off as his own.


Why the Yanks Are Going. Yet Again.
IT was widely assumed, in the aftermath of the cold war, that America's commitment to European security would diminish.
What the United States had done  for Western Europe after World War II with the Marshall Plan and the creation of NATO, the European Union would do for its neighbors in Eastern Europe in the aftermath of Communism.
The notion had a certain intellectual allure, as well as obvious financial benefits for America.
But it was finally laid to rest in Dayton, Ohio, last week by the Pax Americana that put a stop to the slaughter in Bosnia.
The peace, hammered out over 21 days of sometimes burlesque negotiation, is inevitably uncertain because it is an attempt to build a Bosnian state of no obvious cohesion on a terrain still raw with the wounds of war.
The shouting and maneuvering in Ohio could easily degenerate into shooting and mayhem in Bosnia.


A Greener White House
Environmentalists seem to have gained an outspoken friend in the White House  and his name, surprisingly, is Bill Clinton.
During the budget debates with the  Republicans, the President has repeatedly cited the protection of environmental  programs among his reasons for vetoing budget bills.
With these words, he has added muscle to earlier pledges to reject bills that would further reduce funding for the Environmental Protection Agency and cripple its authority to carry out the Clean Water and Clean Air Acts.
He has also promise to veto measures that would increase destructive logging in Alaska's Tongass National Forest and open up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling.


Well-to-Do in Cuba to Pay an Income Tax
Well-to-do Cubans will have to pay a personal income tax on hard currency earnings starting next year, the Government said today.
Cubans have not paid taxes since the early years of the country's 1959 Communist revolution.
The move appears aimed in part at countering increasing income disparities.


American Dreamland, a Neon Mirage
SODOM AND GOMORRAH WITH NEON: FOR decades Las Vegas has thrived on that image.
Promising instant wealth and endless sex, the city offered a short cut to the American dream in its glitziest, least noble form.
Las Vegas was also a perfect match for the movies.
The place where the Rat Pack roamed, it was the only city to rival Hollywood as a dream factory, built from the ground up on manufactured images.
But recently much of Las Vegas has become tame and homogenized enough for a PG-rated family.
Even the staid Smithsonian magazine last month caught up with the fact that Las Vegas now resembles a theme park, with a life-size pirate ship, a sphinx and the MGM lion standing guard.


In New Mexico, an Order on Elusive Owl Leaves Residents Angry, andCold
Salomon Martinez has long considered owls to bring the worst kind of luck.
An unexpected visit by one of these wide-eyed creatures once jinxed a hunting trip  in the surrounding forests.
And he believes that the hoot of an owl recently ruined his chances in the Indian-run gambling casino down the road from his home near Truchas in the Sangre de Cristo mountains.
But the unluckiest owl of all, he says, is a variety that neither he nor anyone he knows has ever seen in these parts -- the Mexican spotted owl.
Efforts to protect the elusive bird have led to restrictions on wood-gathering throughout the Carson National Forest, which covers much of northern New Mexico.
The areas declared off-limits include parts of the old land grants given to local people by the King of Spain.
Barred from forests that have provided a living for their ancestors for more than two centuries, Mr.
Martinez and many of his neighbors say they are wondering how they will get through winter nights in  the villages between Santa Fe and Taos, where altitudes exceed 8,000 feet.


Clinton Seeks Public Support On Bosnia Plan
Seeking to build support for sending American troops to the Balkans, President Clinton said today that "our values, our interests and our leadership  are at stake" in the effort to safeguard the Bosnian peace agreement reached this week.
Devoting most of his weekly radio speech to Bosnia, Mr.
Clinton foreshadowed  the argument he is expected to make Monday night in a televised address from the Oval Office.
He appealed repeatedly to national pride in America's values and leadership, and he said that American troops would have the authority to meet any threat to their safety "with immediate and decisive force."


Edna Deane, Dancer And Inspiration, 90
Edna Deane, the world champion ballroom dancer famous for being the girl "who's danced with the Prince of Wales," died on Wednesday at her home in Rottingdean, on the English Channel, The Times of London reported today.
She was 90.
Miss Deane was born Edna Morton Sewell in the Orange Free State, now part of  South Africa, in 1905 to British parents.
In 1907, her family returned to England, where she trained in ballet and ballroom dancing.


DIARY
PLEASANT SURPRISE


Sweet Charlottes for Dessert
KING GEORGE III of England experienced the humiliation of losing the American colonies.
His wife, Queen Charlotte, had a better time of it, giving her name to a dessert, the charlotte, as in apple charlotte or charlotte russe.
A charlotte consists of a mold lined with buttered bread, filled with a fruit mixture and baked.
A lining of sponge cake or ladyfingers can take a chilled mousse filling.
A savory charlotte, also made with a bread lining, is an excellent way to dress up ratatouille, especially if picked up from a catering shop.


Unions Try To Deter The Flight Of Jobs
Seeking to slow the exodus of factory jobs, top union officials in the Northeast are urging their states to join forces to punish corporations that move operations to low-wage states and countries.
The A.F.L.-C.I.O. presidents of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and eight other states are pushing for laws that would forbid states to sign contracts with such companies and prohibit public-employee pension funds from investing in them.


Unanswered Questions About Rail Connection
To the Editor:
The article "The Connection That Divides" (Oct. 29) says that 17 homes, 28 families and 4 businesses would be displaced by New Jersey Transit's Montclair Connection plan to link the Boonton and Montclair commuter rail lines.
The actual figures are 28 homes and 50 families, and the number may increase.


New Outpost Blends Market and Food Center
TUSCANO'S, a cosmopolitan new spot in Huntington, has an international kitchen crew of 12 led by a fast-rising French chef.
The chef, Eric Eckstien, 30, cooked at a restaurant in Paris before going to Manhattan to work at the Hotel Carlyle, the Sea Grill, Le Bernardin and La Boite en Bois, as well as the  Post House in Southampton.
But Tuscano's, at 1206 Jericho Turnpike (673-0363), which is scheduled to open on Friday, is not a restaurant.
It is the newest of a diverse, even exotic, wave of sophisticated markets on Long Island.


Will They Reform Medicare Out of Existence?
To the Editor:
The debate over a few dollars more or less in the Medicare Part B premium is  beside the main point.
The impact on the lower-income elderly can be controlled  by adjusting for income and making sure Medicaid continues to pay premiums for the poor.
Anyone who cares about Medicare as a social insurance program should worry about the increasing proportion of Part B costs paid through general revenue.


Under the Influence
PURSUED BY FURIES A Life of Malcolm Lowry.
By Gordon Bowker.
Illustrated. 672 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $29.95.


Rangers Have No Goals, And One Unhappy Coach
This was a game of the distorted sort.
It saw Jeff Beukeboom, the big Ranger  defenseman, skating as a forward on the power play, while the offensive star Aleksei Kovalev rode the bench.
Also skating with the manpower advantage was Niklas Sundstrom, the Ranger rookie usually used as a penalty killing specialist.
Other strange moments included Mark Messier, the Ranger captain, twice attacking Vladimir Konstantinov of Detroit and earning 16 minutes in penalties.


Israel Is Reported to Jail 11 West Bank Militants
Israel has arrested 11 members of the militant group, Islamic Holy War, in the West Bank, Palestinian officials said today.
They said the arrests took place on Friday night in villages that remain under Israeli security control near Jenin, which is under Palestinian self-government.


Travel Advisory;Bankruptcy Will Slow Domenico Refunds
Domenico Tours of Bayonne, N.J., which ceased operation last month, is in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Newark, under Chapter 11 of the Federal law.
According to a company lawyer, Karen Lee Turner, the bankruptcy proceedings will slow the process of providing refunds to the "couple hundred" travelers who paid for tours they never got.
Ms.
Turner said earlier that the company had set  aside $300,000 to cover consumer refunds and that she had hoped to get them out  by Christmas.
However, four bus companies that were creditors of Domenico's acted to force the company into involuntary Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings early this month; Domenico converted this to a voluntary proceeding under Chapter 11.


Shakespeare As Sitcom
The theater review of "As You Like It" ("At the Long Wharf, Shakespeare No. 4," Nov. 12) calls the production "pointlessly perverse," a designation richly deserved.
The reviewer describes various elements of the exercise in devastating detail, e.g., "consistent shallowness," "artificial merriment and mannerisms," "self-conscious mismash of visual and performing affectations," "deteriorates into caricature," "stereotypical silly schoolgirls," "gee-whiz kids' dating game."


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Florida Looks Ahead as Ohio State Looks Away;Michigan Breaks Buckeye Hearts
This was a throwback game if there ever was one.
Ohio State and Michigan battling, scratching, clawing, bullying and scrapping for the 92d time.
They have been doing this since 1897, you know.
Back then, way back then, the running game was the thing.
Over the years, that is the way this game has evolved.
Forget the fancy forward pass.
You run in this game, in this rivalry second to none in college football, and you win.
And, boy, did Michigan run the football in this game.
And in the process, it ran Ohio State right out of its bid for a perfect season, the Big Ten championship and the Rose Bowl.


DR. SMITH GOES TO SEXUAL-REHAB SCHOOL
Laurie Abraham's sensitive article "Dr. Smith Goes to Sexual-Rehab School" (Nov. 5) scarcely mentioned one underlying source of the doctor's problem: lawyers.
Their vast numbers exert an insidious cultural influence upon us and tend to sow seeds of defensiveness, hypervigilance and distrust into the field of medicine and into society's other useful endeavors.
GERALD W. GRUMENT, M.D. Rochester


All Is Not Well in This (Animated) Playroom
Toy Story Featuring the voices of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Don Rickles, Annie Potts, John Morris, Erik Von Detten, Laurie Metcalf Directed by John Lasseter G 77 minutes


Peres Charts His Course
Moving quickly to fill the gap left by the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, Prime Minister Shimon Peres presented a new Government to the Israeli Parliament last week.
The basic coalition and most ministers were left in place, and Mr.
Peres stressed that he was continuing the legacy of his slain predecessor.
In fact, several shifts gave the Cabinet a distinct new stamp.
Mr.
Peres gave key posts to two rising Labor Party stars -- Ehud Barak as Foreign Minister and  Chaim Ramon as Interior Minister.


Rare Indeed: A Restaurant Aging Well
MANY restaurants open with a surge and end limply.
It is more unusual for a restaurant to improve as it ages.
Il Falco Ristorante in downtown Stamford, now  in its ninth year, has clearly entered its surge, considerably fine tuned from its early years.
It had a Good rating to begin with, but now it merits a Very Good indeed.
The recitation of specials has been replaced at dinner by a printed list.
Service, always polished, seems even more attentive to diners' needs, without hovering or being obtrusive -- a fine line.
The decor is much the same, with lace cafe curtains at the front windows and  mirrored walls, though the posters in the nonsmoking section have been replaced  by floral prints.
And weren't the orchid walls once a pale pink?
Mostly, though, it is the menu and food that have developed into something very special.


Giants Forced to Ponder the Shape of Things to Come
When you talk with players and coaches on the Giants, there seems to be an overwhelming sense of dread.
It is no longer because of a 3-8 season.
The losses still hurt but the losses do not keep the Giants awake at night.
It is the future that scares the heck out of people.
"Morale is obviously down," kicker Brad Daluiso said.
"A win would cheer things up a little bit."


Billie's Variations
To the Editor:
In the middle of an otherwise excellent review of Stuart Nicholson's biography of Billie Holiday (Oct. 29), Ned Rorem betrays a surprising ignorance  of the difference between jazz and classical performances and, in the process, unfairly belittles jazz performances.
He ridicules Mr.
Nicholson's claim that Holiday's "grasp and understanding of form and structure were such that they also brought great symmetry to her vocal variations, and the best are minor miracles of organizing harmonic and rhythmic ideas." Mr.
Rorem states: "Such claims are irrelevant -- these are the attributes of composers, not of interpreters. A 'grasp . . . of form' has nothing to do with performing, only with making."


Want to Take a Loss, but Keep the Stock? It's the Week to Sell
EVEN in this year's surging market, many investors hold a handful of stocks that have been losers lately but still seem to have bright prospects.
Trucking companies, specialty retailers and steel companies are among the laggards this year that some investors may nevertheless believe in.
Selling stocks with paper losses can produce a tax benefit for 1995, but if you want to take the loss and keep these stocks in your portfolio, you need to act quickly.


Tried for Their Crimes
To the Editor:
Claudia Koonz wrote in her informative review of "Albert Speer: His Battle With Truth" (Oct. 8) that for two decades the author, Gitta Sereny, "covered the major war crimes trials in West Germany, and in 1971 she conducted intensive interviews with Hans Stangl (the only extermination camp commandant to be tried  for his crimes)." This statement is, no doubt inadvertently, misleading.


Koufax Redux?
To the Sports Editor:
Sandy Koufax won Cy Young awards in the 1963, 1965 and 1966 seasons.
During that period, only one Cy Young award each year was awarded; it was not until 1967 that it was awarded in both leagues.


RUSSIAN SECRETS
A Dostoyevsky with a camera, Vladimir Syomin provides an unforgettable vision of the Russian soul: the ordinary people who toil, suffer and rejoice far from the limelight of Moscow politics.
For years, Syomin remained virtually unknown in the West.
Then, six months ago, at a big international photojournalism conference in Moscow, European and American photographers and editors saw the bulk of his work for the first time.
Last month, a jury of his Western peers awarded him photojournalism's most prestigious prize, the $20,000 W. Eugene Smith Grant in Humanistic Photography.
Syomin, 57, grew up in Tula, 100 miles south of Moscow; it was there that he  was introduced to photography by his older brother, an engineer.
After studying  Russian literature at a provincial university, Syomin joined the Union of Soviet Journalists and then the Novosti Press Agency, photographing workers in the remotest provinces of the Soviet Union.
He credits Henri Cartier-Bresson with opening his eyes to photography's artistic potential.
You can see Cartier-Bresson's influence in Syomin's 1979 picture of Caucasian tightrope walkers, with its subtle compositional rhyme between the novice's tilted balance pole and the inclined body of the man beneath him.


Will They Reform Medicare Out of Existence?;An Anti-Privacy Bill
To the Editor:
Re "A Good Start Toward Medical Privacy" (editorial, Nov. 20):


Fires, Claustrophobia And Heat Are a Test
THE training grounds are pure Hollywood, with their burned-out buildings, overturned school buses and instant infernos.
But the figures in helmets at the Westchester County Fire Training Academy here recently were students, not actors, and their curriculum offered a mastery of the unexpected.


Alison Matthews and Stephen Muller
STEPHEN MULLER, 28, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, is the sort  of person who likes to talk for hours about philosophy, literature, law and the  human condition.
But his favorite subject is dogs, especially his own, a mutt named Memphis who has a big black spot on her tongue, a curly tail and a generally unfriendly demeanor.
She is not the sort of dog you would see in a J.  Crew catalogue; she's more the kind of wiry, wary animal that might inhabit a George Booth cartoon in The New Yorker.
Still, Mr.
Muller loves her -- a lot.
He turns down dinner invitations if they don't include Memphis, he chose his apartment on the Upper West Side because Memphis liked the neighborhood, and he tells Memphis everything.


An Evaluation of Paintings That Are Meant to Be Lived With
THE Katonah Museum of Art here presents an exhibition about art as something  to be lived with and so does the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield.
But if the inspiration is the same, the results are astonishingly different.
For one thing, the Aldrich's "Living With Contemporary Art" is an experiment, one that called for artists to design works for 10 Ridgefield residents willing  to play patron and, for awhile, to live with the outcome, recording their reactions.
For another, its purpose is to demystify contemporary art, assuming that this can be done without bringing down the entire structure.
Word-of-mouth  indicates, however, that the project is not only succeeding but also that it is  shedding light on the artist-patron relationship from an anthropological point of view.


Job Discrimination in Europe: Affirmative Laissez Faire
As a Nigerian-born chef working in Britain, Richard Olufeko has encountered plenty of workplace discrimination, including being demoted and then dismissed two years ago from a London restaurant in what a Government equal-opportunity board later ruled was an act of blatant racism.
But when it comes to redressing discrimination, Mr.
Olufeko is wary of American-style affirmative action plans, where jobs can be seen to go to people  because of their race or sex.
Although he has some reservations, he broadly supports Britain's system, which outlaws employment discrimination generally, but bars the use of quotas or any preference programs to help end bias in hiring and promotion.


Torch Song
Alfred Hitchcock novices should dig the master's brush strokes in episodes linking SABOTEUR (1942), about an innocent fugitive (Robert Cummings with Priscilla Lane) on a cross-country run.
A lovely bit involves a blind pianist.
A circus-wagon group adds color and bite; so do two genteel Nazis, a desert rancher and a Fifth Avenue society hostess.
The chase could have ended with its  shoot-up on the stage of Radio City Music Hall.
Instead, it vaults to a breathtaking, head-on fight - one of the screen's great chillers - in the Statue of Liberty torch.
Wow! - WEDNESDAY at 11:30 P.M. and WED./EARLY THUR. at 5 A.M.  on AMC.
Howard Thompson


Having a Famous Relative in the Fish Business Can Hurt
Starting a business is always risky.
It can help to have an older relative in the same field, especially if he has a recognizable name and has attained a certain stature.
Ross Gangi Jr. and his cousin by marriage, Patricia, have a relative in the business, but they say it has not helped them a bit.
Mr.
Gangi and Ms.
Gangi contend that, although neither of them has a criminal record or has even had a brush with the law, the city ruined their nascent wholesale seafood businesses because law-enforcement officials have identified one of their relatives -- Mr.
Gangi's father, Ross Gangi Sr. -- as the Mafia boss of the Fulton Fish Market.
On Oct. 30, Ross Gangi Jr. and Mrs.
Gangi said, city officials and a squad of 10 police officers evicted them from their market stalls without warning.


The Invisible Nations, In Plain Sight
INDIAN Season is over.
"From Columbus Day through Thanksgiving, kids make little headdresses and talk about us in the past tense," said Tonya Gonnella Frichner, the president of the American Indian Law Alliance.
"Then we're invisible again. Did you know there are between 30,000 and 40,000 Indians in the boroughs, representing 67 different native nations? That we suffer from AIDS, homelessness, drugs, vicious landlords, breached contracts, just like you do? And now, block grants, which are really going to hurt us."


A Frustrating Final Chapter in a 19th-Century Graveyard's History
In November 1993, archeologists exhumed the remains of 21 bodies from the Trinity Church Cemetery to pave the way for the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
The plan was to study the remains, dating to the early 1800's, from what was believed to be one of the state's first integrated burial grounds.
Two years later, the cemetery is gone, construction of the arts center is well under way, and the remains and their accompanying cultural artifacts -- jewelry, shoes, coffin chunks -- are still stored in gray boxes and a large freezer in a small storage basement near Military Park, waiting to be analyzed.


Messy Waters
BLACK SEA By Neal Ascherson. 306 pp. New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $23.
THE Black Sea is creepy, enigmatic.
Situated where the Middle East crosshatches with the Balkans, the Caucasus and the southern wastes of Russia, it has always had an outpost quality, its deceptively calm shores the whispery borderlands of colliding martial cultures.
"Like the terminal moraine of a glacier, the Black Sea shore is a place where the detritus of human migrations and invasions has been deposited for more than 4,000 years," Neal Ascherson, a British journalist, writes in his new book, "Black Sea." Both the Serbs and the  Croats, as well as the Black Death, had their origins here.
It was near the Black Sea that the archetypal culture clash occurred, between "civilized" European Greece and "barbarian" Asian Persia -- the classical era's analogue to  the cold war.
Czarist pogroms had a Black Sea backdrop.
So did World War II chaos.
The Nazis had three different policies for Crimea.
While some German units raised Tatar militias to fight pro-Soviet guerrillas left behind by the retreating Red Army, others went farther, trying to restore the Crimean Tatars as a pro-German Kulturvolk.
All this as SS units murdered tens of thousands of Tatars.


A Dip in Crime, A Cut in Police. A Rise in Crime?
For months, Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton have proclaimed that the city's police force is bigger and more effective than ever,  having cut levels of most major crimes to their lowest in years.
But on the Upper East Side the police force has shrunk, to the point that beat patrols have been cut in half, and one civic group in the East 60's is alarmed because, it says, crime is rising within its borders.


Co-op's Basement Too Exclusive for Senior Center?
For 16 years, Chinatown's largest senior center, Project Open Door, has been  shoehorned into a dingy, overheated basement at 115 Chrystie Street.
Space is so tight that at lunch time, the elderly are asked to finish their meals and leave  in 15 minutes so another shift of diners can be served.
And every day, dozens of hungry people are turned away because there is nowhere for them to sit, says the center's director, Po-Ling Ng, whose office is an old broom closet.
"We are choking down here," said Ms.
Ng, 53.
"This place is not fit for even animals."
Now, after searching for years for larger quarters, Project Open Door has found space five blocks west in a building that is owned by the city and that happens to house some of its wealthiest -- and most high-profile -- residents, among them the models Christy Turlington, Cindy Crawford and Linda Evangelista and the tennis star Steffi Graf.
The building is the former Police Headquarters, a domed neo-Baroque confection at 240 Centre Street, which fell into the city's  hands last year after its developers defaulted on real-estate taxes.


Present at the Cremation
AUTOPSY ON AN EMPIRE The American Ambassador's Account of the Collapse of the Soviet Union.
By Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Illustrated. 836 pp.
New York: Random House. $35.


Artistry and Invention Seamlessly Joined
IN THE WORLD OF WEAVERS, Lenore Tawney is almost legendary.
During the 1950's and 60's, she invented techniques that transformed the craft and made weavings that looked like airy sculptures.
Then four years ago, at the age of 84, Mrs.
Tawney developed serious vision problems.
She also made a discovery: a cache of  her best early work, which had been missing for 15 years, had turned up in a friend's attic in New Jersey.
That work, appropriately called the Attic Collection, is one reason for the renewed interest in her work.
In fact, she is busier now than ever with her own  exhibitions.
Two solo shows opened this year in Pittsburgh and in Chicago.
Five  others, from Honolulu to Amsterdam, are planned for the next 18 months.


Stumbling Toward Hollywood
ONE MAN TANGO By Anthony Quinn with Daniel Paisner.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.
ANTHONY QUINN has been a part of the world's cultural landscape for some 40  years.
In "One Man Tango," he has set down his memories and his view of the world, revising "Original Sin," his memoir of 1972.


CREATURE COMFORT
Meg Wolitzer takes an interesting look into why a child's need for oral gratification elicits such negativity.
It is worth noting that other popular comfort tools of childhood, like teddy bears and blankets, do not provoke people nearly as much.
We want children off the bottle, off the pacifier, off the thumb, all by age 2.
Then we sit around mourning the loss of their babyhood.


'Noise' Taps a Historic Route to Joy
EVERY ART FORM MADE OR mass produced in America is a hybrid.
Jazz, the movies, blues, musical theater and gospel songs; vernacular dance, from square dancing to break dancing; even modern dance, with its high-art manners and mongrel vocabulary.
They all serve hybrid functions, for they have been and can  be folk art, popular art or high art.
They are rich forms that an artist can spend a lifetime perfecting, but they can serve as passing styles too, to be lightly sampled or briefly savored.
Tap is a quintessential multipurpose form.
It is dance, music and theater, suitable for clubs, studios, street corners, chorus lines and concert halls.
It  is aural, visual and dramatic: it can tell a story about people, places and emotions, or about rhythm, movement and a body talking to no one but itself.


STILL GOING
JEAN-PAUL GUERLAIN, THE "NOSE" WHO creates the fragrances for the venerable House of Guerlain, is talking shop over oysters at Le Bernardin on 51st Street.
As befits someone who labors in a family business that goes back to 1828, Guerlain is an old-fashioned kind of guy.
He says a woman should not change her  scent too often; her lover should recognize her in the dark.
Someone tells the story of a jilted woman who returned to her boyfriend's apartment, stripped his bed, sprinkled an entire bottle of perfume over the mattress and carefully tucked the sheets back in.
Guerlain likes this story.
He has created 12 fragrances for Guerlain, but when someone asks him to name the family's best seller in America, he answers without hesitation: Shalimar, the one his grandfather Jacques introduced in 1925.
Shalimar, Joy, Arpege and Chanel No. 5 seem to have been around forever.
We call them timeless, but in truth they are embodiments of a particular time and place: Paris in the 20's, a place where artists gathered and grew bold, where Joyce saw Ulysses published, Josephine Baker danced in La Revue Negre, Picasso got rich and Gertrude Stein entertained Hemingway in her salon.
Paris in the 20's also nurtured a golden age of perfumery.


Cleaning the Gowanus: Work Begins
The infamously malodorous Gowanus Canal, which produces a stench that is the  stuff of legend and nausea, is back on track for a slightly delayed cleaning.
Work began this month on a $6.7 million project to rebuild the canal's flushing tunnel, which was built in 1911 to pump in clean water from the Buttermilk Channel.
It has been out of service for more than 30 years.


Richard H. Klinger, Nicole A. Schaffer
Nicole A. Schaffer, the daughter of Ruth Schaffer Bramson of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Dr.
David Schaffer of Miquon, Pa., was married last evening to Richard  H. Klinger, the son of Geri and Allen Klinger of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Wylen  performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Ms.
Schaffer, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical health psychology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in  counseling psychology and education from Columbia University.
Her father is the  chairman of pediatric ophthalmology at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and a professor of ophthalmology at Penn.
Her mother is the vice president of NCS Communications, telecommunications consultants in Bala-Cynwyd.


A Musical Tour Along the Mississippi
Along the Mississippi River, from St.
Louis to New Orleans, is the source of  much of America's indigenous music -- the blues, jazz, ragtime and rock and roll.
America's Music Corridor, a new self-guided drive started by the St.
Louis Convention and Visitors Commission in cooperation with the New Orleans Convention and Visitors Bureau, focuses on the contributions to the nation's musical heritage from these cities and places between.
The 700-mile trip begins at the Scott Joplin House in St.
Louis, a National Historic Landmark dedicated to the history of ragtime.
Next is Memphis, where many renowned performers, including Elvis Presley, Roy Orbison and Carl Perkins, first recorded at the Sun Studio.
And finally, New Orleans, home to a permanent  exhibit at the United States Mint that explores the history and nature of jazz.


Bedford's Struggle With the Devil
THE way Mary Ann Di Bari and Ceil Di Nozzi see it, the Devil arrived in Bedford, liked what he saw and settled in.
Now, there are signs of him everywhere, the women say, particularly in the school curriculum, where he reveals himself in science experiments that worship death, award-winning books that promote the occult and history lessons that glorify witchcraft and Satanism.
Dr.
Bruce Dennis, Superintendent of Bedford's schools, sees things differently.
He refers to the women as "a coalition of two" who claim to speak for most parents but who in reality are attempting to dictate their own narrow point of view by fomenting hysteria and advocating censorship.
Dr.
Dennis said he believed that the women are part of a national movement that is pursuing a broad agenda of curriculum control in local schools.


Grand Plans
The $113 million renovation of Grand Central Terminal is about to begin.
A return to symmetry, if not to Turkish steam baths.
Article, page 41.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 26, 1995
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


All Is Not Well in This (Animated) Playroom
Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls Jim Carrey, Ian McNeice Directed by Steve Oedekerk PG-13 105 minutes


Shelters Nearly Full Well Before Winter
Winter is weeks away, but New York City's 38 homeless shelters are already near capacity, raising concerns that they will be overwhelmed in the colder months to come.
The shelters hold 6,780 homeless people, commanding 95.2 percent of the total beds available.
Demand is up by an estimated 600 people compared with the same time last year, officials said.


Finding the Value Behind the Clutter
What's even better than giving?
Giving and getting a tax deduction.
Most donations to charities come at the end of the year, partly because of the holiday spirit and partly because of the opportunity to snare one last tax break for 1995.
Cash is not all that charities will take.
Anyone who wants to get rid of household clutter, like that twice-used exercise cycle from Christmas past, will find plenty of willing recipients, from the Salvation Army to Goodwill.
Many charities, including the American Lung Association, will even take the old clunker in the driveway.
No need to fix it up, get it waxed, advertise it and sell it.


POSTINGS: Seminars This Thursday and Next;All About Brownstones
Forget the pictures of the collies, kids or cats.
Just bring a photo of your  brownstone, or a house that passes as one, to either of the two-hour seminars being offered by the Brownstone Revival Committee of New York City on the next two Thursdays at 7 P.M.
Experts will identify exact architectural styles and details following slide presentations called "The Brownstone Age" and "Brownstone Architecture."
Everett Ortner, chairman of the committee and former editor of Popular Science magazine, and his wife, Evelyn, a preservationist, will preside over the program.
The couple live in what Mr.
Ortner describes as a 1886 neo-Grec brownstone in Park Slope.
About 600 members belong to the group, which was formed in 1968.


In the Region: Westchester;A Federal Court House Adds to a City's Law Luster
ON Nov. 13, the eve of the temporary shutdown of the Federal Government, officials gathered on the steps of the new Federal Court House here to dedicate  the long awaited, classicaly designed 161,300-square-foot building.
It took a third of a century to get the building approved, financed and completed, said Mayor Sy J. Schulman, adding that its presence confirmed White Plains as an "unquestioned center of law and justice."


Federal Agents Join Search for Missing Heiress
Dogs searching a wooded area today were unable to find the body of a missing  furniture heiress, Jacqueline Levitz, who vanished more than a week ago, leaving signs of a violent struggle and blood in her one-story brick house here.
Mrs.
Levitz's family offered a $10,000 reward for information leading to any  arrests in what is now being treated as a homicide.


Scarce Snow Leaves California Skiers Longing for Last Season
Operators of California ski resorts are gazing impatiently at the sky for storm clouds and checking their thermometers for cold weather.
This weekend, slopes in the Sierra Mountains were better suited for mountain biking than winter sports.
Warm temperatures and a dearth of natural snow have deflated the expectations of many skiers and resort operators; the last ski season was one of this state's longest.


BUDGET CUTS STALL BROADER SERVICES IN MEDICARE PLAN
Hospitals and other health care providers who have responded to demands for a wider range of Medicare services say they are stymied because they cannot get approval from Federal regulators.
Because of budget cuts, Federal and state officials say, inspections to certify providers' participation in Medicare are delayed so long they sometimes  are not even scheduled.


Conversations/Timothy Leary;At Death's Door, the Message Is Tune In, Turn On, Drop In
TIMOTHY LEARY is dying, and he is delighted to talk about it.
A sensualist to the end, he is charting his last few minutes on earth, or at least the last few  that anyone can be certain of, making sure that the nation's death industry will not spoil this, the experience of a lifetime.
"It's called designer dying," he explained cheerfully into the speaker phone  at his house in Beverly Hills the other day.
"It's a hip, chic, vogue thing to do. It's the most elegant thing you can do. Even if you've lived your life like  a complete slob, you can die with terrific style."


In Transition Haiti, Let's Help Democracy
To the Editor:
Re "Haitian Leader's Angry Words Set Off New Wave of Violence" (news article, Nov. 19): The last time the United States press portrayed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in that light, following the Central Intelligence Agency's campaign of character assassination, Haiti's military leaders staged a  coup that led to three years of terror.


Hardaway Sparks a Late Surge by Magic
Magic 114, Bullets 112


Crack Down on H.M.O.'s? 2 Arguments for More Time
In 1974, when New Jersey last changed its rules governing health maintenance  organizations, only 100,000 people around the state were members.
Now more than  1.4 million people are enrolled, and health officials are overhauling regulations to protect the rights of the increasing number of patients and physicians involved with H.M.O.'s.
Last week, State Health Commissioner Len Fishman announced a set of proposed  regulations that would more tightly control and monitor H.M.O.'s to insure that  patients get adequate care.
Patients could appeal to the state when they believed that services had been curtailed or denied, and H.M.O.'s would have to  file extensive reports with the state on how many patients benefited from each service they provide.


Bringing Symmetry and Logic Back to 'New York's Living Room'
When Grand Central Terminal opened in 1913, the well-heeled traveler could dally at a Turkish steam bath, take a hot shower or freshen up in private changing rooms -- luxuries befitting the "grand" of its name.
But it was not long before the cathedral of train stations became an architectural victim of both its success and failure.
Within a decade, to squeeze in more ticket windows and offices to accommodate a boom in train travel, ceilings were dropped, false walls thrown up and corridors narrowed, turning parts of the terminal into cave-like passages.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Where Saturday Mornings Rock
SATURDAY MORNING CARTOONS occupy a fond place in the hearts of most people who grew up in the 50's and after.
They call to mind a world in which violence was innocent, imagination was encouraged, and delusions of grandeur were considered cute.
In the realm of pop and rock, where primitivism, imagination and self-delusion can be an asset, cartoons have been a fertile source of inspiration.
The avant-garde saxophonist John Zorn has composed pieces based on  the madcap collages of cartoon music; the rap group Two Kings in a Cypher has argued that Daffy Duck was "a black man," and the alternative-rock band Sonic Youth has been working on music for an episode of "The Simpsons."


Westwood Dressing, To the Nines
One of the delights of last month's Paris collections was the sight of young  people attending Vivienne Westwood's show dressed in her highly individual designs.
In Tokyo, young women often spend a month's salary on one of her window-plaid bustle-back suits with matching bag, platform shoes and pendant-pearl necklace.
Or a young man (like the one below right) might splurge  on a pair of her square-toed shoes and a Harris tweed suit jacket with shoulders modeled to look like flexible 15th-century armor.
Like many designers, Ms.
Westwood is inspired by museum costume collections.
But it is how she filters these influences through her own imagination that gives her young clients their own language of individuality, whether it is in popular 17th-century-style corsets (bottom, far right) or a mini-dress (above right) crocheted granny style.


Murder Conviction in Accountant's Killing
A clerical worker was convicted of murder for the 1993 contract killing of an auditor who discovered that $100,000 was missing from a drug clinic, Bronx District Attorney Robert T. Johnson said yesterday.
The worker, Borys Diaz, 28, of Queens, was also convicted of conspiracy in the slaying of Lillian DeJesus, 52, the controller of the Puerto Rican Organization to Motivate, Enlighten and Serve Addicts.


Safe Home in Kansas


BENEFITS
For New Composers MONDAY -- A concert at 8 P.M. in Weill Recital Hall will feature the composer Ned Rorem, the pianist Dick Hyman, the bassist Milt Hinton and Marni Nixon, a vocalist.
The event will benefit New Music for Young Ensembles, which promotes new American composers.
A dessert reception will follow.
Tickets, $75, or $15 for the concert alone, from (212) 877-1999.
For the Hudson Guild TUESDAY -- The Hudson Guild, a New York settlement house, will benefit from a dinner at the 200 Fifth Club, Fifth Avenue at 23d Street.
Borough President Ruth Messinger of Manhattan will speak.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 760-9812.


Don't Let Racial Balancing Stop Parents' School Plan
To the Editor:
In your article about the Belle Harbor parents' desire to extend their grammar school through eighth grade ("The Battle of Belle Harbor," Nov. 12) I found it disturbing that concerns about maintaining racial balance at the junior high school were cited as a reason for blocking the plan.


LANDMARK STATUS
A well-dresssed man is like an architect with a vision.
He builds his wardrobe on a keystone of classic accessories.


Scanners
AT WAR WITHIN The Double-Edged Sword of Immunity.
By William R. Clark.
Illustrated. 276 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.
WHILE we noisily stumble through our daily lives trying (with greater or less success) to negotiate the world, our immune systems handle our microscopic  adventures with the same outside forces silently and efficiently.
Unrecognized until the last century, the immune system is now acknowledged to be the single major determinant of health and disease.
Its task is to ask one profound question: what is self and what is nonself?
Its fantastically elegant, versatile and vigilant organization scans virtually every molecule we come in contact with.
When the system is working, microbial barbarians at the door are handily dispatched.
When it is not, the consequences for us are dire.


While Roaming the Outskirts of the City, A Photographer Discovers Hidden Views
IN the eyes -- and the lens -- of Larry Racioppo, factories (active and abandoned) and roller coasters (mainly abandoned) are works of art.
Unusual out-of-the-way places around New York City are the subject of Mr.
Racioppo's exhibit, "The Outskirts of Town," at The Jamaica Arts Center in Queens.


Peter Grant, 60, An Ex-Wrestler Who Managed Led Zeppelin
Peter Grant, a strapping British ex-wrestler who once managed Led Zeppelin and other rock groups, died on Tuesday.
He was 60 and lived in Eastbourne on the Channel coast south of London.
The cause was a heart attack, said his press agent, Judy Totton.


After Yonkers Blast, Heartache And Shifting Blame for Evacuees
BEHIND the cordoned-off streets, the flashing lights and a steady stream of officialdom were 2,000 personal stories of residents -- many poor and elderly -- who were put out of their homes for 10 days this month in what is believed to be the largest evacuation effort ever in Westchester County.
"We've seen a lot of hardship, a lot of heartache right at the beginning of the holiday season," said Roger Denman, a 20-year resident of Buena Vista Apartments, where an explosion in the electrical service room of the sprawling complex set off a series of power failures, which left residents unhurt but without shelter.


His Nemesis, U.S., Indicts Texas Doctor
A Federal grand jury here has returned an indictment of Dr.
Stanislaw Burzynski, the latest salvo in a 12-year battle between the physician and the Food and Drug Administration.
The lengthy investigation, and the current indictment, stem from the doctor's development and use of a drug called antineoplaston, originally derived from specially processed human urine and now also produced synthetically, which Dr.
Burzynski says helps cells' response to disease.


Mexican-Spanish Cuisine in Pleasantville
IT is hardly surprising for a Mexican-Spanish restaurant to display tiles, pottery, cactuses, Moorish arches and pictures suggesting narrow streets lined with adobe houses.
Attractive decor is easy to come by.
What is not easy, however, is producing decent food to go with it.
We are pleased to report that Camino Real is one of the rare Mexican restaurants that delivers both.
What makes the success of this place particularly unexpected is the length of the menu.
At least as long as those found in lesser Mexican dining spots, Camino Real's list includes many sophisticated Mexican dishes and specials influenced by the Southwest as well as the usual Tex-Mex offerings here composed with care  and without the sloppy gloppiness found in most other places serving them.


The Long-Lost Powers Of the Borough Presidents
To the Editor:
Borough President Henry Bruckner, after whom Bruckner Boulevard was named, may have "made no ripples," as the historian quoted in your Nov. 19 F.Y.I. column states, but the job certainly called for more than "sitting on his hands."


Sweet Tidings
About five years ago, when the Republican Party laid claim to having a big tent, it seemed the forces of inclusion had scored a big victory, if only a rhetorical one.
To date, no major institution or cultural phenomenon has escaped the spirit of egalitarianism.
It is, therefore, not exactly tasteful to anticipate Christmas.
Better to look forward to the "winter holidays."
Now, the notion of a winter holiday, one that includes Hanukkah, Kwanzaa and  the winter solstice, broadens our horizons considerably.
We have more reasons to shop, more cards to send, and we can now tolerate even more exotica when it comes to our usual holiday indulgences.


CREATURE COMFORT
What brings comfort, costs nothing, doesn't inebriate or cause cancer, has no calories and is as handy as your thumb (Hers: "Creature Comfort," by Meg Wolitzer, Nov. 5)?
Your thumb, of course.
And yet what is it that society ridicules more than drunks, cigarette smokers and obsessive eaters?
Thumb-suckers.
As a 40-year-old professional who still enjoys the pleasures of thumb-sucking after a hard day, I can only hope that Meg and Gabriel don't put too much store in the artificially contrived stop date of Dec. 21.
LIBBY HATCH Washington


BEST SELLERS: November 26, 1995
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


In League of Labels, One Maker Is All-World
TWENTY-FOUR hours a day, people around the world are wearing something -- a shirt, a skirt, a sweater, a snowsuit, but something --with a label made by Paxar, a company that recently moved its headquarters from Pearl River in Rockland County to 105 Corporate Park Drive here.
Paxar, which defines itself as "the world's largest manufacturer of labeling systems and identification products," oversees the operations of its 12 manufacturing installations around the globe, which, the chairman and chief executive, Arthur Hershaft, said, supplies its global apparel and textile customers with woven and printed labels, electronic bar-code tags, printers and  inks,anti-theft and anti-counterfeiting products for the apparel industry.


Connecticut Blows Out The Hoosiers in Alaska
Connecticut 86, Indiana 52


Classical Brief
DIAMOND: CHAMBER WORKS Chicago Chamber Musicians. Cedille CDR 90000 023; CD.


The Renaissance Of the Marais
UNTIL its reincarnation as perhaps the most fashionable purveyor of tea in Paris -- 465 kinds -- Mariage Freres operated more or less anonymously as a wholesaler.
The venerable company, founded in 1854, has been radically transformed in the last decade after its move to the Marais.
Now it is crowded with upscale customers in surroundings of acquired antiquarian sophistication -- much like the Marais itself.
This 310 acres on the Right Bank, where patches of medieval Paris also survive, is rich with 17th- and 18th-century architectural treasures  and has become a destination of choice for museumgoers, antique and gallery browsers, and window shoppers of every persuasion.
The neighborhood's renaissance -- still continuing -- has made it a model of urban historic restoration.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


Travel Advisory;Two Chains Opening Hotels in Southeast Asia
Two international hotel companies, Accor Asia Pacific, (800) 221-4542, and Radisson Hospitality Worldwide, (800) 333-3333, are opening several new properties in Southeast Asia, including Malaysia and Indonesia.
The Australian-owned Accor Asia Pacific recently opened the 130-room Novotel  Surabaya in Indonesia.
Situated in the central business district of Surabaya, the capital of East Java, the hotel offers a swimming pool, tennis courts and jogging track as well as secretarial service and meeting facilities.
Rooms for two people are $105 a night.


Rake, Clip, Mow, Repair, Neaten and Mulch
THE outdoor gardening season is pretty much history, but don't be too eager to put a lock on the tool shed.
There still are some important things to do and  laggards, as most of us are, may just need a little prodding to get on with it.
Some deeds can be put off until the end of next month.
But some can't.
The first thing on everyone's minds is leaves.
They are magnificent while shrouding the fall landscape.
But as soon as they start to fall on the lawn, the charm fades.


ON THE TOWNS
Music CLUB BENE Eddie Money.
Thursday at 9 P.M.; optional dinner at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $22; dinner and show, $32.
Route 35, South Amboy. (908) 727-3000.


Aqueduct Afternoon Belongs to Long Shots
New York's final day of major racing until next spring proved a gold mine for long shots yesterday when Flying Chevron won the N.Y.R.A.
Mile at 16-1, La Rosa  captured the Demoiselle at 7-1 and Tropicool took the Remsen at 31-1.
A lot of good horses bit the November dust at Aqueduct.
They included Unaccounted For, the last horse to outrun the great Cigar before he won the N.Y.R.A.
Mile last fall en route to a 12-race winning streak and the title Horse of the Year.
But in the final race of his career, Unaccounted For ran fifth behind a pack of horses separated by only two lengths.


Goodbye, Corinth; Hello, New York
TELEVISIONLAND: Anything can happen.
Say you're living a nice quiet life in a classic little daytime television town called Corinth, smooching your way through the usual love triangles and gasping your way through the usual revelations that you're illegitimate and have six months to live.


G.O.P. Agrees To College Aid For Immigrants
Republicans in Congress have abandoned a plan to deny Federal higher education aid to lawful immigrants, but still want to limit access to the Head Start program for the youngest legal aliens.


The Roses Are Purple
Northwestern, the purple-clad Big 10 team that was long a symbol of football  futility, is going to the Rose Bowl.
The surprising development came when Ohio State lost to Michigan yesterday.
That opened the door for Northwestern, which hasn't been to the Rose Bowl since 1949.
Article, SportsSunday, Section 8.


Black Mark for a 'Good Citizen'
WHEN it comes to business ethics, few American corporations have a better image than the H.B.
Fuller Company of St.
Paul, a leading manufacturer of industrial glues, coatings and paints.
Awards, honors and inclusion in various socially conscious mutual funds attest to its standing as a good corporate citizen.
But that reputation is being clouded by the company's handling of a stubborn  image-staining problem: the illegal abuse of its shoemaker's glue by homeless Central American children, who have become addicted to the product's intoxicating but dangerous fumes.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Anchor With Many Ties


Evidence Clears Two. The Law Doesn't.
Even prosecutors now say Laverne Pavlinac and John Sosnovske did not commit the murder for which they have already been imprisoned for five years in Oregon.
Still, two months after someone else confessed to the crime, they have not been  freed.


BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION
NOT SO SIMPLE The "Simple" Stories by Langston Hughes.
By Donna Akiba Sullivan Harper.
University of Missouri, $34.95.


When Referee Wyatt Earp Laid Down the Law
All a man has got to show for his time here on earth is what kind of name he had.
Now, Wyatt Earp . . . who would have told him when he was fighting crooks and standing up for his principles that there'd be a television show about him?
That kids on the street would say, 'I'm Wyatt Earp.
Reach.' "
Muhammad Ali, explaining why
he was refusing induction into
the United States Army in 1967.


The Holiday Season Bursts Into Bloom
THE annual proliferation of choral concerts and other holiday attractions will soon be in full bloom.
To the Hartford Symphony and Chorale goes the honor  of presenting the first "Messiah" of the season, the 8 P.M.
Saturday performance of the Handel oratorio conducted by Henley Denmead with Carol Ann Manzi, Cherry  Duke, Peter Harvey and Philip Cutlip as vocal soloists.
For tickets, call the Bushnell box office at 246-6807.
An ensemble drawn from the ranks of the Hartford Symphony will accompany the  Greater Middletown Chorale in its celebration of the winter solstice next Sunday afternoon at 5.
Christopher Shepard, the artistic director, conducts Purcell's ode "Come Ye Sons of Art" and, in its Connecticut premiere, "First Light" commissioned jointly by the chorale and the Bennington Choral Society from the Vermont composer Erik Nielsen (659-0771 or 347-5709).


Sports of The Times;On Changing A Mind-Set For Mayhem
CONCUSSIONS are down, shoulders are up.
That's the conclusion to be drawn so  far from the National Football League's attempt to provide its quarterbacks with more thoughtful care and feeding this season.
Boomer Esiason of the Jets is the only quarterback to miss a start because of a concussion; he missed five.
John Elway of the Denver Broncos and Rodney Peete of the Philadelphia Eagles were knocked woozy, then were sanctioned by their team doctors to return the following Sunday.


IN PERSON


Trial of Black in '54 Recalled Anew
In your Q &amp; A with Judge Jawn Sandifer ["Scholar Who Became a Pioneer," Oct.  29], he refers to a case in 1954 in which he defended a man named Jesse Morgan.
He was one of thousands of black migrant workers on farms in eastern Suffolk, Mr.
Sandifer said.
"One night there was a raid, and Jesse Morgan didn't run. He  refused to give up his money. The police beat him unmercifully, fracturing his skull, then charging him with disorderly conduct. The trial was held in the kitchen of a Patchogue justice of the peace who had an American flag on the wall. No stenographer. No jury. Just Jesse and me surrounded in this small kitchen by white police and the prosecutor. Of course he was convicted."
I believe that Judge Sandifer and I may have the same case in mind, but I can't pin it down with certainty because I don't have my records after all these years.
However, it was a case that stuck in each of our minds, though for different reasons, and each of us remembers it from a different perspective.


A Jolt to Egypt From Afar
Just as Egypt seemed to have suppressed terrorist violence at home, the suicide bombing of the country's embassy in Pakistan served notice that Muslim militants opposed to the Government in Cairo remain a vicious foe.
The attack killed 17 people and wounded at least 59 last week, making it the most deadly strike on an Egyptian target since the militants began their three-year-old quest to topple the Government.
If the devastation has any galvanizing effect, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt hopes it will be in places like Pakistan, which, immediately after the blast, began to round up potential suspects.
Mr.
Mubarak has long warned that governments that provide refuge to Islamic extremists do so at their peril; in the wreckage of the Egyptian Embassy in Islamabad he now has a chilling example.
DOUGLAS JEHL


Benefactor Offered to Aid Slain Girl
Not so long ago, Alisa Izquierdo had a way out.
A benefactor at the Brooklyn  preschool she was attending had taken a shine to her, and he pledged to pay her  way through the 12th grade at the Brooklyn Friends School, a respected private academy, preschool officials said.
They said that Alisa passed the entrance exam and would have begun classes at the academy in the fall of 1994.


Frederic Jalton; 'Patriarch' of Guadeloupe, 71
Dr.
Frederic Jalton, a politician whom the Paris newspaper Le Monde called the patriarch of the French overseas department of Guadeloupe, in the Caribbean, died last Sunday in his home in Abymes, Guadeloupe.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, Le Monde reported.


Republican Socialism
IF THERE IS ONE proposition upon which all Republican politicians can agree,  it is that the Government should butt out of the market.
The budget bills passed by the Republican-controlled House and Senate earlier this month testify to the  G.O.P.'s faith in the invisible hand.
Explicit industrial policies, like tax incentives for small businesses in poor neighborhoods, are as unfashionable as they have ever been; implicit ones like affirmative action are beyond the pale.
People who want money must go out and get it for themselves.
There is one important exception, however.
The reduction in capital-gains taxes for individuals and businesses that Congress agreed to recently -- widely  viewed as a rest stop on the way to no capital-gains taxes at all -- is a textbook case of the Government intervening in the economy.
That's not how Republican politicians have packaged it, of course.
Lower the capital-gains-tax  rate, runs the party line, and you take the Government out of the market, allowing it to work its magic.


POSTINGS: A Home for Dinner Cruises, Fishing Charters and PossibleFerry Service; 1901 Steel Pier in Yonkers Is Being Restored
One of the last public recreational piers left on the Hudson River is now being restored in Yonkers, with plans for using it as a debarkation point for dinner cruises, fishing charters and possible ferry service to Manhattan.
Built in 1901, the two-story steel-frame pier is being completely overhauled, but will "retain its original look and flair," said Bruce J. Levy, a principal with the Hastings Design Group of Westchester, which is designing the project.


MAKING MICROSOFT SAFE FOR CAPITALISM
When and if Microsoft flounders in aptly exploiting its "monopoly" status, competitors will rush in to swipe the business.
Microsoft is neither omnipotent nor omniscient.
Just very, very smart, agile and determined, as your own article documents.
I would be very happy if Microsoft, and Microsoft alone, made it possible for me to fax, phone, E-mail, catch a movie, order a pizza, publish a newsletter and lose weight -- all with the same $10 swatch of software on some two-pound I.B.M. compatible.
Gleick should be exuberant over what Microsoft has achieved instead of cynically censuring it.


Dr. Crew's Prescription;'Efficacy' Looms as New York's Next Education Philosophy
In Candida DeVito's classroom at the Donald McKay School, the fifth graders politely admonish one another for listening to their "weak side" when they misbehave in class or don't finish their homework.
The students are regularly quizzed on ways to become better students.
"Believe in yourself," a boy answered one day.
"Practice a lot," another chimed  in.
"Stay in school," a girl added.


The Politics of Politicians' Health
IN the last few weeks, Attorney General Janet Reno, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey have all disclosed personal health problems.
What little public reaction there was came in the form of plaudits for the political leaders, who, while perhaps speaking out to pre-empt reporters and rivals, were also serving to destigmatize disability and disease.
And the matter-of-fact way in which the press and public handled the news showed just how accepting Americans have become of medical problems.


Artistry and Invention Seamlessly Joined
IN THE WORLD OF WEAVERS, Lenore Tawney is almost legendary.
During the 1950's and 60's, she invented techniques that transformed the craft and made weavings that looked like airy sculptures.
Then four years ago, at the age of 84, Mrs.
Tawney developed serious vision problems.
She also made a discovery: a cache of  her best early work, which had been missing for 15 years, had turned up in a friend's attic in New Jersey.
That work, appropriately called the Attic Collection, is one reason for the renewed interest in her work.
In fact, she is busier now than ever with her own  exhibitions.
Two solo shows opened this year in Pittsburgh and in Chicago.
Five  others, from Honolulu to Amsterdam, are planned for the next 18 months.


Trying to Defuse a Traffic Bomb
The plan to rebuild the Gowanus Expressway, as state transportation officials describe it, is like a piece of urban dentistry: it may be unpleasant and inflict pain, but it is necessary to stem dangerous decay.
But that doesn't mean there won't be complaints about the pain.
And with the  planned reconstruction of the elevated expressway expected to take over six years, cost $598 million and divert some of the 175,000 drivers who cross it daily onto the streets below or to alternate means of transportation, there is likely to be considerable griping -- and perhaps screaming and yelling -- during the project's public review phase.


Barbie Devotion: Not Just Child's Play
THE monthly BKNY meeting will now come to order.
BKNY?
It's the Barbie &amp; Ken New York Doll Collectors' Club.
There is only one requirement for membership: a deep, devoted, downright maniacal passion for the  world of Barbie.


Orthodoxy in Israel Loosens Its Hold
To the Editor:
"Secular Israelis, Too, Have a Faith" (Week in Review, Nov. 19) is a good overview of the response of Israelis to the Yitzhak Rabin assassination.
However, the 20 percent Orthodox to 80 percent secular model of the Israeli public is long outdated.
The majority of non-Orthodox Israelis observe many, though selected, aspects of the Jewish tradition.


Time to Make Merry And to Say Thank You
At two benefits, awards were presented, and at two others, fun was the order  of the day, Nov. 16 to 21.


Matinecocks Lay Claim to Fort Totten, Citing Burial Ground
Since August, when the Department of Defense announced plans to close Fort Totten, various interest groups have vied to promote their views on what to do with the portion of the land that is open for development.
Environmentalists want to make it into a recreation area, while the business-minded talk of commercial and residential development.
But as the Matinecock Tribal Nation sees it, the arguments among the competing groups are moot.
The Matinecocks say that the land belongs to them.


Knight's Not Bad
To the Sports Editor:
I applaud The Times's decision to publish graduation rates for the schools mentioned in the college basketball preview.
But as Malcolm Moran pointed out ("Win a Few, Lose a Few, and Get a Few to Graduate," The Times, Nov. 12), the method used is not perfect.
A better way to determine a school's rate is by the  number of graduates who have completed their athletic eligibility in that particular school.


A New Catalyst in the 'Law and Order' Chemistry
CALL HIM NBC'S ANSWER to ABC's Jimmy Smits, or simply a good actor getting a  significant break.
Benjamin Bratt was brought in at the start of the season to play Detective Reynaldo Curtis, the new partner for Jerry Orbach's Detective Lennie Briscoe, on the long-successful crime drama "Law and Order." And he is fitting right in as one of the most visible new faces on any established show.
As the Hispanic detective, Mr.
Bratt (of Peruvian Indian and English and German heritage) is unruffled, smart and politically conservative.
He is a traditional family man, with a wife and three young children, this in itself a telling contrast to Detective Bobby Simone, the sensitive ladies' man played on  "N.Y.P.D. Blue" by Mr.
Smits (who is part Puerto Rican).


The Doctor Networks Aren't Created Equal
WHENEVER investors embrace a new idea, a crowd of companies quickly gathers to get a share of the affection.
That's what has happened with a type of health-care company that helps doctors band together to face the growing world of managed medicine.
But before opening their arms to these suitors -- roughly 20 have gone public in the last two years, and more are on the way -- investors  should take a long, hard look.
The idea behind these companies has plenty of appeal.
Doctors' bills account  for roughly a fifth of the $1 trillion spent on health care in this country; in  fact, directly or indirectly, doctors control nearly three-quarters of that amount.
And because they feel under the gun of health care's new cost consciousness, they are uniting in "physician practice management" enterprises.
These companies pool the doctors' skills and practices, handle their administrative chores and negotiate their deals with H.M.O.'s and other managed-care groups -- all in return for some of the doctors' sizable dollars.


The End for an Oasis of Africana
The poet Amiri Baraka turned to Bill French's bookshop when he wanted to buy  a full set of Crisis, W. E. B. Du Bois's magazine from the 1920's, or an out-of-print treasure from the Harlem Renaissance.
The art historian Robert Farris Thompson has been known to browse through Mr.
French's dusty, overgrown stacks.
So has the novelist John Edgar Wideman.
For 63 years, this drafty ninth-floor loft known as University Place Books has been an oasis for writers and academics interested in black literature and history.


Tiffany's Gets Windows '95
As Manhattan windows go, their size is unimposing and the ground-level vantage point is hardly panoramic.
But their exquisite miniature vistas attract  hundreds of thousands of viewers.
They are Tiffany and Company's windows -- three facing 57th Street and two on Fifth Avenue -- and for four decades they reflected the wit and whimsy of Gene Moore, a pioneer who took them from mere jewelry displays to an art form.
But after completing last year's holiday windows, Mr.
Moore stepped down as Tiffany's director of window display.
He was succeeded by George Shimko, who will unveil his first holiday windows on Tuesday.


Cataloguese
I SPEND AN INORDINATE amount of time reading Victoria's Secret catalogues, looking for errors. (To avoid disapproving stares from colleagues, I slip the catalogue inside my copy of Hustler.)
"Weekend Prequisite" is the caption beginning copy under a picture of a model in a "heather grey" hooded sweatshirt, "prewashed for extra softness."


A Capitalist Democracy Marx Could Recognize
ON Halloween, a holiday not usually celebrated in Russia, Gennady Burbulis, a centrist member of Parliament who was once a close adviser to President Boris N. Yeltsin, was host to an open-bar reception in Parliament that got a little raucous by last call.
One guest, a candidate in the elections to be held next month, refused to obey a security guard's order to leave and was thrown through  a glass door, leaving a trail of blood and shards all over the carpet and couches.
Democracy is rarely a pretty sight, but there is something distinctive about  the conduct of Russia's elected -- and un-elected -- representatives.
At times,  Russia's legislature looks a little like a cross between the Board of Aldermen under Boss Tweed and a gunslingers' saloon in the old West.
There are 5,000 candidates competing for the 450 seats at stake in the December elections, and so far in the campaign, there is little to suggest that the new legislature will be any more dignified than the old.


All Is Not Well in This (Animated) Playroom
Goldeneye Pierce Brosnan, Sean Bean, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen Directed by Martin Campbell PG-13 130 minutes


Edward Greenberg, Director of Musicals And a Professor, 71
Edward M. Greenberg, the stage director of hit musical classics from New York to Los Angeles in the 1960's, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a stroke after open-heart surgery, his family said.


Giving Thanks For Signs Of Growth
As the Dow Jones industrial average smashed through 5,000 last week, it was the cyclical stocks -- the ones most vulnerable to a weak economy -- that were leading the way.
That was a sharp reversal of recent months, and a repudiation of the growing suspicion among economists that the economy was sliding toward a  recession next year or the year after.
It was not just that the cyclicals did best.
They were virtually the only movers.
Most major indexes other than the Dow were having a blah week.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500, the most-watched indicator of large stock performance, fell a bit.
Smaller stocks suffered more, and technology stocks -- the erstwhile leaders -- fared poorly.
After hitting amazing highs on Monday, even the Internet stocks turned south.


Brett H. Cantor, Jeffrey D. Harris
Brett Hillary Cantor, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon J. Cantor of East Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Dale Harris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Harris of Skokie, Ill.
Cantor Richard Berman performed the ceremony at  Temple Judea in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Cantor Harris, 30, is the director of advertising and creative services  at Ameritech, the telephone company in Chicago.
She graduated from Hofstra University.
Her father is a plastic surgeon in Manhasset and Fresh Meadows, L.I.
Her mother, June Cantor, is an interior designer and owns Barjulee Designs  in East Hills.


LOOKING PAST THE STORMS
IN September, after Hurricane Luis howled through the island of Dominica, bashing crops, knocking down trees and pushing the Caribbean into a casual seaside inn, the innkeepers went to work cleaning up and repainting.
The 11-room Castle Comfort Lodge -- homey and comfortable but no castle -- came through shiningly.
Water had flowed into the lower level but the rooms were soon livable again, the facade fresh white and the porch overlooking the sea as  pleasant as ever.


NEWS SUMMARY
IRELAND VOTES TO PERMIT DIVORCE The Irish narrowly approved a referendum to remove the constitutional ban on divorce and remarriage after a bitter campaign that pitted the Roman Catholic Church against the state. 1


At Least He Has His Health
He began the day by trashing the team's new alternate road uniforms, saying they were too tight and that the color scheme didn't work.
He was called for a technical for not tucking his shirt in the first quarter.
He ended the afternoon by saying he will retaliate physically against anyone who "wrongs" him on the floor.
Do you get the feeling that Charles Oakley was in a foul mood yesterday?


MOVIES THIS WEEK
On this week's movie roster the accent is on character in a variety of settings, from an aircraft carrier and a city block to a casino and a psychologist's home.
Fredric March, William Holden and Mickey Rooney dominate THE BRIDGES AT TOKO-RI (1954), about aircraft-carrier pilots flying into Korean War combat.
They are splendid in Mark Robson's gritty, compact version of the James Michener novel.
Grace Kelly appears briefly in a family interlude.
But it's mainly a gritty salute to heroism on the job - Monday at 1:05 P.M. on TBS.


Park, Lock and Bet
LET us now praise a parking garage, one among the horde that dominates the Atlantic City skyline.
Plain and pragmatic in design, lacking any exterior decoration, the 2,400-space, eight-level garage at Harrah's Atlantic City casino hotel is among the city's more monotonous lumps of architecture.
But this humble concrete pile is significant in ways that don't immediately meet the eye.
In truth, Harrah's garage, 15 years old this month, is among the city's most important structures, one that has changed the skyline and revolutionized the way America's gambling industry does business.


Weapons Cache Is Seized
A woman and her teen-aged son were arrested after the police uncovered a cache of weapons, marijuana and hundreds of rounds of ammunition in their Brooklyn home, officials said yesterday.
Officers with a search warrant raided the Bensonhurst home of the woman, Aida Anzalone, 42, on Friday night.
They seized a 9-millimeter machine gun, two semiautomatic pistols, two 12-gauge shotguns and a .44-caliber Magnum revolver.


Opening Day Is Long on Atmosphere, but Short on Ducks
What cards were you holding?" I asked.
"I don't remember," my guide, Barry Kanavy, said.


Can He Explain the Vulcan Mind Meld?
THE PHYSICS OF STAR TREK By Lawrence M. Krauss.
Foreword by Stephen Hawking.
Illustrated. 188 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $18.50.
ON the dust jacket of "The Physics of Star Trek," by Lawrence M. Krauss, "Star Trek" is in big letters and "Physics" in small.
Don't let the typography fool you.
This book is fun, and Mr.
Krauss has a nice touch with a tough subject, but between dust jacket and text the reader experiences a subtle bait-and-switch.
"Star Trek" moves to the background, and physics takes center stage.


L.I. VINES
Eis Bedell Cellars, Cutchogue, nonvintage. About $27.50 (half bottle).


Steve Wood, 34, Olympic Rower
Steve Wood, an Australian rowing champion who won the bronze medal at the Barcelona Olympics, died only weeks after beginning a comeback he had hoped would take him to next year's Atlanta Games.
He was 34.
The police gave no official cause of Wood's death, but said foul play was not suspected.
Television reports late Friday said Wood had committed suicide Thursday but gave no further details.


Helping Others
Volunteers can be the glue that holds a community together.
Tell Chatter about volunteer work you do, or about a volunteer you know.
At School, a Big Difference
If you're looking for volunteers making a difference, then look a little closer at Catholic schools.
To provide a quality all-round educational experience for about a quarter of what public schools require, you need a lot of people organizing fund-raisers, working bingos and coaching sports teams (which I do).
And, not incidentally, you need a lot of teachers volunteering a portion of their salaries, the portion they would get had they public-school jobs.


Sweet or Savory, a Charlotte Is Regal
KING GEORGE III of England experienced the humiliation of losing the American colonies.
His wife, Queen Charlotte, had a better time of it, giving her name to a dessert, the charlotte, as in apple charlotte or charlotte russe.
A charlotte consists of a mold lined with buttered bread, filled with a fruit mixture and baked.
A lining of sponge cake or ladyfingers can take a chilled mousse filling.


WHY IS THIS $30,000 MAYOR LAUGHING
MAYORS of cities are some of the unhappiest people today, perennially worried about new problems stacked on old problems, less state aid, less Federal aid.
Most of them could substitute for the actors in a television antacid ad.
And then there's Michael P. Peters, the Mayor of Hartford, Connecticut's capital city, who over the last two years has tried something really radical in  governing a municipality: Humor.


Flu Has Broken Out in at Least 16 States
At least sixteen states and Washington, D.C., have already had outbreaks of influenza this season, and the worst is still ahead, the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Friday.
Flu season normally begins in November.
The virus spreads as families and friends gather at Thanksgiving and produces outbreaks in December.


Fedex Pilots Refuse to Work Overtime as Union Offer Is Rejected
Fedex rejected a last-ditch contract offer from its pilots union today, and the union said its members would refuse to work overtime during the holiday shipping season.
The union said that would delay thousands of packages, but Fedex officials reported today that package delivery and operations had been normal in the first hours of the overtime refusal by the pilots union, the Air Line Pilots Association.


MARKET TIMING
Monday


Car Crash Is Caused By Russian Roulette
A man playing Russian roulette with a revolver as he drove through a residential neighborhood on Friday night shot himself in the head on the third click of the trigger, the police said, causing the car to crash through a stone  wall.
Two passengers were injured.
Officer J. A. Compton of the Charleston police said it was unclear whether any of the three people had known that the gun was loaded.
The Russian roulette, he said, was apparently intended as simple horseplay.


Charred Pine Barrens Are Laboratory at Doorstep
THOUSANDS of acres of charred pine barrens have created a living laboratory for scientists who want to study the revival of the ecosystem and compare it to  areas left intact after fires in Rocky Point and Westhampton in August.
A few months after the fire had blackened and seemingly destroyed all plant life, as well as endangering nearby houses and businesses, acres of scrub oak line the ground surrounding the desolate trees, tiny huckleberry plants dot the space between the oak, and green pine needles pop out of the black pines.


What the Perkins Fund Doesn't Tell Its Shareholders
SINCE the beginning of the year, no diversified mutual fund has outperformed  the Perkins Opportunity fund.
Run by Richard W. Perkins, a folksy 61-year-old Minnesota native, the fund specializes in discovering tiny companies in Minnesota with seemingly infinite promise.
But many of the fund's biggest winners have been companies in which Perkins Capital Management, the family's private money management company, controls a substantial stake.
If the management company sours on some of these small, illiquid stocks and decides to sell, it could greatly depress their prices, perhaps wiping out much of the fund's gains in the process.
Furthermore, some steps taken by Mr.
Perkins to divest the fund of shares in companies where he is on the board raise questions about whose best interest he has at heart: shareholders in the mutual fund or investors in the private accounts.


No Centennial Hoopla in This Sport
A century ago this Thanksgiving Day, the molecules that produced motorsports' amoebic event -- six cars, a race course and a sponsor -- came together along the lake front in Chicago.
The first automobile race in the United States was won by Frank Duryea in a car that he and his brother, Charles, had built.
That contest -- 54 miles from Jackson Park to Evanston, Ill., and back again in snow and freezing temperatures -- took more than 10 hours to complete.


Susan G. Adams And Pope Brock
Susan G. Adams, a national producer in New York for "Dateline NBC," the news  magazine program, is to be married today to Pope Brock, a freelance writer.
The  Rev.
Eric Kolbell, a Congregational minister, is to perform the ceremony at the  Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Ms.
Adams, who changed her name, is a daughter of Judith Hunter Wilson of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Archibald C. Gernert.
The bride, 40, graduated from Colby College and is a four-time Emmy Award winner.
Her father was an insurance underwriter in Chicago for Kemper Insurance.


Seeing a Future In Bar Codes
In its first acquisition outside the apparel market, Paxar bought the Monarch Mailing Corporation of Dayton, Ohio, from Pitney Bowes this summer, for a reported $127 million.
"Monarch is a bar-code manufacturer and the largest manufacturer of grocery  price labels that are required by law to be used in seven states," Arthur Hershaft said of the June acquisition.
"The company is global in nature, very well run and compatible to ours. We are operating Monarch on a completely stand-alone basis from Paxar. Monarch people remain in their jobs, and we expect the acquisition will have a significant beneficial impact on our performance in  future years."
PENNY SINGER


Habitats: 1100 Park Avenue;When Combining 3 Apartments Is the Easy Part
FRAN ITKIN, quite simply, was not in the mood to fool around.
The market may have been lukewarm, but she and her husband, Myles, were looking for the hottest type of property around: an apartment of at least six rooms in an impeccable prewar Upper East Side building.
Furthermore, they wanted to buy the apartment under market -- way under market.


Virtual Equality'
To the Editor:
The mocking tone that Bruce Bawer adopts in his review of Urvashi Vaid's "Virtual Equality" (Nov. 5) is no substitute for a reasoned discussion of her views, no matter how opposed Mr.
Bawer is to them.
Instead of encouraging debate over principles and strategies, Mr.
Bawer engages in the divisive and antagonistic discourse for which he criticizes Ms.
Vaid.


John Watters, 47, an Advocate Of Needle Exchange Programs
Dr.
John Watters, a pioneer in the fight for clean needle programs to prevent the spread of AIDS, was found dead on Monday at his home in San Francisco, the coroner's office said.
He was 47.
A spokesman for the coroner said the death was being investigated as a possible drug overdose.
Dr.
Watters's body was found by his partner, Lesley Iura, with a syringe nearby, according to a coroner's report.


Slaves To Economics
To the Editor:


Color-Blind? Justice, Maybe, But Not Juries
WOULDN'T it be nice if the terrible wrench of the O. J. Simpson case did some good, maybe by impelling America to begin exorcising the racial demons that haunt its courthouses?
A comforting thought, but not a realistic one.
The specter of race is far from banished, a point vividly demonstrated by a verbal brawl that passed for jury deliberations recently in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 12 about movies with Presidential roles misspelled the surname of an actor who appeared in the film "Clear and Present Danger." He is Donald Moffat, not Moffatt.


Safer Streets? We'll See
New York City is embarking on a new era of traffic control.
Police officers are replacing civilian agents at busy intersections.
Helicopters prowl the skies in search of the dreaded gridlock.
Soon, the Department of Transportation will unveil a plan to clean up "high-fatality" areas like Columbus Circle and Queens  Boulevard.
Most of these ideas have been tried before, which does not mean they  are not worth revisiting.
The police surrendered the job of directing traffic to civilian agents in the 1970's as an economy move.
Now many civilian jobs have been eliminated, also as an economy move, and the police are back.
The battle against gridlock has actually been a long guerrilla war, in which the city alternately threatens, punishes and bribes motorists to keep them from blocking intersections between lights.


A Director Switches To the Fast Track
FOR A MAN WHO HAS DIRECTED only six plays in his life, Scott Elliott has come a long way fast.
His fifth directorial effort, "Ecstasy," a naturalistic play about working-class despair in Thatcherite London, was a sleeper hit Off Broadway last season with both critics and audiences.
No sooner had it ended in October at the Judith Anderson Theater on West 42d Street than Mr.
Elliott walked next door to  Playwrights Horizons to direct "The Monogamist," a cerebral comedy, scheduled to close next Sunday, that examines generational conflicts and mid-life crises in America.


The Devils Let No. 5 Get Away
Mike Modano had a short-handed goal and Andy Moog turned aside 26 shots for his 22d career shutout, sending the Dallas Stars past the New Jersey Devils by 2-0 tonight.
Greg Adams got the assist on the game-winning goal against the Devils, who have not won in their past five games (0-4-1).


DR. SMITH GOES TO SEXUAL-REHAB SCHOOL
Dr.
Smith is not clueless.
He revealed his problem when he wrote in his medical-journal essay that gone are the times of "the golden glow of approval that a good doctor-patient relationship radiated for us to bask in." How astute  your writer was to have cited that quote!
Smith is angry that patients no longer revere him in the way his ego requires.
NANCY D'ANGELO Manchester, Conn.


Soothing, Cardamom-Scented Indian Tea
Pop music pulsates through the dining room at Udupi, one of the many Indian restaurants along Oak Tree Road in Edison.
But customers are listening to the gurgle and hiss of a contraption that looks like an espresso machine and produces strong, fragrant Masala tea.
On a chilly afternoon, Masala tea at Udupi is the perfect comfort drink.
Infused with steamed milk and spiced with cardamom, it soothes and invigorates.


TOSSING SEEDS
Collect seeds from perennials, like black-eyed Susans, columbine and hollyhocks, and give them to friends.
Or let the seeds fall where they are, to germinate in spring.
Broadcast the seeds of poppies, larkspurs, cornflowers and  calendula, which need a period of cold to break their dormancy and produce sturdy seedlings.
Toss the seeds over a well-prepared garden spot (or a pot), and label the spot so you don't plant something else there in the frenzy of next year's planting.
ANNE RAVER


Picking a Present For the Road
TWO super-small flashlights lead the way in the year's parade of gifts for travelers.
Good in emergencies, they would also be helpful for reading phone books, spotting keyholes or finding lost contact lenses.
The Flash Card is about the size of a credit card, 3 by 3 1/2 inches, and only a little bit thicker than a card at the bulb end.
Squeezing it near the bulb produces a surprisingly strong beam.
It weighs an ounce.
A plastic cover keeps water out and should prevent corrosion.
The Flash Card came out a few months ago, and its maker, Lumatec of Texas, says it is the first flashlight shaped to go into a wallet.
It costs $6.98 at Barson's Hardware, 35 West 44th Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 944-8181.
Information on other outlets and catalogues is available from Lumatec, 500 Shady Lane, Austin, Tex. 78702; (800)  586-2832.


Insuring Disaster
ULTIMATE RISK The Inside Story of the Lloyd's Catastrophe.
By Adam Raphael.
Illustrated. 301 pp.
New York: Four Walls Eight Windows. $24.95.


A Cacophony of Lower East Side Voices, on a One-Woman Stage
A homeless, drug-addicted prostitute with AIDS and a baby on the way stands on a Lower East Side street.
"Yo brother, give me 50 cents," she says.
Her plea  is ignored, so she embellishes her pitch with song: "We are the world, we are the children, we are the world, so let's start givin'."
Moments later, a blonde speed addict lobs verbal grenades at upwardly mobile  newcomers to the neighborhood as they step from their cabs.
"You think I'm sleazy?" she asks, eyeing a book in one person's hand.
"And you're reading William Burroughs!"


After the Deluge, the Fallen Trees Lie in Wait
As the rain gushed down during a northeaster this month, Cecilia Aguilera heard a thump before her house went dark and the telephone went dead.
The gale-force wind had hurled a huge maple tree that had been in front of her house across the street, knocking down the power lines.
"I looked out and saw the tree lying in the middle of the street," said Ms.
Aguilera, who lives in Flushing.
"It was terrible."


Surrealistic Nature From Not Far Away
TO put it in a nutshell, New Jersey did not go to Staten Island, so Staten Island has come to New Jersey, specifically to the Art Center on First here with the wryly titled show "Ecstatic Island Paintings."
The shift is temporary, of course.
It involves on three artists, Charles Farless, Stephen Shedrowitz and Kathe Frantz, and ingenues they are not.
This much is clear from their work and their decadelong records of exhibitions, several of them solos in Manhattan for Mr.
Farless and Ms.
Frantz.
And if they are supplicants, it is only in the sense that any artist not enjoying page 1 status is a supplicant.
The three are, however, in need of feedback, particularly from their peers, not enough of whom live in their own small community.


In Orbit
A beautiful, young 41st-century space adventurer roams the galaxy, dodging villains and meeting a handsome blind angel with a large heart and wing span.
That's Roger Vadim's BARBARELLA (1968) - and unmistakably Jane Fonda doing a saucy aerial striptease to initiate this gleaming, surreal French-Italian caper  - TUES./EARLY WED. at 12:30 A.M. on TNT.
There's a little real wit but plenty of bounce and verve, to a be-boppish score.
John Phillip Law plays the angel, but it's Ms.
Fonda's showcase and she's an intergalactic sight for sore eyes.
Good stardust, good fun.
Howard Thompson


Role Reversal


Cue From Q Ratio: Dow Is Too High
AS the Dow Jones industrial average vaults higher and higher, past 5,000 Tuesday and settling at 5,048.84 on Friday, is it time to pop open a bottle of Veuve Clicquot or reach for a good strong cup of java?
Wall Street sages are divided.
While many analysts say the Dow has no place to go but up, a worried minority wonders how long the levitation act can last.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PARK SLOPE


Belle Strikes Out
To the Sports Editor:
In a comparison between the top finishers in the American League most valuable player balloting, Mo Vaughn of the Red Sox and Albert Belle of the Indians, it's obvious to me that baseball is on the mend and healing, thank you.


Oven-Roasted In Kip's Bay
C. T. RESTAURANT *** (212) 995-8500; 111 East 22d Street; $$$(c) all major credit cards


Will They Reform Medicare Out of Existence?;Choices for Patients
To the Editor:
Re "Drop the Medical Savings Accounts" (editorial, Nov. 13): Incongruously, you seem to want to have matters both ways when you simultaneously recommend reconfiguring Medicare around market forces, yet malign medical savings accounts, the only feature of the Republican reform plan that contributes toward that objective.


Three Arrested in Sting At the Coachman Hotel
IT seems more the stuff of espionage and high-level skulduggery than the work of public safety and social services officials.
Still, a three-month undercover  investigation at the Coachman Hotel here, a temporary housing shelter for homeless families, resulted in the arrest of three residents last week for drug  dealing and possession of drugs.
Those arrested were Cella Hardee, Felicia Smith and Deirdra Murray.
The Westchester county police are also seeking a former resident of the shelter.
To those familiar with the Coachman Hotel, it is no surprise that criminal activities were taking place.
The Coachman has long been a source of frustration to merchants, neighbors and community activists, who have complained about illegal activities there.
The shelter, which is under renovation, is operated by Westhab, a nonprofit housing organization, which provides casework management, parent-education skills, security and other services.
Thirty-two families live at the hotel.


Barbara Bonner, Maurice Stiefel
Barbara Bonner, a fund-raising consultant, was married last evening to Maurice Benjamin Stiefel, a lawyer.
Acting Justice Seymour Schwartz of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the couple's apartment in New York.


Ms. Chavious and Mr. Brossard
Charisse Lori Chavious, the daughter of Dolores Klein of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and the stepdaughter of Arthur Klein, was married on Friday to Mario Antonio Brossard, a son of Juana Brossard of Rochdale Village, Queens.
Judge Betty E. Staton of the New York Family Court in Brooklyn officiated at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Mrs.
Brossard, 30, is a group manager at ADP/WTR Consulting Group, employee benefits consultants in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her mother is a former administrator at Intermediate School 162 in the Bronx.
Her stepfather is a senior manager at the Gestetner Corporation, the office equipment company, in New York.


Taxpayers Get the Bill For Work That Wasn't Done
Two members of the House engaged in a shoving match during n egotiations on the budget, but at least they were working.
More than 800,000 other Americans, more than a quarter of the civilian Federal work force, were not at their posts during the four-day shutdown that was finally ended last weekend, shelving for the moment the continuing spat between the President and Congress over what should be promised in their still-separate blueprints for eventually achieving a balanced budget.


FUNDS WATCH
Sit International: Unappreciated


Setting the Stage for a Celluloid Fantasy
IN ITS OPENING SECONDS, THE new film "Reckless" attempts a visual conjuring trick.
The camera pans a lavishly decorated Christmas tree and slowly zooms in on a spherical glass ornament that encloses a storybook country house in a snow  scene.
It draws closer still and in a slow downward swoop, goes right through a  window into the second-floor bedroom.
It's the cinematic equivalent of "once upon a time," pulling the viewer, like Alice through the keyhole, into a strange new visual world.


Not Sweet, and Not a Science
WHAT'S a kick in the head between friends?
The question is prompted by the growing popularity of a new sport that caters to those who find boxing too polite.
The competition, called extreme or ultimate fighting, pits two bare-knuckled fighters who punch, kick and brawl their way toward an often bloody denouement.
A particular charm of the discipline, its promoters say, is the unfettered and natural expression of human tendencies that takes place on the sweat-and-blood-stained mats.
Indeed, participants are required to check their adrenaline surges only long enough to obey the cardinal rule against eye-gouging.


Out, Damned Spot!
Deciding which television commercials are more annoying than others is a little like debating whether "Sugar, Sugar" or "(You're) Having My Baby" is the  most insipid pop tune of all time.
Still, compiling lists of the most grating sspots is irresistible, and one sure way to land onthem lately is through repetition.
An ad that is merely inane at first viewing becomes unendurable the  hundredth time around.
Familiarity breeds exactly what it's supposed to.
Some marketers try to avoid audience contempt by running a smorgasbord of spots.
But  others cannot afford the variety or believe they benefit from incessant exposure.
Below are six of the deadliest spots in the current crop.
AMERICAN ONLINE


Oldies but Goodies
More than 80,000 die-hard fans packed Municipal Stadium in Cleveland last Saturday for the first all-star fund-raising concert for the Democratic Museum and Liberal Hall of Fame.
Many people arrived as early as noon, and quickly turned the old ball park into a party; by sundown, the air had acquired a sweet  aroma characteristic of so many liberal gatherings, that of chardonnay and brie.
Then precisely at 8, the fans let loose a mighty roar as George McGovern bounded onto the stage, and in his flat, prairie accent boomed, "Well now let me hear you say, 'Yeah!' " Barely waiting for an answer, the godfather of liberalism plunged into a set of his hits from the golden summer of '72, including "Come Home, America," "Halt the Bombing," "I Want to Give Every Man, Woman and Child $1,000" and his signature number, "Acid, Amnesty and Abortion."
It was a strong opening, and it brought the rest of the lineup in grooving.


DR. SMITH GOES TO SEXUAL-REHAB SCHOOL
The courts, several doctors, four medical professionals and a former nun found Dr.
Smith innocent of any crime or misdeed, except, perhaps, insensitivity.
Nonetheless, his practice, reputation and probably his ability to provide financially for himself and his wife have all been destroyed.
My faith in the system's ability to deliver reasonable justice continues to  spiral downward.
All we see are individual lives chewed up and spit out by morally rudderless public lynchings.


Kennedy Earns Chance To Repeat as Champion
P.S.A.L.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 22 about the islands of Lake Titicaca, which borders Peru  and Bolivia, misidentified the man who sailed the boat Uru from Peru to Tahiti.
A fax received from a reader on Oct. 24 points out that it was Kitin Munoz, not  Thor Heyerdahl.
This correction was delayed for research.


Earthquake After Earthquake Shaking Yellowstone Park
It has been a shaky few months here.
More than 1,200 earthquakes have rumbled Yellowstone National Park this year, up from 800 last year and 179 the year before.
While this park is world famous for its skyrocketing geysers, simmering hot pools and bubbling mudpots, what is less well known, because it is invisible, is the underground volcano that created these geothermal attractions.
Slumbering fitfully beneath sagebrush-studded meadows and lodgepole-pine forests, this volcano, known as a caldera, is believed to be causing the strings of earthquakes, known as swarms.
It is by far the largest "hot spot" in North America and one of the largest in the world.


Isolate Nuclear Waste
To the Editor:
The vast preponderance of respected scientific opinion supports the Ward Valley low-level nuclear waste site for California (news article, Nov. 19).
The  technical community is not split on this issue, rather the overwhelming majority considers Ward Valley an appropriate location.
The opponents have little interest in finding a solution for the disposal of the wastes, even though they  are generated in medical research and treatment, producing products such as smoke detectors and, of course, power production.


All Is Not Well in This (Animated) Playroom
Two Bits Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Al Pacino, Jerry Barone, with narration by Alec Baldwin Directed by James Foley PG-13 93 minutes


Buckle Up or Get a Ticket: Seat-Belt Campaign Intensifies
Seat belts save lives." It would be a rare driver who hasn't heard that slogan time and time again.
But only 60 percent of New Jersey residents routinely buckle up, according to state safety officials, who say they won't be happy until at least 75 percent are obeying seat-belt laws.


Suspect Sketch Released In Fatal Saudi Bombing
The police released a sketch today of a man they said was a suspect in the car bombing of a United States-run military building in which seven people, including five Americans, were killed.
No one has claimed responsibility for the Nov. 13 attack.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:
Monday


A Mother's Tale: Drugs, Despair And Violence;A Life Mired in Urban Ills Ends in a Daughter's Death
When Awilda Lopez took her first hit of crack cocaine on the hardscrabble streets of Bushwick, Brooklyn, in 1988, she crossed the shadowy divide that separates tough urban poverty from mind-numbing neglect.
In a matter of months, Ms.
Lopez lost everything to the drug, according to the accounts of several friends and relatives.
First, she lost her junior high school sweetheart, then her rundown apartment on Knickerbocker Avenue and finally her three oldest children, Rubensito, Kasey and baby Elisa.
Now, Ms.
Lopez, 29, stands charged in the beating death of 6-year-old Elisa, who died last week from blows so severe her brain hemorrhaged.
Elisa will be buried on Wednesday.


Time Warner Wins a Tug-of-War
The day after Michael J. Fuchs was dismissed as the chairman of Time Warner's music division on Nov. 16, Sylvia Rhone sent piping hot pizzas to the staff of the Elektra Entertainment Group.
Executives at Warner said Ms.
Rhone was celebrating the ouster of Mr.
Fuchs,  with whom she had repeatedly and bitterly clashed.
Ms.
Rhone, who is the chairman of Elektra, insisted she was merely celebrating Thanksgiving a week early with her colleagues.


School Financing
Many states are currently involved in or have concluded some sort of lawsuit  within the last 15 years regarding state financing of public schools.
Plaintiffs have argued that finance disparities between rich and poor districts violate the guarantee of a minimal education in state constitutions.
New Jersey is one of about a dozen states under court order to close the gap in spending among districts and New York could soon be another.
A suit brought by a New York City  citizen's group says the state's system of finances is unfair.
Although New York has 37 percent of the state's public school students, it receives only 37 percent of its education aid.


Three-Vehicle Crash Kills 5 in California
Five people died in a three-vehicle crash near here on Saturday, including the editor of the local daily newspaper, his wife, who was a reporter at the paper, and their 12-year-old daughter.
Jeff Fairbanks, 46, the editor of The County Telegram-Tribune, his wife, Ann, 45, and a daughter, Sienna, were in a car that was involved in a crash with a motor home and a pickup truck, the authorities said.
The driver of the motor home, Richard Jennings, 55, of Visalia, Calif., also died.


Edith Haggard, 92, an Agent For Many Celebrated Writers
Edith Haggard, a New York literary agent whose clients ranged from an important group of proper British writers to the cantankerous Sinclair Lewis, died on Thursday in the Whitney Pavilion of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She was 92 and lived in Manhattan.


New York City Labor Accord Exploits the Poor
To the Editor:
The labor contract agreed upon by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Stanley Hill  of District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees stomps on the rights of poor women and men forced into New York City's workfare programs (news article, Nov. 18).
The Giuliani administration cites the contract as having "achieved the major goals of the administration's labor strategy," part of which is to use "welfare recipients to do routine work."


Arnold Vollmer, An Architect And Engineer, 80
Arnold H. Vollmer, an engineer and landscape architect who did extensive work in the New York region over the years, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 80 and had homes on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and in Nantucket, Mass.
The cause was leukemia, said his daughter, Ann Svanson.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC


CHRONICLE
A Charlie Brown Christmas" has been a holiday staple on television for 30 years, but the "Peanuts" cartoonist, CHARLES M. SCHULZ , says he is ashamed of the artwork in the Christmas special.
"The continued success of the special has surprised me as much as anyone," Mr.
Schulz told TV Guide.
"A lot of the drawings are terrible.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY


Diller Moves To Bolster TV Holdings
Barry Diller, who built his reputation creating the Fox network and expanding QVC, the home shopping service, moved on two fronts during the weekend to expand the reach of his new enterprise, the Silver King Communications television network.
Mr.
Diller, Silver King's chairman and chief executive, has agreed to acquire the controlling stake of the Home Shopping Network Inc. from its parent company, Tele-Communications Inc.
Using Silver King stock as payment, Mr.
Diller will buy Tele-Communications' 35 million shares of Home Shopping in a transaction valued  at $300 million.
The 35 million shares represent 41 percent of the equity and 80 percent of the voting stock of Home Shopping.
Shares of Home Shopping closed at  $9.50 on Friday, up $1, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Ireland's Anti-Divorce Camp Gears Up for Court Challenge
On the day after announcement of Ireland's hairbreadth approval of a constitutional amendment permitting divorce, the Government braced itself for a  court challenge of the result.
The two largest anti-divorce organizations said they would meet on Monday to  consider a court challenge.
A smaller group said it would initiate its own challenge.


Martin Scorsese, Attracted to Excess, Still Taking Risks
Martin Scorsese was recalling his childhood the other day.
As a boy, he would sit at a kitchen table in the Little Italy section of Manhattan and listen to his father and uncles talk about movies.
"They loved movies," he said, "but at a certain point they'd say, 'Yeah, yeah, but that never would have happened in real life.'
"I decided I wanted to make movies about what really happens."


A Plan to Streamline France's Rail System
The French Government proposed slimming down its efficient but costly railroad system today by selling non-rail assets, shifting some responsibility to the regions and studying whether some routes should be scrapped.
In its 1996-2000 five-year plan for the rail system, the Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer, or S.N.C.F., the Government stressed that it would retain responsibility for the network and would not seek to change the labor status of  its workers.


Nikolai Drozdetsky, Soviet Hockey Star, 38
Nikolai Drozdetsky, a onetime star on Soviet Union national and Olympic hockey teams, has died from complications of diabetes at age 38, the Itar-Tass news agency said today.
The news agency said Mr.
Drozdetsky collapsed at his mother's apartment in St.
Petersburg early Saturday.
Mr.
Drozdetsky had been treated for diabetes for  the past three years and was taking insulin.


Painful Loss Shows That Reeves Is Under Fans' Microscope, Too
Late last week, Giants management met to discuss the future of Coach Dan Reeves.
Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch, the co-owners, as well as General Manager George Young talked about what to do with their head coach.
And they agreed on one thing: Now is not the time to do anything rash or make any official decisions.
Reeves's fate will be officially determined at the end of the season.
But even before the Giants played the Chicago Bears today and eventually lost, 27-24, on a 37-yard field goal in the final seconds before 70,015 at Giants Stadium, Reeves was being closely watched by management.
And that will be the case for the remainder of the year.


Abroad at Home;Living In A Cocoon
If you are heading for college or graduate school and are sensitive about being male, female, black, white, Asian, young, old, married, unmarried, gay, straight, Catholic, Jewish, evangelical Protestant or a veteran, think about going to the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
You will be protected there against offense to your group sensibilities.
That is the purpose of a new code of behavior proposed by the university's administration and its union of graduate student employees.
It would punish as "harassment" a wide range of speech by faculty members or students -- including  "epithets, slurs and negative stereotyping" -- that may offend groups.


Speaker's Race In California Divides G.O.P.
Assemblywoman Doris Allen, a Republican and the former Speaker of the California Assembly, made a deal with the enemy.
Now she could lose her seat, and the Republicans could lose their legislative majority.


Jaws 3


Montreal Journal;Anxious Immigrants Adrift in a Sea of Frenchness
Patty Bakakis is a Greek immigrant who has lived here for 30 years.
She has pumped her life savings into the lively Miss Westmount Restaurant in the English-speaking enclave along the western slopes of Mount Royal.
Now, after an independence referendum she had hoped would "finally end all the talk about a new country and allow people to get on with their lives," she has decided to sell out and leave the province.


Centrist Democrats Discuss A Candidate of Their Own
Frustrated with President Clinton and even more dissatisfied with his Republican rivals, seven prominent Democratic and independent politicians have been quietly discussing the prospects of fielding an independent candidate for President next year.
The goal of the group, organized more than two months ago by former Gov.
Dick Lamm of Colorado, a Democrat, is to set out a philosophy for a third party or an independent candidate and perhaps even to endorse someone to make the race.


Body Found Burning Beside L.I. Highway
A driver on the Northern State Parkway found the burning body of a woman early this morning just off the highway, state police said.
The police said that the driver stopped after seeing flames in woods near Wolf Hill Road.


Murrell Sprints and Jets Sputter Along to a Victory
Holding on to a rare first-half lead, the Jets staggered to an inelegant 16-10 victory over the Seahawks today.
But when a team has to wait this long to  produce its third victory of the season, who cares about style points?
In fact, it has taken this long for the Jets to produce their first 100-yard  rusher of the year in Adrian Murrell.
He did it today behind two rookies on the  offensive line starting for the first time.
And it was an even longer wait for Aaron Glenn, who finally nailed the first interception of his 27-game, two-year  career.


In Movie, the Flames Do No Harm
The burning of a subway token clerk in his booth early yesterday bore an unsettling resemblance to scenes in the current hit film "Money Train" -- scenes that transit officials say they objected to before the filming.
Twice during the movie, a pyromaniac squirts a flammable liquid through the slot in a booth's bullet-proof window and then ignites it.
The attackers who set fire to Harry Kaufman in Bedford-Stuyvesant yesterday used much the same technique, though Mr.
Kaufman was not as lucky as his fictional counterpart, who escapes without injury.


Ordinance Would Raise Wages
Officials are considering an ordinance that would force companies that do business with the city to pay their workers a minimum of $12.50 an hour.
"This is a start toward raising the standard of living of more and more people in the area so that they can raise families," said the Rev.
George Ligos, pastor of St.
Paul of the Cross Roman Catholic Church and a member of the Interfaith Community Organization, a coalition of religious groups that proposed the ordinance.


People
Maureen B. Crow was named president and chief executive at Carl Byoir &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, a unit of the WPP Group, succeeding Holly Howard, who resigned.
Ms.
Crow, who was also named a senior managing director at a sibling public relations agency, Hill &amp; Knowlton, New York, was previously co-general manager at Golin/Harris, Los Angeles, a unit of Golin/Harris Communications.
Bob LaBarge was named to the new position of associate creative director at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York.
He was previously a senior art director at Gotham Inc., New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.


Volunteers Tally Public Artworks
Someone stole Andrew Jackson's stirrups at Lafayette Square.
Revolutionary War hero Thaddeus Kosciusko, the Polish patriot who shares the park near the White House, is without saber and hat.
But all is not lost.
Blocks away, Joan of Arc is a new woman thanks to a wash and wax and replacement of her battle sword.


When Not Just Any Home Will Do
When a Federal judge ruled this month that New York State could not arbitrarily cut off payments to 50 severely retarded and autistic adults who live out of state, the decision was a salve to people like Lorraine and Myron Slaff, whose son is one of them.
For as far back as they can remember, their twin sons, who are both autistic, had a compulsion to destroy things.
But while Stewart usually wrecked his belongings, Matthew hurt himself, banging his head into walls and, eventually, into sharp corners.


Marino Breaks Mark. Miami Breaks Down.
Colts 36, Dolphins 28


Love (and Exploitation) At the End of the Rail Line
They were known as street Arabs, the thousands of children without decent homes or families who cadged some sort of living on New York City streets a century ago, a threat to themselves and to others, not altogether unlike some of today's luckless inner-city youths.
But that was a simpler time, less afflicted  by guns and drugs.
Tonight's offering from "The American Experience" recalls a solution that seems quaint yet appears to have enriched and in some cases saved the lives of more than 100,000 children.
In its quiet and often affecting way, using Jacob Riis's unmatchable photographs, "The Orphan Trains" tells the story of the Childen's Aid Society, founded in 1853 by Charles Loring Brace, a young minister, with the mission of rescuing "these children of unhappy fortune" by "getting them utterly out of their surroundings" and into "kind Christian homes in the country."


Keeping Muller Fit
If KIRK MULLER is not traded in the next couple of days, Islanders General Manager DON MALONEY is expected to summon the center from his current exile in Southern California for workouts under team supervision.
"I broached the subject with his agent a couple of days ago," Maloney said yesterday.
"This is just a way to control his conditioning so that when the time comes to make a deal we can assure that he is in top shape."
MIKE BARNETT, Muller's agent, said yesterday, "Don had said he was considering it."


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI REVEALS A METHOD TO HIS MILDNESS


Editorial Notebook;China's Golden Shovels
In China as elsewhere, farmers plow, geologists map remote deserts and army conscripts dig trenches.
But perhaps nowhere else does their toil yield more incredible finds: entire armies of life-size terra-cotta warriors, walled cities buried in shifting dunes or, as happened not long ago, a fifth-century B.C. tomb harboring a whole orchestra of perfectly preserved string, wind and percussion instruments.
Nowadays in China, discoveries like these are almost commonplace.
"Just Another Wonder" was the blase headline a few months ago over a China Daily News account of a sacrificial grave near Xian filled with superb Tang dynasty bronzes.
China swarms with a billion people, a majority of them peasants who have been plowing for centuries.
How, then, can the soil still conceal so many wonders?
Partly it is because many major discoveries turn up in sparsely settled western  provinces.
Moreover, only in this century has archeology become a widespread profession in China.
A young practitioner offered a further thought:


With 'No Enemies,' Russia's Baltic Fleet Rusts
This formerly German city of Konigsberg and its nearby port on the Baltic Sea, Baltisk, once Pillau, were the Soviet Union's most forward military base facing the West, a place of high interest for NATO's strategists.
It remains a region of major military installations, but those who run them and operate their equipment are in the poorhouse.


Success Story Is Rewritten As a Mystery
Have we got anything yet?" asked Lieut. Walter Wilfinger, in his office as chief of detectives of the 61st Precinct on Coney Island Avenue in Brooklyn. He  squared the black-rimmed glasses on his face and turned to Bob Sommer, one of his detectives.
"Nothing," replied Sommer, his amber tie loosened, sitting across the desk from him.
"It's going on three weeks and still not a clue. It's a total mystery."


Leon Zitrone, News Broadcaster, 81
Leon Zitrone, a popular news broadcaster on French television for 30 years, died of a brain hemorrhage on Saturday.
He was 81.
Mr.
Zitrone, who was born in Russia, became a household name as a news anchor in the 1960's, when television was still a novelty for millions of French families.
The events he covered over the years included the annual Bastille Day parade, de Gaulle's funeral and the marriage of the Prince of Wales to Lady Diana Spencer.
He also commented on sports events, including the Tour de France cycling race, horse racing and figure skating, and was known for improvised interviews, genial rather than combative, with political figures.


A Family Struggle for the Soul of Times Mirror
To understand the deep changes roiling The Los Angeles Times and its parent,  the Times Mirror Company, four months after a management turnover that brought wrenching cutbacks to the paper and its staff, it is useful to look much further back, to a different turning point in the paper's history.
On March 5, 1961, the newspaper began a tough five-part series on the far-right-wing John Birch Society.
But for those who knew the Chandler family, which controls the newspaper, it was more than an expose on some anti-Communist  zealots.


Scandal Puts Focus on Lingering Questions About Utah Congresswoman
As chairwoman of the Young Republicans, Enid Greene was given two minutes to  speak at the Republican National Convention in Houston in 1992.
Wearing a red power suit, the 33-year-old candidate for Congress from Utah seemed unusually self-possessed.
"Should anyone stand between us and our goals," she warned her audience, almost spitting out her words with measured emphasis, "we will move them aside."
As she drew out each word, she held her hands together and then yanked them apart, showing the path this determined young Hannibal would clear over whatever Alps stood in her way.
A whoop went up from the Utah delegation, where her future husband, Joe Waldholtz, hung on her every word, nodding in silent communion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9


V.M.I.'s 'Sister' School Can't Measure Up in Money and Prestige
To the Editor:
Re "Separate and Equal" (Op-Ed, Nov. 20): Anita K. Blair, a member of the Board of Visitors of the Virginia Military Institute, made a plea to preserve V.M.I.'s all-male status.
She maintains that it is in women's self-interest, because women's colleges stand to lose if V.M.I. loses.
She's wrong.


Bridge
The American team that won the world title in Beijing last month is trying for its third straight Reisinger Team title at the American Contract Brdige League's Fall Nationals here today.
With the field cut to 10 teams for the final two sessions, Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Richard Freeman of Atlanta, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric  Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, were  in second position, trailing Russell Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., Ron Rubin of North Miami, Fla., and Mike Becker of Teaneck, N.J.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Tributes to a King And a Saint by Purcell Grande Bande Cathedral of St. John the Divine


House Compromised to Pass the Highway Bill;Billboard Economics
To the Editor:
"The Senate's Highway Cave-In" (editorial, Nov. 21) omitted important factors about the outdoor advertising provision in the recently passed national highway  system bill.


Nets Remain 0-for-the-Road
The rookie point guard Tyus Edney scored all 10 of his points in the fourth quarter and helped the Sacramento Kings overtake the New Jersey Nets, 99-92, tonight.
New Jersey, without a victory in eight road games, held a 74-73 lead early in the final period before Edney stepped up.
A driving jumper ended his scoring drought and earned Sacramento a 75-74 lead with 9:26 remaining.


Once Touched by Notoriety, Donna Rice Is Now in Limelight FightingSmut
When Donna Rice Hughes and Dee Jepsen walked into Senator Charles E. Grassley's office 10 days ago, they had long ago established their credentials as crusaders against pornography and indecency in cyberspace.
As leaders of a grass-roots group, Enough is Enough, they were among the first to show members of Congress a display of violent hard-core pornography they had plucked off the Internet and to push for tough new restrictions on computer networks.


AT&amp;T Contract in Egypt
The AT&amp;T Corporation signed a contract today worth about $26 million to add 92,000 underground feeder lines to the telephone systems in Cairo and Alexandria in Egypt.
The Agency for International Development said it was paying $13.4 million toward the project, and Egypt's National Telecommunications Organization is paying the rest.
AT&amp;T won a similar contract in July, worth about $24 million, for digital switching systems for 101,000 lines in Cairo and Alexandria.
The telecommunications giant has added 159,800 feeder lines to Egypt's telephone system in the last seven years.


Attackers Set Fire to Token Clerk in Brooklyn Subway Station
Two men armed with a bottle of flammable liquid and a match turned a token clerk's booth into an inferno inside a Brooklyn subway station early yesterday,  critically injuring the clerk in an attack that officials said may have been patterned on a current movie.
The liquid was squirted into the bulletproof booth, igniting with such force  that the booth was blown apart, spraying broken glass, charred insulation and splintered wood inside the Kingston-Throop Avenue station on the A and C lines in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Trapped inside was the clerk, Harry Kaufman, 50, working  an overtime shift he had volunteered for, who suffered second- and third-degree  burns over 70 to 80 percent of his body.


U.S. Plans Bill and Note Sales This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of bills and notes,  beginning with today's auctions of three- and six-month bills.
The Treasury will auction a two-year note on Tuesday and a five-year note on Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.31 percent; a six-month bill was at 5.23  percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 5.48 percent, and a five-year note at a rate to yield 5.69 percent.


Candidate, Front and Center


U.S. Signal to Haiti: Election Must Be Held
The Clinton Administration signaled strongly today that it expects Haiti to hold presidential elections as scheduled next month and President Jean-Bertrand  Aristide to step down in February.
"We expect him to leave," the White House national security adviser, Anthony  Lake, said today after President Aristide suggested last week that he would consider the requests of his followers to stay in power for another term.


Bankers Trust Head Of Derivatives Quits
The executive at the Bankers Trust New York Corporation who oversaw the company's embattled derivatives business will leave the bank by the end of the year.
The executive, Brian Walsh, plans to join a private investment group led by the Texan investors Sid and Lee Bass, a spokesman for Bankers Trust said last week.


Amtrak's Uphill Climb
Rail passenger service is the stepchild of America's transportation policy and the automobile culture Congress serves so slavishly.
It took decades for urban transit systems to wrest even a penny of the Federal gasoline tax to help  localities rationalize the way people get to and from work.
Now Amtrak, the intercity people-mover struggling to gain its financial footing, is at the mercy of the highway lobby and their loyal legislators.
Congress must provide the financial security Amtrak needs.
The passenger company, spun off from railroads that were allowed to concentrate on their viable freight business, deserves a sound financial base from a capital trust fund such as highway construction enjoys.
So do rail customers, and so for that  matter do motorists who seek open, uncluttered roadways.


Pentagon Confident, but Some Serbs 'Will Fight';In Sarajevo Suburbs, Talk of Resistance
The redrawing of the boundaries of Sarajevo, clean and neat on the conference table, is the most contentious part of the Balkan peace agreement, one that threatens to draw NATO troops into the kinds of firefights American officials desperately hope to avoid.
Demoralized Bosnian Serb leaders said today that the United States- sponsored agreement, initialed in Dayton, Ohio, last week, had led to a disintegration of  their authority over a bitter, well-armed populace that regards the accord as a  betrayal.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF


Quartet Celebrates Its 50th With a Toast to Beethoven
The Juilliard String Quartet began a five-concert series of the Beethoven quartets on Friday evening.
If not for a pre-concert announcement of congratulations, the audience at the Metropolitan Museum of Art might not have known that the quartet is celebrating its 50th anniversary. (The actual anniversary comes in 1996.)
Of course, except for the first violinist, Robert Mann, this is not the original Juilliard Quartet.
But Samuel Rhodes, who joined in 1969, has been on board longer than the founding violist, Raphael Hillyer.
And Joel Krosnick, who  joined in 1974, has now passed his distinguished predecessor, Claus Adam, as the longest-serving cellist.
Only Joel Smirnoff, the second violinist, is a relative newcomer.


Celtics Trade Douglas
The Milwaukee Bucks traded guard TODD DAY and center ALTON LISTER to the Boston Celtics yesterday for guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS.
Douglas was caught in a backcourt logjam.
Since last season, the Celtics have acquired the free agent DANA BARROS to go along with guards DAVID WESLEY, GREG MINOR and DEE BROWN.
(AP)


Edward Greenberg, 71, Professor And a Director of Hit Musicals
Edward M. Greenberg, the stage director of hit musical classics from New York to Los Angeles in the 1960's, died last Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was  71 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a stroke after open-heart surgery, his family said.


Tikkanen Is Suspended After Missing a Game
ESA TIKKANEN, acquired from the Devils by Vancouver in a Thanksgiving trade,  has been suspended by the Canucks for not reporting to a game in San Jose.
The 30-year-old left wing spent the weekend with his family in Edmonton rather than going to San Jose, where the Canucks lost, 7-2, to the Sharks.


A YEAR IN ALBANY: A special report.;Goals Met, Pataki Reveals A Method to His Mildness
In his campaign for governor last year, George E. Pataki outlined a succinct  set of goals for his administration.
Lower taxes.
Smaller government.
Less regulation.
A death penalty.
Just 10 months into his term, Governor Pataki has all but fulfilled these goals.
He has pushed through a three-year income tax cut that will eventually be worth $3.6 billion.
He has reduced the size of state government, though not nearly as much as his tax cuts would seem to demand.
He has created an agency whose sole purpose is to eliminate regulations that are deemed to cost too much.
He has reinstituted the death penalty.


Mexico's Former Chief Expresses 'Amazement' at Brother's Hoard
Former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today expressed "amazement" that his older brother, Raul, had $84 million in Swiss bank accounts under a false name and denied that he knew of the money when he was Mexico's chief executive.
A five-paragraph fax sent this afternoon to several news organizations was the first statement the former President has made about a mushrooming scandal involving his brother.
On Thursday, the Mexican Attorney General announced that  Raul Salinas' wife, Paulina Castanon, had been arrested on Nov. 15 in Switzerland for using fraudulent documents to withdraw money from the accounts.


Judge Is Forced to Lengthen Sentences for Crack
A judge who has bucked Federal sentencing guidelines in crack cocaine cases,  arguing that they discriminate against blacks, reluctantly obeyed a higher court's instructions last week and used those guidelines to sentence two brothers.


Retailers' Vision Of Full Registers Goes a Bit Awry
America went to the mall over the weekend, snooped around for bargains, nibbled on Mrs.
Fields cookies and went home.
The post-Thanksgiving shopping traffic was heavy -- but spending was not, retailers and those who study them said yesterday.
"We've had a lot of cruisers," said Vinny Castoro, an assistant manager at the Sears Office Center in the Paramus Park mall in Bergen County, N.J.
"Time will tell if they'll come back and buy."


Frank Hammond, Tennis Umpire With Style and a Sure Eye, 66
Frank M. Hammond, an umpire whose booming voice and flamboyant style earned him a reputation for controlling a tennis match better than anyone else, died Thursday at the St.
Elizabeth's nursing home on Staten Island.
He was 66.
The cause was Lou Gehrig's disease, said a friend, Eugene L. Scott, the editor and publisher of Tennis Week magazine.


Japanese Stocks Are Up Sharply
Japanese stocks rose sharply here today amid signs that the nation's banks might be prepared to unload some nonperforming loans.
At the close, the benchmark Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 327.91 points, or 1.8 percent, at 18,543.14.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 24.61 points, about one-tenth of 1 percent.


Poll Discounts Effect of Tax Cut
A new poll could provide food for thought for the many politicians nationwide who have set out on the tax-cutting trail blazed by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The Star-Ledger/Eagleton poll, released yesterday, shows that only 31 percent of New Jerseyans said they had benefited from her 30 percent cut in income taxes.
At the beginning of Mrs.
Whitman's term, 48 percent of residents said they thought they would benefit.


Doubts About the Fantasy of a $500 'Network PC'
It was the buzz of the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas earlier this month, hailed as the hottest idea since the personal digital assistant or the set-top box.
But can anyone really build a $500 "network PC"?
And will anybody buy a computer that has been stripped down to just the basic components required for connecting to the Internet and other computer networks?
I.B.M., the Oracle Corporation, Wyse Technology, Toshiba and other companies  have said in recent weeks that they will have these so-called diskless network computers on the market next year, although only Oracle and Wyse have talked specifically about a $500 price tag.


Correction
An obituary on Friday of Emanuel Pisetzner, the structural engineer engaged for the construction of the Holocaust Memorial in Washington, misidentified its  designer.
It was James Ingo Freed of the Manhattan firm of Pei, Cobb, Freed &amp; Partners, not I.M.
Pei.


49ers Able to Flatten Rams After a Flurry of Punches
Steve Young made a successful return from a shoulder injury and, for added inspiration, the San Francisco 49ers could thank the gall of Todd Kinchen.
Young threw for three touchdowns in his first game in six weeks and the 49ers ran off 35 straight points after Kinchen, a St.
Louis wide receiver, kicked and  punched their goal post, going on to a 41-13 rout of the Rams today at 3Com Park.


A Bid to Redefine Indian Education
Facing final exam pressures common to all boarding schools, students here have found an uncommon way to unwind.
Following the bouncing ponytail of Al Blackhorse, their history teacher, Indian students hop, skip and dip in a clockwise whirl of the Navajo grass dance.


Sports of The Times;The 'Must Go' Serenade Begins for Dan Reeves
THE chant has begun.
As the Giants walked wearily toward their locker room after the 27-24 loss to the Bears, some parishioners were heard yelling, "Dan Must Go" and others were heard yelling, "Reeves Must Go." The first name or surname is irrelevant.
The "must go" is all that counts because sooner or later the chanters always get their man.
The "Ray Must Go" chanters got Ray Handley in his last weeks as the Giants' coach in 1992.
The "Joe Must Go" chanters got Joe Walton in his last weeks as the Jets' coach in 1989.


U.S. Women No Match for Spain's Clay Specialists
Monica Seles telephoned here on Friday night to wish the United States Fed Cup team the best of luck.
It was a kind gesture, but what the Americans really  needed was a healthy Seles, not a thoughtful Seles.
Even with her on the American team, it would have been a daunting task to trump Spain and its clay-court aces Conchita Martinez and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in front of a home crowd of 6,000.


'Mahagonny,' an Apt Metaphor For Political Chaos in Any Era
If politics is the systemization of all that is worst in us, then "The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny" is the most political of operas.
Its banners  are all-purpose: equally appropriate to social democrats, libertarians or republicans.
So basic are its appraisals of human frailty that any party will do.
The message of "Mahagonny" is, unfortunately, in no danger of becoming obsolete.
The Metropolitan Opera brought back John Dexter's 1979 production of the Kurt Weill-Bertolt Brecht stage piece on Saturday afternoon.
Its mythical evocation of New World free enterprise looks to faraway places but grows out of a specific
environment, the economic and spiritual chaos of Germany in the 1920's.
It was a time when Communism and Fascism were in the bloom of youth, when capitalism had  reached comfortable maturity, when greed was enjoying its ripe old age and hope  was on its deathbed.


Outlook for Hiring Shows a Small Decline
Fewer companies expect to hire workers in the first quarter of 1996 than a year earlier, because of an uncertain economic outlook, according to a survey by Manpower Inc. that was released today.
"There is an undercurrent of uncertainty evident in the failure of companies  to be more aggressive in their staffing activities, and jobs will not be as plentiful as in the past nine months," Manpower's president, Mitchell S. Fromstein, said.


The Schools Are Washing Away
There are a lot of things that need fixing in New York City.
But school repair has got to be at the top of the list.
When rain falls in New York, 460 public school roofs begin to leak.
The water seeps into the masonry, loosening bricks and sending pieces of parapets crashing down on the sidewalk.
It runs into classrooms and gyms, splashing into water-catchers that custodians manufacture out of aluminum pans and plastic buckets.
It freezes and expands if  the weather is cold.
Walls crack, ceilings break.
The Board of Education hemorrhages money fixing buckling gym floors, warped windows, corroded tiles, rusting equipment.
Still, much of the damage just goes  unrepaired.
At New Utrecht High School in Brooklyn, the students can look through a hole in their cafeteria ceiling and see the steel beam that holds up the roof.
The ceiling tiles, the wire lathes that held up the plaster and the concrete that encased the beams have all been eaten away by water.
The hole is right next to a clock with no hands, the perfect symbol of a high school with 2,885 students and a single, prewar science laboratory.


Come Chilly Scenes of Winter, 'The Nutcracker': So Nice to Come Home To
All's right with the world, or at least with Lincoln Center.
"The Nutcracker" returned on Friday night to the New York State Theater.
The New York City Ballet will be offering George Balanchine's production of the evergreen classic there through Dec. 31.
"The Nutcracker" is easy to love and deserves being loved.
Tchaikovsky's score, which Hugo Fiorato conducted, enchants the ears.
Rouben Ter-Arutunian's scenery charms the eyes.
And the basic story of "Nutcracker," though simple, is  not foolish, especially as retold in Balanchine's choreography.


Child Abuse and Laws Protecting Protectors
STATE confidentiality laws prevent the city from discussing the case."
The words leap out from the newspaper every time, as if written in neon.
A child dies of unspeakable abuse, as 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo did last week, and the public cannot know if some government agency, exhausted social worker or distracted judge could have saved a life.


Blacks in South Africa Turn To Vigilantes as Crime Soars
The young man crawled carefully out from under the conference table where he  had been imprisoned for hours.
His head was misshapen from blows, his eyes swollen nearly shut, his shins and forearms rippled with welts.
His captors offered him for an interview and, mechanically, Big Fish (as he is known in Soweto) confessed to raping, robbing and beating people.


Streamlining Juvenile Justice
The Governor, meanwhile, is concerned about young people whose brushes with the law involve more than illegal smoking.
On Thursday, the Assembly will take up a legislative package from Mrs.
Whitman that is aimed at revamping New Jersey's disjointed system for handling juvenile delinquents.
The bills would create a Juvenile Justice Commission to coordinate programs for young offenders now administered by the Departments of Law and Public Safety, Human Services and Corrections and various private agencies.


Packing Up and Moving Out
Fort Monmouth and the Army Chaplain Center and School will formally say farewell at a ceremony on the base today.
The school, which trains more than 1,500 students each year, is moving to Fort Jackson, S.C., next month as part of Federal base realignments.


Pentagon Confident, but Some Serbs 'Will Fight';Military Now Says Bosnia Peace Plan Will Work
In the corridors of Congress and across the country, critics of United States involvement in NATO's plan to enforce a Bosnia peace accord have drawn comparisons with three other American missions: Vietnam, Lebanon and Somalia.
A few months ago, the Pentagon, which has opposed nearly every peacekeeping mission since the end of the cold war, would have agreed.
But after reviewing details of the accord initialed last week, even the most skeptical commanders now express confidence that the NATO force, including 20,000 American troops, can achieve a tightly circumscribed set of goals with minimum casualties.


New Plan for Hearing-Aid Users
Federal regulators have come up with a proposal to insure that business phones, like those in hotels, hospitals and offices, can be used by people who need hearing aids.
Lightweight telephones introduced in the 1970's had an unintended downside: many people with hearing aids encountered so much static and interference on the phones that they could not use them.


Northwestern and Its Fans Get to Stop and Savor the Roses
Fred Hemke thought he had seen just about everything in his 15 years as the faculty representative to the Athletic Department at Northwestern University and more than three decades on the campus.
He arrived in the early 1960's when Ara Parseghian was the football coach and Northwestern reached the top 10 in a brief flirtation with success.
He saw the school's purple flag flying at the Rose Bowl on New Year's Day, and assumed the  Wildcats would never come closer than that.
He watched athletes endure the humiliation of the 34-game losing streak from 1979-1982, and sat in on meetings  when Northwestern's worthiness as a Big Ten member became the subject of an intense debate.


U.S. WILL DEPLOY ITS SPY SATELLITES ON NATURE MISSION
With the cold war a fading memory, the nation's spy satellites are beginning  to turn some of their attention to nature.
In addition to peering at the usual military targets, they are monitoring such natural phenomena as clouds, glaciers, sea ice, deserts and tropical rain forests to gather clues about long-term global climatic change and ecological threats.


House Compromised to Pass the Highway Bill
To the Editor:
I wish "The Senate's Highway Cave-In" (editorial, Nov. 21), claiming that the Senate capitulated to the House on the National Highway System bill, were true.
The fact, however, is that during the negotiations, the House grudgingly dropped several strongly supported important House provisions.


INSIDE
Rabbis Queried About Rabin


Downsizing Portends Coming Discontents
To the Editor:
As one of the 77,800 A.T.&amp; T. managers who received a voluntary separation package, I urge Russell Baker to relax (column, Nov. 18).
Many business units whose employees received their "packages" have been informed that the employees  cannot be spared.
Some who accept the offer will have their acceptances overridden by higher management, which is their prerogative.
It is estimated only 10 percent of the managers who received offers will be let go.


Essay;The Way It Really Was Not
History has had assigned to it," wrote Leopold von Ranke in 1874, "the office of judging the past and of instructing the present for the benefit of the future." But the historian rejected that propagandistic assignment, proposing a  different purpose: "to seek only to show what actually happened."
That goal of impartially discovering wie es eigentlich gewesen -- the way it  really was -- is now expected of the best historians.
But truth in biography has been undermined by a new breed of cinematic pseudo-historians who hype conflict  and twist facts to suit dramatic requirements or political ends.


Virginia Remains Undefeated
Virginia took another step closer to its fifth consecutive soccer championship yesterday.
The undefeated Cavaliers posted a 4-0 triumph over Hartwick College of Oneonta, N.Y., in a National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament game at Charlottesville, Va.
Two goals each by Andriy Shapowal and Mike Fisher led the Cavaliers to their  20th victory of the season in a game dominated by Virginia, which seems to be getting into sync at the right time again under the direction of Coach Bruce Arena.


Mercedes Rossy, Jazz Pianist, 34
Mercedes Rossy, a pianist, composer and bandleader, died on Thursday in Barcelona, Spain.
She was 34.
The cause was intestinal cancer, said her brother Jorge.


Separated by a River And Not Much Else
The symmetry and relative social status between the Rangers and the Devils go beyond location on opposite sides of the same river.
The two teams have won the  last two Stanley Cup tournaments.
Despite a handful of great games so far this season, both are playing inconsistently and below potential.
Both lost road games by 2-0 Saturday night.
And both teams have one major player in common.
He is Bruce Driver, a veteran defenseman who joined the Rangers last summer as a free agent after 12 seasons in a New Jersey uniform.


Texas Replaces Food Stamps With Food Cards
While Congress and the White House debate the future of welfare, Texas officials, trying to cut down on fraud and administrative costs, have expanded to the entire state a program that dispenses food-stamp benefits electronically.


Some New Antics In That Charenton Asylum
It can't have been easy being married to literature's most notorious libertine: Donatien Alphonse Francois, Marquis de Sade (1740-1814).
That's clear with the initial appearance of Renee, the Marquise, in Doug Wright's raffish new comedy, "Quills," about the final years of Sade's life in the Charenton mental asylum outside Paris.
The play, directed with discipline and elan by Howard Shalwitz, opened last night at the New York Theater Workshop.


Metro-North Braces for a Strike, Again
With 15 of its unions still without a contract and a strike possible as early as tomorrow, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad plans to distribute its strike contingency plan today at Grand Central Terminal.
Negotiators for the teamsters and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority,  Metro-North's parent agency, met over the weekend, and talks are scheduled to resume with a coalition of other unions this morning to try to reach contracts retroactive to Jan. 1.


An Intel computer security expert runs afoul of the law. So much for the 'hacker ethic'?
RANDAL L. SCHWARTZ said he thought that he was doing the Intel Corporation a  big favor by finding weaknesses in the company's computer networks.
Instead, in  July he became a convicted felon -- on probation for five years, facing a deferred 90-day jail term, 480 hours of community service and $170,000 in legal  fees.
In two weeks, a judge will determine if he also owes Intel $72,000 in damages.
Regardless of whether one sees Mr.
Schwartz as a white knight with questionable judgment or a computer criminal who deserves jail time, his tale contains valuable lessons for anyone who uses or manages a corporate computer system.


Johnnie Tillmon Blackston, Welfare Reformer, Dies at 69
Johnnie Tillmon Blackston, who encountered one officious welfare inspector too many and used her anger to help change the system, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 69.
Her family said the cause was diabetes.


Corporate veils of secrecy limit access to important stories.
DO journalists know what is really going on?
Oh, they cover Congress like a blanket and on occasion the President can't even get a haircut without headlines.


Violence Begets Violence
To the Editor:
Re "Crime Continues to Decline, but Experts Warn of Coming 'Storm' of Juvenile Violence" (news article, Nov. 19): You quote Prof.
John J. DiIulio of Princeton University regarding his anticipation of a surge in violent crime from a generation of adolescents, many of them "fatherless, godless and jobless."


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
An Old-Fashioned Musical On Sex and Doing Without 'Abstinence' Theater for the New City


Taking In the Sites;A Maui Sunset in Real Time (Modems Not Optional)
As December nears, it may be of some comfort to know that a Maui sunset is but a few keystrokes away.
A camcorder at Synchromic Studios, a video production plant in Hawaii, faces  a window toward the Silversword Golf Course and the West Maui mountains.
Every 10 minutes, a Silicon Graphics Indy computer automatically uploads a picture to the company's World Wide Web page.


Russian Lawmaker Dies In Unexplained Shooting
A young, liberal member of the Russian Parliament was shot dead by his bodyguard early today while campaigning in his district in Siberia.
Sergei Markidonov, 34, a candidate of the Stability Party, was the fourth member of the lower house of Parliament to be killed in the last two years.


Silicon Valley executives don't seem to feel they are getting much bang for their marketing buck.
THE advertising efforts of high-tech marketers have grown more sophisticated  since the days when their idea of effective selling was to attend trade shows and give away pocket protectors.
Yet a survey of chief executives of companies based in Silicon Valley indicates that many still question the efficacy of the campaigns undertaken on their behalf.
According to the survey, which was conducted in September, though 96 percent  of the chief executives said they considered marketing critical to the success of their companies, 74.3 percent rated the effectiveness of their marketing programs as only poor, fair or average.


Girl's Cousin Is Haunted By Failure to Get Custody
She caught the first snatches of the news on a distant radio in a furniture store, and did not even pause to pay attention.
"Worst case of child abuse ever," the radio announced.
Elsa Canizares simply  went on with her shopping.
"In this city," she said, "you don't even react anymore."


Honors
Emily Soell, vice chairwoman and chief creative officer at Rapp Collins Worldwide, New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, has been named 1995 Direct Marketer of the Year by Target Marketing Magazine, Philadelphia, published by the North American Publishing Co.
Prevent Blindness America, Schaumburg, Ill., has honored the Saturn Corp., Troy, Mich., a unit of the General Motors Corp., for a television commercial, "A Few Improvements," created by Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco.
The spot featured protective eyewear in a prominent role.


Quarterback Earns Tag As a Big-Game Player
In practice, his passes often flutter like the proverbial butterfly, and don't travel much faster.
Steve Spurrier, his coach, admits to sometimes cringing at his accuracy.
Yet when the stadium fills up, Danny Wuerffel, the University of Florida's junior quarterback with the shot-put delivery, is among college football's deadliest passers.


Slovak Language Law Won't Harm Minorities
To the Editor:
After reading the Nov. 16 news article and Nov. 20 letter by Bela Liptak concerning the recently passed language law in Slovakia, let me present the Slovak view of this legislation.


Sports of The Times;Jets Do Not Match The Yankees' Gift
NEW YORK stopped doing favors for wobbly Seattle franchises yesterday.
After  the Yankees and Giants had done wonders for the locals this fall, the Jets came  out here and stunned the Seahawks, 16-10, to crush their playoff hopes and maybe even speed up their moving plans.
What is it with Seattle?
Half the young people in the country are plotting to move out here, but team owners are scheming for better stadiums at the threat of moving elsewhere.


Many Israelis Find Peace Hopes Inspiring
To the Editor:
The moving Nov. 21 letter by Helen Friedman ("Where Will the Witch Hunt End?") is a testament to the tragedy that has befallen religious Zionism, largely of the movement's own making.


Token Clerk's Booth Blown Apart


No Troops, No Peace
Tonight, President Clinton addresses the nation to explain why the United States must help peace take hold in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
He will make the case that it is in America's interest to carry out the agreement reached in Dayton, Ohio.
I have never been involved in a negotiation with so many complex and seemingly intractable issues at stake.
The negotiations took place against the backdrop of four years of the bloodiest events in Europe in 50 years.
The American role in reaching a comprehensive settlement was essential.
But at crucial moments, the Presidents of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia sought each other out in direct talks and reached hard-fought compromises.
American and allied resolve, combined with war fatigue, self-interest, fear of continued carnage and an eye toward history's verdict, produced a sound agreement.


Increasingly, Top Designers Are Drawn to the Web
In a nondescript office, Dan Coutu sat at a high-powered computer work station painstakingly creating the digital pieces of a site on the Internet's World Wide Web.
His long hair was tied in a ponytail and he wore a polo shirt, khakis and old running shoes, the proper uniform for the resident technojock at  Convergent Media Systems, an interactive communications and design company in this suburb of Boston.
Mr.
Coutu, 39, works with Jonathan Reducker, a 35-year-old graphic designer.
This is one of cyberspace's odd couples, a pair that represents the merging of traditional design with leading-edge computer programming.
They are helping customers take advantage of the new darling of corporate America, the Internet multimedia information-retrieval system known as the Web.


Accounts
Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom, Allentown, Pa., owned by Cedar Fair L.P., to  Tierney &amp; Partners, Philadelphia, a unit of True North Communications, to handle its account, previously at Marc Advertising, Pittsburgh.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Operation Bucky: When the Deer Is a Decoy and a Hunter Is the Prey
The young white-tailed deer with the well-formed rack of antlers stared intently over its right shoulder, frozen in the classic stance of an animal sensing danger and preparing to spring for cover.
But its fluffy white tail refused to give the distinctive flick that alerts its kin to danger.
Pulling out a crescent wrench, David Clayton, an officer for  the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, tinkered with a tiny motor in the deer's hindquarters.
"The last time out, he got shot in the tail and they messed up our robotics a little bit," he said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Computer Industry Debates The $500 Connection Does the world need a $500 diskless computer, intended simply for connecting to  the Internet and other computer networks?
Some executives imagine a future rich  in low-cost, limited-function machines; I.B.M., Toshiba, Oracle and other companies are planning to make them.


Religion vs. Archeology


Autopsy Raises Questions About Model's Death
Injuries on the body of a model found in a makeshift grave do not appear to have come from an automobile accident, contradicting the account of a photographer who says he killed her accidentally, the coroner's office said today.
But more tests will be needed to determine the cause of death, said Scott Carrier, a spokeman for the Los Angeles County coroner's office.


Voting on Public Smoking Ban
This Hunterdon County Borough really doesn't want its young people to start smoking.
Last summer the Borough Council passed an ordinance outlawing cigarette vending machines.
Today it is expected to pass a measure making it illegal for anyone under 18 to smoke in public.


CHRONICLE
In September, Pocket Books, a division of Simon &amp; Schuster, paid $1 million for "Home Cookin' with Dave's Mom" by DOROTHY with JESS CAGLE .
The book is due  in December, and meanwhile, Dorothy, who is the mother of DAVID LETTERMAN , and  prefers to use only her first name, is cooking.
So, what could be in a million-dollar cookbook?


Browns Fans Still Don't Get a Reason to Cheer
It has become surreal at Cleveland Stadium now that news of the Browns' move  to Baltimore has had time to sink in.
Protesters milled around outside the stadium before the kickoff against the Steelers today, passing out fliers that depicted the Browns' owner, Art Modell, as one of the Three Stooges.
The bleak stadium was barren of advertising signs, but fans' banners proclaimed love for the team and distaste for Modell.
The Cleveland police, bracing for trouble, ringed the field midway into the fourth quarter.
There were 11,243 no-shows and the 67,269 fans in the stadium -- many of them Steelers followers -- alternated between cheering for the Browns and booing receiver Andre Rison, who voiced his support of the move last week.


Finger-Pointing Over Past Straining South African Unity
In an angry response to a call for senior members of his Government to be prosecuted for their role in the armed struggle to end apartheid in South Africa, President Nelson Mandela this weekend described his deputy, F. W. de Klerk, as a "joke."
Mr.
Mandela made his statement after Mr. de Klerk, the former leader of the apartheid Government, said that prosecutions of officials of Mr.
Mandela's African National Congress were necessary for the sake of "evenhandedness."


In America;Merry Christmas, New York Pols
The nerve! The audacity! The utter gall!
I reached for the thesaurus.


Heroes, Warts And All
In three two-hour segments, beginning tonight at 8:05 and continuing tomorrow and Thursday at 8:05 (with repeats at 10:05 each evening), TBS takes an anything-but-idolatrous look at this century's American sports heroes in "Idols  of the Game." The legends, the role models, are put in the deflating context of  social and cultural whirlwinds, conjuring a largely white male world buffeted by the fierce winds of racism, sexism and insistent stereotyping.
This collection of profiles, buttressed with great archival material, seems to meander at times, but each two-hour segment has a unifying thesis.
Tonight it's inventing, or at least defining, the All-American mythic hero.
Who is he, or she?
Going back to the Olympic Games of 1912 in Stockholm, the documentary begins with Jim Thorpe, the American Indian athlete who would later see his gold medals confiscated because he had briefly played baseball for money.


Conill Names 4 Managing Partners
A month after Carlos R. Rossi, the chairman and chief executive at Conill Advertising in New York, left the agency, changes are being made in top management.
Four senior executives are being promoted to the new positions of managing partners at Conill, a unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising North America that specializes in advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
The executives are Luz de Armas, 39, senior vice president and creative director, who was also  promoted to the new position of chief creative officer; Paul Melter, 40, the chief financial officer; Nancy Pendas-Smith, 40, vice president and account director, who was also promoted to the new position of president, and Nancy Tellet, 37, senior vice president and media director, who was named to the new position of communications director.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Patents;A recent patent on a Papua New Guinea tribe's cell line prompts outrage and charges of 'biopiracy.'
IS human tissue a natural resource akin to oil or iron?
If so, are researchers practicing a sort of biological colonialism when they go prospecting for exotic genes among remote indigenous populations -- genes that may one day form the basis for new and expensive drugs?
Such questions have reached a new pitch since an advocacy group issued a press release on the Internet last month charging that the National Institutes of Health had recently patented a man from the Hagahai tribe of Papua New Guinea.


BellSouth Signsm 'Designing Woman'
A unit of the BellSouth Corporation has signed Dixie Carter, the actress who  was a regular on the CBS sitcom "Designing Women," as the spokeswoman for its Yellow Pages directory.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
A campaign featuring Ms.
Carter, created by Tucker Wayne/Luckie in Atlanta,  is scheduled to begin in mid-January and run for two years; spending for the first year was estimated at more than $20 million.
Commercials will follow Ms.
Carter's renovation of her house in Tennessee as she hires contractors and other workers from the Yellow Pages.
The campaign is being sponsored by the BellSouth  Advertising and Publishing Corporation.


Machine Tool Orders Rose 8% in October
Orders for industrial tools made in the United States rose 8 percent in October from the month before, according to the Association for Manufacturing Technology.
While domestic customers raised their orders by 15.5 percent last month, demand from abroad fell 22.1 percent, the trade group's report showed.


Equity Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
BAB Holdings Inc., Chicago, an initial public offering of 1.7 million shares.
R.
J.
Steichen.


Fedex Acting Against Pilots In Slowdowns
After beginning disciplinary procedures against at least four pilots for what the Federal Express Corporation called their participation in work slowdowns by  its pilots' union, company officials today described operations as normal throughout the weekend and said deliveries were "expected to occur normally on Monday."
Hours after contract talks broke down on Saturday morning between Fedex and its pilots' union, the Air Line Pilots Association, the union began what it said was the first stage of a four-level plan to force the company back to the bargaining table.
The union said pilots would start turning down overtime requests.


Can the Flintstones Fly in Fiji?
Superheroes and supervillains, cutesy animals and karate-kicking kids -- from Popeye to Scooby Doo, the latest American television export to be pumped into worldwide circulation is children's programming.
Hoping to match the international success of the Cable News Network and MTV,  the nation's top purveyors of children's shows are racing to expand into a still-developing global marketplace with more than $100 billion in potential revenue.


A Multimedia Assault Takes Shape
Maybe it is his penchant for luring big-name talent like Kevin Wendle, a co-founder of the Fox television network and one-time producer of "Beverly Hills 90210." Or perhaps it is the way he boldly strikes deals for exclusivity when it just is not done.
Halsey Minor is proof that the once-cozy Internet, with its roots in academia and the military establishment, is today steeped in the no-holds-barred competitive traditions of American capitalism.
With new electronic magazines popping up daily on the World Wide Web, there is a land-rush feel to the place, and Mr.
Minor is intent on staking out his audience early.
Mr.
Minor, the 30-year-old chief executive of the C/net on-line  computer magazine, begun in June, offers a telling example of the aggressiveness, energy and seed money that may be required to set down economic  roots in God's little cyberacre.


For Music With a Bite, Labels That Bark
In a simpler, gentler time, rock-and-roll hits came on 45 r.p.m. vinyl, lyrics dwelt on unrequited love or expressed mild rebellion, and many Top 40 singles were recorded on labels with updeat, sentimental or patriotic names.
Remember B. T. Puppy Records (the Happenings), White Whale (the Turtles), Liberty (Kenny Rogers), or Chrysalis (Jethro Tull)?
Popular music has, of course, grown more raucous, so it is no surprise that  the names of record labels have evolved from the colorful to the caustic.


Officer Shot in Hand in Brooklyn Struggle
A police officer was shot through the left hand yesterday morning while struggling with a man who had harassed a woman at a Brooklyn bank's automatic-teller machine, a Police Department spokeswoman said.
The officer, Curtis Rose, was alone on foot patrol at about 7:30 A.M. when he saw the man approach an elderly woman near the Chemical Bank branch at McDonald  and Church Avenues in Kensington, said the spokeswoman, Officer Ivette Serrano.
When Officer Rose approached the woman, she told him the man harassed her and asked for money, Officer Serrano said.


The Past, From Simple to Popular to Elegant
Steam railroads, comic books, ocean liners, the Bible: objects from the past  appear to have taken over this year's selection of the most appealing gift books.
Well, so be it.
As the advertising copy for a book on traditional craftsmanship points out, "The past has a great future ahead of it." Here's a look into some pieces of that future.
THE PRACTICAL GUIDE TO PRACTICALLY EVERYTHING, Edited by Peter Bernstein and  Christopher Ma. (1,006 pages. Random House. Paperback, $13.95.) Inspired by Ben  Franklin's "Poor Richard's Almanac," two editors at U.S.
News and World Report offer tips on everything under the sun and moon: the best mutual funds, the safest airlines, the art of flirting, what to do about bear attacks, how to spot a fake antique and so forth, through a most astonishing mix of the trivial and essential.
The book's 14 chapters are titled "Money," "Health," "Sexuality," "Education," "Careers," "House and Garden," "Travel," "Sports," "Entertainment," "Autos," "Computers," "The U.S.A.," "The World" and "Facts for Life."
HOME AWAY FROM HOME: Motels in America.
By John Margolies. (127 pages. A Bulfinch Press Book/Little, Brown and Company. $29.95.) The author of "Pump and  Circumstance: Glory Days of the Gas Station" takes the logical next step, traveling some 100,000 miles in the 48 contiguous states and exploring hundreds  of motels of every imaginable form and occasionally bizarre manner.
The amusing  mix of text and pictures shows how quickly one of those dern newfangled ideas can achieve a richly variegated history.


Israeli Police Question 2 Rabbis in Rabin Assassination
For the first time since the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin three weeks ago,  the police interrogated two rabbis today on the suspicion that they had issued religious rulings condemning the Prime Minister to death.
The questioning followed reports that the confessed killer, Yigal Amir, might have acted after receiving a rabbinic sanction.
Mr.
Amir, an Orthodox Jewish student, has asserted that he followed religious law in shooting Mr.
Rabin on Nov. 4, but insists that he acted on his own.


No Headline
People have no confidence in the justice system.
They don't even go to the police.
They are more and more trying to deal with it on their own.
And the danger is that they revert to summary judgment and punish immediately." -- SYLVESTER RAKGOADI, a researcher on vigilantism in South Africa. [A6:1.]


Brooks Talks and Vents Frustration
It has been a terribly frustrating season for the Giants, whose only hope of  making the playoffs is to be magically transformed into the Dallas Cowboys.
And  players express that frustration in different ways.
Some become silent.
Others point fingers.
Linebacker Michael Brooks, an unrestricted free agent at the end of the season, may be in his last days with the Giants, and he isn't going out without first placing some blame for the team's 3-9 record.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Tormentors and Their Puppets, Panic-Stricken in Pools of Light Limon Dance Company Joyce Theater


Pact Signed for Sweden-Denmark Bridge
Swedish, Danish, and German construction companies signed a contract today worth nearly $1 billion to build a bridge to link Sweden and Denmark.
The Swedish construction company Skanska A.B. led a consortium of Hochtief of Germany and Hojgaard &amp; Schultz and Monberg &amp; Thorsen, both of Denmark, in a bid  for the project's largest single contract, worth 5.3 billion Danish crowns ($962.6 million).


WELLS FARGO FILES HOSTILE BID FOR FIRST INTERSTATE
Wells Fargo &amp; Company outlined its $10.83 billion hostile bid yesterday for First Interstate Bancorp in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
First Interstate has already agreed to a friendly $10.23 billion offer from First Bank System Inc.
Wells Fargo is offering 0.67 share for each First Interstate share,  based on yesterday's stock prices, and First Bank System is offering 2.6 shares  for each First Interstate share.
In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, shares of Wells Fargo rose $1.125, to $213.375.
Shares of First Interstate rose  62.5 cents, to $135, and shares of First Bank System rose 62.5 cents, to $52.25.
Wells Fargo has indicated that it will present its plan to First Interstate shareholders and try to oust the company board.
If either offer is accepted, it  will be the biggest merger deal in history.


Fidelity to Offer Fund in Japan
Fidelity Investments will offer an investment trust in Japan, becoming the first American money management firm to provide Japanese investors a yen-denominated fund, Fidelity said today.
The Fidelity Japan Open-End Fund will invest mainly in Japanese stocks, and it will be marketed through Nomura Securities Ltd., the company said.
Shigeki Makino, who joined Fidelity in 1990, was named to manage the fund.


Remember the Nixon Doctrine
The Clinton Administration's insistence on putting 20,000 American troops into Bosnia should be seized on by national leaders, particularly those running  for President, to force a long-overdue debate on the worldwide obligations of our military.
While the Balkan factions may be immersed in their struggle, and Europeans may feel threatened by it, for Americans it represents only one of many conflicts, real and potential, whose seriousness must be weighed, often against  one another, before allowing a commitment of lives, resources and national energy.


EDISON BROTHERS PLANS TO CLOSE 462 STORES
Edison Brothers Stores Inc., which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Nov. 3, submitted a request yesterday in Federal bankruptcy court for permission to close 462 underperforming stores by Jan. 31.
The company said it expected to lay off about 3,000 part-time workers and 960 full-time workers.
During the year that ended on Jan. 28, 1995, St.
Louis-based Edison had 23,400 full- and part-time employees.
Of the closings, 382 would be apparel stores called J. Riggings, Jeans West, Oaktree, Repp Ltd., 5-7-9 Shops, Webster Clothes and Zeidler &amp; Zeidler, while 80 would be shoe stores operating under the names Bakers, Leeds and Wild Pair.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


British Retailer in Sale
The British retailer Sears P.L.C. said today that it had sold the 123 sporting goods stores that make up its Olympus unit to Mayfind Ltd.
Terms were not disclosed, but the London-based retail store and home-shopping concern said  it would book a loss of L35 million, or $54.6 million, in the transaction.


Justices Won't Hear Student Who Sought to Write on Jesus
Acting on a case that has drawn considerable attention from the religious right, the Supreme Court today turned down an appeal that argued that a public school teacher's refusal to accept a ninth grader's research paper on the life of Jesus amounted to discrimination against religious speech.
The student, Brittney Settle, sued the Dickson County, Tenn., school board after she received a grade of zero on the paper she submitted to fulfill an assignment to write a research paper on any topic using four sources.
The teacher had earlier rejected Brittney's proposal to write about Jesus on the ground that the girl's strong Christian beliefs and deep knowledge of the subject would make it difficult for her to approach the topic in a scholarly way or to accept criticism of her paper.


Let's Balance Budget Before Cutting Taxes
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 23 front-page article on the Congressional Republicans' tax plan points out anomalies in their budget proposal, including odd revenue fluctuations, suspicious timing for tax breaks and discrepancies with Treasury Department estimates of cost and benefit distribution.


New Rules for Old Dams Can Revive Rivers
For the better part of two centuries, the 65-mile-long Deerfield River -- gurgling, rushing and roaring down a 2,000-foot gradient through postcard settings in Vermont's Green Mountains and Massachusetts' Berkshires -- has had its ecological health sacrificed to the demands of industry.
Today the Deerfield is much cleaner than in decades past, when mills and towns discharged enough polluted waste to turn the river into what Dr.
Kenneth D. Kimball, a regional conservationist, calls "a well-landscaped sewer." But one of the most devastating insults to the life of any river remains: a string of 10 hydroelectric dams that have impoverished the river biologically, despite its new cleanliness.


Smoke and Burns Are a Devastating Mix
When someone suffers third-degree burns that cover 80 percent of the body as  well as lung damage from smoke inhalation, as Harry Kaufman did, the medical task of saving him becomes heroic and the odds of survival very long.
Mr.
Kaufman, 50, a token clerk who suffered the severe burns early Sunday morning when two men torched his subway booth, is in the burn unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
Mr.
Kaufman's condition "is touch and go," Dr.
Michael Madden, the clinical director of the burn unit, said, describing the burn injuries as the most severe kind.
"It is an hour-to-hour situation."


Letting One's Hair Down In Stand-Up Recollections
Midway through his one-man show "The Warm-Up," Sammy Shore, an old-time professional comic in his mid-60's, doffs his curly gray toupee, plants it on a  wig stand and observes that men are as vain as women.
Removing his shirt and pointing to his sagging flesh, he invents sarcastic names for the wattles under  his chin and the flab under his arms, and ticks off a list of his ailments.
"When I was a kid, I never heard the word prostate," he remarks.
"Now it's like a relative you can't get rid of."


Subway Fire Attack Prompts an Uproar Over Action Movie
Columbia Pictures, the maker of the new $60 million movie "Money Train," said yesterday that it was "appalled and dismayed" by the subway firebombing that critically burned a token clerk in Brooklyn over the weekend, but declined to comment on a rising chorus of charges in Washington and New York that the film had inspired the vicious attack.
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, urged Americans to boycott the movie, which contains two scenes in which a pyromaniac squirts flammable liquid into token booths and ignites it, though the clerks escape injury.
The film opened last Wednesday and made $15 million in its first five days.


Gingrich Closes the Door


CHRONICLE
IGNAT SOLZHENITSYN, 23, a concert pianist and a son of the Russian Nobel laureate Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, was injured yesterday when his speeding car went off Interstate 91 in Hatfield, Mass., and rolled over several times, the police told The Associated Press.
The cause of the crash, which occured at 6 A.M. and in which two passengers, Sabrina Turim, 32, and her daughter, Tatiana, 2, were also injured, is under investigation, Shayne Suarez, a state trooper, said.


Will Catch-95 Spoil Your Holiday?
CALL it Catch-95.
Compaq Presario computers, like most new models available for the holidays, come with Windows 95 preinstalled.
The catch?
Just as you begin to troll the modern Yuletide carol hailing long file names, you discover that the free copy of Microsoft Works on the machine's hard drive is version 3.0, which does not understand them.
I.B.M.
Aptiva models include Works 4.0, which does know about long file names, but also throw in Smartsuite 4.0, which does not.
Catch-95, by no means limited to these models, is the latest stumbling block  in the drive to turn computers into consumer products.
Imagine the fun in unwrapping an expensive TV set and discovering the remote control is last year's model and can select only single-digit channels.


Former Chairman of Tri-Star To Form New Movie Company
Mike Medavoy, the longtime film producer and former chairman of Tri-Star Pictures, said yesterday that he would form a new entertainment company with Sony Pictures and two other backers.
Mr.
Medavoy, who resigned under pressure from Sony's Tri-Star unit early last year, said his new company, Phoenix Pictures, would eventually produce eight feature films a year.
He said he already had 15 movie projects in various stages of development.


No Puritans at the Feast
To the Editor:
Thanks be to John Demos, Yale history professor, for " 'Cannoe' Diplomacy" (Op-Ed, Nov. 23), on the first Thanksgiving.
However, he incorrectly identifies  an original celebrant as a Puritan.
Puritans were an ultra-orthodox sect within  the Church of England and did not arrive in America until 1630.
Plymouth Colony  was settled in 1620 by Separatists, nonconformists who worshiped separately, and secretly, in England, where their breakaway religion was outlawed.


CHRONICLE
NICHOLAS ROMANOV, who bears the title Prince of Russia and who some people consider the heir to the throne should it ever be restored, has no desire to lead the country.
"I am not at all in favor of a monarchy for all kinds of practical reasons,"  he said yesterday.
"The Russian people are not educated in the principles of constitutional behavior."


Monitoring Is Backed to See Who Needs Hypertension Drugs
MORE than 250 years ago, a German physician called it "the pulse of the doctor." Today it is called white-coat hypertension.
Both refer to the fact that a person's pulse rate and blood pressure are often higher when measured at a doctor's office or clinic than at home, work or play.
As a result, some patients may be mistakenly found to be hypertensive and may be needlessly given drugs to  bring their pressure down, two new studies suggest.
But while no one questions the existence of white-coat hypertension, there are strong disagreements about interpreting and treating it that could have a significant impact on medical costs and a lasting influence on patients' self-image, employability and insurability, as well as their risks of suffering  heart attacks, kidney disease or strokes.


Executive Changes
GRUBB &amp; ELLIS CO., San Francisco, named Allan Schuster president and chief executive, succeeding Joe S. Hanauer, who will continue as chairman.


The Case of the Plagiarized Papers Solved
To the Editor:
Re your article about the business of selling term papers to college students (Education page, Nov. 22):


Forte Criticizes Bidder
Defending itself against a bid of L3.4 billion ($5.3 billion), Forte P.L.C. attacked the Granada Group as "an old-fashioned 1980's-style acquisition machine" that is trying to buy its assets on the cheap.
In its response to Granada's offering document, Forte, Britain's largest hotel company, said Granada "fails to understand Forte's business and ignores the achievements of Forte's new management team." Granada wants to add hotels to interests that include roadside service centers, catering and television production and rentals.
Bloomberg Business News


Devils Were Downed With an Early Punch
The Crash Line has been one of the good things for the Devils in these days of distress, but Coach Jacques Lemaire broke up the line of Bobby Holik centering for Mike Peluso on the left and Randy McKay on the right for last night's meeting with the Rangers.
The move backfired.
Lemaire scratched Peluso, the team's best pugilist, in favor of Reid Simpson, who is a fighter like Peluso and McKay, but has yet to prove himself with his fists.
Simpson's career as a battler took a turn for the worse last night.
The Rangers' Joe Kocur, a longtime tough guy, decked him just 5 minutes 5 seconds into the game and Simpson missed the balance of the 1-1 deadlock at Madison Square Garden.


AMERICAN FINANCIAL TO SELL BUCKEYE UNIT
American Financial Group put its Buckeye Management Company unit up for sale  yesterday and said discussions had already begun with interested parties.
Buckeye Management, based in Allentown, Pa., is the managing general partner of  Buckeye Partners L.P. and holds a 2 percent general partnership interest in the  independent petroleum pipeline, which had revenue of $45.8 million in 1994.
A spokesman for American Financial said the sale of the unit was part of the company's plan to sell noncore operations so it could concentrate on its insurance businesses.
American Financial, which had revenue of $3.8 billion in 1994, is a holding company.


Judge Strikes Down G.O.P. Rules For New York's Presidential Race
A Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday struck down the Republican Party's rules for New York State's Presidential primary, saying they set unfair hurdles  for candidates to gather enough signatures on petitions to put their names on ballots in some areas of the state.
If it withstands appeals to higher courts, the ruling by Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal District Court would be a significant setback to the state party and its choice for President, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.
Because Mr.
Dole has the backing of the state party, whose legions of volunteers can help him distribute petitions, he is likely to have a much easier time than other candidates collecting the tens of thousands of signatures needed to get on the ballot.


Budget Chief For Giuliani Joins M.T.A.
Faced with a tight budget squeeze, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority  named Marc V. Shaw, New York City's budget director, as its chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Shaw, 41, has 15 years' experience as a financial analyst and manager for the city and for New York State, and has developed a reputation for creative fiscal management at a time of seemingly intractable budgetary challenges.


Bernie Williams Needs Own Scorecard
Every few days, it seemed, the news brought new changes.
"I didn't know what to think," Bernie Williams, the Yankees' center fielder,  said today.
"It was like, man, they're changing the whole team. It's kind of frustrating because you have to go through this period trying to get adjusted to new teammates and a new manager. It's going to be kind of hard for a while, I guess, but we'll get it done."


Nintendo Says Profit Rose 25% in 6 Months
The Nintendo Company said yesterday that its pretax profit for the six months through Sept. 30 rose 25 percent from the corresponding period a year earlier.
Nintendo, a Japanese video-game maker, reported pretax profit of 63.87 billion yen, or about $629 million, compared with 51.05 billion yen a year earlier.
The  company's sales totaled 135.19 billion yen in the latest period, a 19 percent decline from 166.1 billion yen.
The company had nonoperating profits of 26 billion yen in the latest period, most of which came from revenue earned from foreign exchange operations.
Dow Jones


Whitman Takes Sides in G.O.P. Primary Race for Bradley's Seat
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman moved to impose some order today on the increasingly fractious Republican primary race for the United States Senate seat being vacated by Bill Bradley by endorsing the embattled front-runner, Representative Richard A. Zimmer.
Although the endorsement was expected, its announcement more than six months  before the June 2 party primary and nearly a year before the election was seen by Mr.
Zimmer's opponents as evidence that the Governor was trying to help the Congressman recover from the political fallout from his Oct. 19 vote against an  early version of the House budget.


Clinton's Words on Mission to Bosnia: 'The Right Thing to Do'
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's remarks on Bosnia tonight, as recorded by The New York Times.


A Word-Bending Wit's Riff on the Unreachable
Eco is not Umberto Eco's real name.
It is an acrostic.
His grandfather was a  foundling and, as the writer recently discovered through a friend who works in the Vatican library, he was given the name by an inventive civil servant sometime before the turn of the century.
Eco stands for "Ex caelis oblatus," Latin for "offered by the heavens." For someone who has devoted his life to semiotics, the study of signs and symbols, this might be taken as proof of divine provenance.
The mystery of Mr.
Eco's paternal roots allows him to imagine outrageous possibilities.
"I could be the last descendant of the emperor of Byzantium," he  said in an interview.
"Since I am the first son of the first son of my grandfather, I would be the chief of a royal family."


California Official Investigating Whether Simpson Detective Lied onStand
The California Attorney General's office has begun an investigation into whether former Detective Mark Fuhrman committed perjury during the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Gil Garcetti, the Los Angeles District Attorney, said during a news conference today that he had asked Dan Lungren, the State Attorney General, to handle the investigation and that Mr.
Lungren had agreed to do so.
Mr.
Garcetti  said the Attorney General's involvement was needed to avoid any appearance of a  conflict of interest because Mr.
Fuhrman had been a witness for the prosecution  and to assure the public that a decision on whether to press charges against Mr.
Fuhrman would be reached by an impartial prosecuting agency.


Orioles Hire Gillick As General Manager
PAT GILLICK, architect of two World Series titles with the Toronto Blue Jays, was hired yesterday as general manager of the Baltimore Orioles.
The former Blue Jays general manager, whose teams won the Series in 1992 and 1993, signed a three-year contract.
He replaces ROLAND HEMOND, who resigned last month after eight years.
Gillick played for five years with the Orioles as a minor leaguer and was a  teammate of the new manager, DAVEY JOHNSON, in 1962. (AP)


Chinese Breweries Stake
Asahi Breweries Ltd. and the Itochu Corporation will pay $52.5 million for a  75 percent stake in two breweries in China.
The purchases will make Asahi, Japan's second-largest brewer, the largest brewer in China.
Asahi will buy 45 percent of two breweries owned by China Brewery (Holdings) from the Hong Kong-listed investment company China Strategic  Holdings.
Itochu, one of the top five trading companies in Japan, will buy 30 percent of the breweries, which are in Beijing and in Yantai.
Bloomberg Business News


Handwriting on the Wall


Worries in South Africa
South Africa's top Olympic official said yesterday that a fatal shooting during a boxing match would have minimal impact on Cape Town's bid for the 2004  Games.


On My Mind;Yes, There Is A Taiwan
The trucks move day and night through the streets of Taiwan like creatures alive and wild with their own energy -- shouting and singing through their loudspeakers, denouncing, trumpeting, cajoling, forbidding escape or the succor  of a moment's silence.
The loudspeakers, mounted fore, aft and atop, deliver a gigantic rolling headache.
But they also deliver the sound of democracy, to a small country new to it, and to a huge glowering country whose leaders detest the thought of it.


Galapagos Islands Journal;Homo Sapiens at War on Darwin's Peaceful Isles
The commotion this fall in these far-off islands, where Charles Darwin studied the species and changed human understanding, drew competition for survival in terms sharper than most tourists cared to see.
Led by a fiery politician, hundreds of fishermen, teachers, bus drivers and laborers shut down an airport, while others converged at the National Park Service, threatening to burn down buildings and take visitors hostage.
Radio broadcasts urged looting and arson, while ordinary people vowed to become guerrilla fighters.
Visitors fled a vacation paradise turned war theater.


Shuttle-Mir Docking: The View from Space


Shell to Seek Oil Beneath The Gulf Salts
Shell Offshore Inc. announced yesterday that it planned to spend $240 million to develop oil and natural-gas deposits that have been discovered beneath layers of salt in the Gulf of Mexico.
The discoveries in recent years have been made using new computer-imaging techniques.
The project is one of several that have revived the Gulf of Mexico as a region for oil and gas exploration.
Fields that were believed to have been thoroughly exploited now hold out the possibility of hidden deposits.


Playoff Fringe Has a Fresh Look
With only four games to play in the National Football League regular season,  no playoff spots have been clinched and none are guaranteed.
But the teams that  are in the best shape heading down the stretch are Dallas (10-2) and San Francisco (8-4) in the National Football Conference; Kansas City (10-2), Buffalo (8-4) and Pittsburgh (8-4) in the American Football Conference.
The playoffs again may come down to the usual suspects that have taken center stage the last few seasons.
But there are other teams that are making strong pushes to crash the pre-Super Bowl party.


Accident on Ocean Kills 3 and a Dream
Judith Ann and Michael Sleavin long dreamed of sailing around the world with  their two young children.
They were off New Zealand on Friday when their boat was rammed in the dark and sank.
Only Mrs.
Sleavin survived.
Mrs.
Sleavin, 43, told rescuers at Cape Brett, New Zealand, that the family's yacht was rammed by a "large, long ship, perhaps a freighter," about 30 miles offshore.
She was on deck watch before dawn in rough seas, she said, when the ship suddenly appeared, bearing down on their 46-foot yacht.


Sports of The Times;Rutgers Continues Search for Holy Grail
FRANCIS L. LAWRENCE stood before the assembled news media yesterday afternoon and re-enacted what has become a ritual for many college presidents at this time of year: He dismissed the school's football coach.


Tobacco Giant Wins Ruling On Its Secrets
Brown &amp; Williamson, the nation's third largest tobacco company, yesterday won a crucial preliminary round in its legal campaign to silence a former top executive said to have information about an abandoned program to develop safer cigarettes.
A state judge in Louisville, Ky., where Brown &amp; Williamson has its headquarters, left in force a temporary restraining order barring the executive, Jeffrey Wigand, from disclosing any company secrets before a hearing  is held on whether he should be silenced longer.


Shoring Up a Lake


Rangers and Richter (40 Saves) Keep the Devils at Bay
Gritty, great and grouchy were appropriate words for last night's match between the two most recent Stanley Cup winners.
The Devils, the current champions, visited the Rangers, the champions of 1994, in the first game between the teams this season.
Through 65 minutes of playoff-like intensity, New Jersey  probably played better, but both teams earned a 1-1 tie at Madison Square Garden.
"It's too bad it ended in a tie," said Jacques Lemaire, the Devils' coach, who saw his team's losing streak end at four but its streak without a victory extended to six.


Budget Crisis Of Novel Kind For a Mandela
Winnie Mandela, who has been battling creditors on several fronts lately, narrowly escaped losing her furniture to them today.
The estranged wife of President Nelson Mandela has been in court disputing a  claim that she owes nearly $30,000 for renting a Lear Jet in 1993.
Testimony in  the case, which has been going on for weeks, alleged that Mrs.
Mandela had rented the jet to take her son-in-law to Angola to see about a deal involving the country's diamond industry.


Metro-North Reaches Tentative Accords With 5 Unions
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad reached tentative contract agreements with  five more of its unions early this morning, but talks with the teamsters union were still under way and officials would not rule out a possible strike this morning.
The unions that reached the agreements, announced at 2:20 A.M., represent several trades, including the railroad's electricians, machinists, firemen and sheet metal workers.


Haselrig Apologizes to Police
Carlton Haselrig, the Jets' starting offensive guard, apologized in Bayonne (N.J.) Municipal Court today to arresting police officers and pleaded guilty to  tailgating and driving with an expired license.
He was fined $132 for the traffic violations.
Haselrig was arrested three weeks ago today when police officers said he "began to act in a violent and tumultuous manner." When he apologized in court,  Judge Harvey L. Birne dismissed disorderly conduct charges stemming from the arrest.


Ancient Rift of the Red Sea Was Swift, Geological Study Says
The original parting of the Red Sea saw the earth's crust separate like the rigid leaves of a table, say geologists disputing an earlier theory that the sea unzipped gradually from south to north.
The rift, 34 million years before Moses is said to have parted the waters, took place along the length of what is now the Red Sea, two geologists, Gomaa I. Omar and Michael S. Steckler, reported in the current issue of the journal Science.


HAITI ACCUSES U.S. OF HOLDING DATA RECOVERED BY G.I.'S
After landing in Haiti last year, American troops seized more than 150,000 pages of documents from the headquarters of the Haitian Armed Forces and the country's most feared paramilitary group.
Now the Haitian Government wants the records back and accuses Washington of stalling.
The issue is becoming an increasingly sore point in relations between the two countries.


Tired of Being an 'Also-Ran,' Rutgers's President Fires Graber
As football coach, Doug Graber ushered Rutgers into the Big East Conference and into a new stadium.
But he did not usher in an era of success at a time when the university president is impatient for the financial solvency, increased visibility and greater prestige that more victories could presumably achieve.
Today, after two winning seasons out of six and a 29-36-1 record over all, Graber was fired with two years left on his contract.
An immediate search for his replacement was begun by the university president, Francis L. Lawrence, who  said he wanted a coach who could win consistently, "not do it for one year, then fall back."


Hospitals as Nursing Homes
Over the protests of nursing home officials, the Senate budget committee passed a bill yesterday that would allow hospitals to use their vacant beds to get into the nursing home business.
Current law permits hospitals to treat only patients who need acute medical  or surgical care.
Under the proposed change, hospitals could begin providing subacute or skilled nursing care.
Advocates say the change would bring in Medicare money that would help hold down the bills of all patients.
Senior citizens' groups back the bill, too, saying it is psychologically better to stay in a hospital than to go to a nursing home, even for a short time.
The 6-0 vote  yesterday sends the bill to the full Senate, The Associated Press said.


Chess
The 32d Rubinstein Memorial?
I don't even want to think about that tournament," said the 38-year-old New York grandmaster Nick DeFirmian after returning from Polanica Zdroj, Poland. He finished last in the 12-entrant invitational event last summer and for him there was little consolation in musing on the strength of his opponents.
Had DeFirmian been a baseball pitcher and that tourney his whole season, he would have had a 4-7 record and an earned run average of about 5.
But if a pitcher can restore his loss of pride with a no-hitter, a grandmaster can do something analogous: turn in a performance that wins a brilliancy prize.
And that is what DeFirmian did in his game with the German grandmaster Robert Hubner.


The Serb's Hopes Rise As the Sanctions Fall
He started with a dream and a whisk, stirring the ingredients himself in a metal pot to make ketchup on a two-burner electric stove.
Now, three and a half years later, 41-year old Vojin Starcevic owns Polimark, a company that has 65 employees working in three shifts, seven days a week, producing 3.5 tons of ketchup a day on modern machines.


Alabama Awaits Word on Appeal
A National Collegiate Athletic Association committee has decided Alabama's appeal of sanctions against its football program and will likely release its findings by the week's end, a spokeswoman said today.
Given that timetable, the Crimson Tide (8-3) should know by the day bowl bids go out whether the panel will lift a ban on post-season play -- a key request by Alabama.


Young Heroes Honored for a Tip
Four boys got handshakes from the Governor and an ovation from investigators  yesterday for helping catch a sex offender last year.
When the man approached the boys, they declined his offer of a ride and wrote down his license plate number, Bob O'Leary, an assistant Union County prosecutor, said.
The man, who had been on parole after serving time for the sexual assault and slaying of another child, is back in prison for eight more years.


What Could Be Better Than Brooklyn?
Fond memories, funny home movies and zesty newsreels lend a glow to "Brooklyn," the latest episode in PBS's engaging series "New York the Way It Was." The focus is on the 1930's and 40's.
Youngsters of the time, who appear tonight in their advanced years, did not have lots of toys, never mind videos or television, but they did have candy stores to hang around in, a park to picnic in, an ocean to swim in and a great cafeteria for dating.
Their parents had a local newspaper to read and local beers to drink.
And, of course, everybody had a team to root for.
Everybody, that is, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who confesses here that he was a Yankees fan.
He says he got tossed in the mud when he made the mistake of wearing the Yankees uniform his father had bought him.
Maybe that explains his growing up a Republican in Brooklyn.


Mother Found Stabbed in Neck
Two teen-age girls returned home from school yesterday afternoon to find their mother lying dead on the kitchen floor of their Brooklyn apartment, with a knife in her neck, the police said.
When they got home at about 3:20 P.M., the sisters, both students at Sheepshead Bay High School, were locked out of the apartment on Kings Highway in the Midwood section.
They climbed up the fire escape to let themselves in, the police said.


Judge Told City Welfare Agency To Monitor Girl Who Was Slain
When Elisa Izquierdo was placed in her mother's care around the time of her father's death last year, a Family Court judge ordered the city to supervise her new home through visits by a caseworker at least twice a month for a full year,  according to an official of the city's Child Welfare Administration.
Even after the year was up, the agency remained responsible for safeguarding  the child's welfare, and did not close the case until her death last week, the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Twenty years ago last month, JANE PAULEY joined NBC, where she was a co-anchor of the "Today" show for 13 years and is now a co-anchor of "Dateline NBC." So, yesterday, ROBERT WRIGHT, the president of NBC, and ANDREW LACK, the president of NBC News, gave a luncheon for her at 30 Rockfeller Plaza.
"She arrived from the Midwest 25 years of age, looking like a prom queen with brains," TOM BROKAW recalled during one of the numerous tributes.
"She was so mature and so sophisticated and so composed. The first time I realized that she really was new to New York was when she came rushing into my office after her first paycheck arrived. She realized that the grand sum for which she  had signed on was considerably diminished by New York state, city and Federal taxes. She was stunned."


Trading of Chalk for Whistles Is Out;A New Contract Would Bar Teachers From Policing Duties
It was lunchtime at Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn, and Amateka Morgan, a math teacher, was scanning a cafeteria full of 400 boisterous students like a nightclub bouncer.
Sensing a fight was about to erupt, Mr.
Morgan darted over to a group of tall senior boys and uttered soothing words that persuaded them to take their seats again.
Moments later, spotting a dress-code violation, he told another boy to button up the plaid flannel shirt he wore casually over a T-shirt.
When lunch was over, he grabbed a broom, swept up cellophane wrappers and rearranged tables for the next lunch period.


Cabby Made Taste of Democracy Costly
To the Editor:
A Nov. 20 news article describes the ways a New York City cabby used to overcharge his riders.
Once he told a woman that she gave him only a single when she had given him a $5 bill for a $3 fare.


Surviving on the Street As a Homeless Teen-Ager
Homeless teen-agers are convenient pegs on which television movies can hang periodic semblances of a social conscience.
Back in 1986, for instance, there was "Children of the Night," based on a book by Dr.
Lois Lee, a sociologist and  children's advocate.
Tonight at 8 on Fox, there's "The Price of Love," the press kit for which included an interview with Dr.
Lee, who cites estimates that 1 million to 1.5 million children run away from home each year and that about a third of them get involved in prostitution or pornography.
These are statistics  that almost beg for cheap exploitation.
For the most part, though, "The Price of Love" takes the high road, thanks largely to a remarkably affectation-free performance by Peter Facinelli as 16-year-old Bret, a runaway who reluctantly drifts into hustling male clients.
According to Dr.
Lee, incidentally, most of the hustlers' customers, at least in Hollywood, are attorneys and, she adds, "I think 95 percent are white and 75 percent are married." Now that's a rock Pat Robertson might not be too eager to  look under.


AmHS/Premier and Sun Health to Merge
The owners of AmHS/Premier and board members of the Sun Health Alliance have  agreed to merge the two alliances into the largest health care network in the nation, the groups said today.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Convictions Are Upheld in Guinness Case
The former chairman of Guinness P.L.C. and three co-defendants lost their appeal today against convictions in a plot to prop up Guinness's share price during a takeover of the Scottish drinks company Distillers.
The Court of Appeal turned down claims from the former chairman, Ernest Saunders, and the others that they were victimized by unfair prosecutors who withheld evidence that could have helped the defense.


Airbus Competitor For the Boeing 767
The European plane maker Airbus Industrie said today that it would develop a  long-range version of its A-330 twin-engine jet, a model that would directly compete with the Boeing 767.
The Airbus consortium said it would cost an estimated $450 million to develop the new version of the wide-body aircraft.


Making the Case on Bosnia
In a speech televised from the Oval Office last night, President Clinton asked the American people and their Congressional representatives to approve his plan to send 20,000 United States troops to Bosnia to help establish the peace.
Dispatching soldiers to the Balkans is not a prospect Americans face with enthusiasm.
But the mission the President has defined is limited, achievable and in accordance with American national interests.
Mr.
Clinton made a strong case in a sober, measured address.
Congress should  honor his request in a timely manner so that American troops can be deployed, along with 40,000 others from European countries and Canada, once a formal peace agreement is signed in Paris, probably in mid-December.


Company Briefs
SHONEY'S INC., Nashville, which operates 1,525 restaurants in 34 states, completed the sale of its unit to Levmark Capital Corp., for an undisclosed amount.


With a European Currency, The Currency Is Conflict
Though Europe is moving toward creating a single currency sometime around the end of the century, the path will be fraught with dispute, backbiting and squabbling.
That was plainly demonstrated at an important meeting of European finance ministers here today.
Representatives of the Continent's two biggest economic powers, Germany and France, bickered for much of the day over procedural issues  and tried to win support for their positions from other Governments of the European Union.


FIRST ALERT ANTICIPATES SLOWER DETECTOR SALES
First Alert Inc., a maker of smoke and carbon-monoxide detectors for home use, said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter charge of about $3.5 million and warned of flat sales for the full year, prompting a selloff in its stock.
The stock plunged $5.125, or 37.6 percent, to $8.50, in Nasdaq trading of more than 4.5 million shares.
First Alert said it would take the charge of about 8 cents a share to write off its inventories of first-generation carbon-monoxide sensors.
The company, based in Aurora, Ill., estimated that sales for the year ending on Dec. 31 would be nearly unchanged from last year's  $248 million.


South Africa Drug Venture
Apotex Inc., Canada's largest generic drug manufacturer, said today that it had bought a controlling interest in Accupharm, a South African pharmaceutical company.
The price of the transaction was not disclosed.
Accupharm, based in the Johannesburg suburb of Midrand, sells 40 generic medicines in South Africa.
It is also registering 50 Apotex products with the South African regulatory authority.
Apotex's partner in the venture is Garec Pharmaceuticals, a South African pharmaceutical company.
Apotex makes 140 generic medicines.


Heroin Influx Ignites a Growing AIDS Epidemic in China
Ai Hang is 23 and appears as robust and muscular as any farmhand in this village.
Saved from handsomeness by a crooked grin, he has a self-assuredness that is beguiling, so it seems almost believable when he says he just might defeat the sickness inside him whose symptoms he has never felt.
"The health clinic people said I have AIDS and that I would only live for six months or a year, but it has been already two years and I still have all this energy and good health," he said, sitting on the mat floor of his bamboo-frame house, his arms draped over his blue plaid sarong.
"I told those health clinic people: What if I don't die? Do you want to bet some money?"


New Leader In Algeria Promises Democracy
Algeria's newly elected President was sworn into office today and in an inaugural address pledged to bring "an authentic pluralistic democracy" to the strife-torn nation.
But he pointedly omitted Islamic militants in an invitation  to various political factions to join a "national dialogue," referring to them only as "misled Algerian youth."
In his first address since winning 61 percent of the vote in presidential elections 11 days ago, Liamine Zeroual, 54, a former general, also promised to hold parliamentary and municipal elections, but did not set dates for them.


Christie Wants Out If He Can't Play More
The acrobatic flair that Doug Christie exhibited on all those highlight reels when he first came to New York a year ago are almost a memory.
Other than an occasional liftoff in a game, to see a spectacular dunk from the 6-foot-6-inch swingman these days, you have to attend practice at Purchase College.
Or arrive early for warm-ups at Madison Square Garden.
He is calling it lack of opportunity.
The Knicks keep preaching patience.
At  any rate, the experiment is going nowhere and has produced discouraging results  for both parties.
Their relationship may be about to end.


Wisconsin Governor Endorses Dole for President
Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, who has been a leader among the country's governors in pressing the Federal Government to transfer more power to the states, endorsed Senator Bob Dole today for the Republican Presidential nomination.
"He has been truly a friend of all of the governors this past year when he was working so hard in the United States Senate to carry the difficult message that we have to balance the budget, we have to reform welfare and we have to keep the economy moving," Mr.
Thompson said.
Earlier this year, Mr.
Thompson had considered seeking the Presidential nomination himself.


Hannah Baumann, 79, Jewish Civic Leader
Hannah Hirschhorn Baumann, a former national vice president of the American Jewish Committee who was active in many charitable, cultural and religious organizations, died on Sunday at her home in Rye, N.Y.
She was 79.
The cause was cancer, her son, James, said.


Vanderbilt Is Too Much for Lady Jaspers
They arrived with a great deal of stature, took advantage of their superior size, strength and speed, and when the final buzzer sounded in Draddy Gymnasium  last night, the Vanderbilt Commodores trotted off the floor in style, having defeated the Manhattan Lady Jaspers, 85-64.
Vanderbilt (2-0), top-ranked in a number of preseason polls and currently ranked fourth by The Associated Press, brought big-time women's basketball to Riverdale.


Dismissal of Officer Upheld in Haiti Case
The dismissal of an Army captain who left his post to investigate reports of  human rights abuses at a Haitian prison was upheld today by the commanding officer of the 10th Mountain Division.
But the commanding officer, Maj.
Gen.
Thomas N. Burnette, reduced a court-martial panel's recommended punishment and dismissed a charge of conduct unbecoming an officer against Capt.
Lawrence Rockwood for lack of evidence, said a Fort Drum spokesman, Maj.
Rudy Cohen.


China Sets Goals for 1996
China set targets of 8 percent for economic growth and 10 percent for its inflation rate for next year and will maintain tough loan restrictions until the second half of 1996, The Shanghai Securities News reported today, citing a senior Government official.
The official, Ma Jiantang, director of the state council's macroeconomic development center, said China's state enterprises would have to improve productivity and increase working capital to meet the targets.


Two Views of Athletes That Offer Rare Insight
It is easy to focus the TV sports eye on the expansion of ESPN's "N.F.L. Gameday" to 90 minutes, John Madden's Thanksgiving Day discourse on why the legs of today's turkeys cannot support their girth (must be the beer), Fox's shameless cross-promotion of Terry Bradshaw's Sunday guest shot on "Married With Children" by featuring him and the show's cast in the opening sketch of Fox's National Football League pre-game show.
All those items -- and Ahmad Rashad portraying Joe Smith's barber to open NBC's "Inside Stuff" on Saturday -- keep company in the business-as-usual department.
Meanwhile, there has been a noteworthy spate of new sports feature and documentary works, all executed with vision, viewpoint and verve.


Patterns
A Japanese Connection


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Market Place;'Sell soon' seems like sound tax advice for the stock losers of '95.
IF you've got any long-term losses in your portfolio, you may want to dump those stocks before the end of 1995.
And if you are loath to sell because you still believe in the loser, today may be a good day to buy more, so you can still get 1995 tax benefits by selling later in the year.
That is because both the pending Senate and House tax bills have a provision  that makes capital losses worth a whole lot less starting next year.
By increasing the potential damage to an investor if an investment goes bad, it could be argued that the bills are at least partly offsetting the provisions that cut the tax on capital gains -- provisions that are supposed to encourage investment.
But as of now they are included in the planned legislation in part to bring some revenue to the Treasury.


Gel a Clue to Rupture, Implants Study Finds
The presence of silicone gel on the surface of a breast implant, which can be detected by magnetic imaging, is a likely sign the implant has ruptured and has  not just bled some of its contents, a researcher said today.
"Often, implants are called 'normal' when silicone gel is seen on the surface of the implant, and that gel is referred to as 'bleed,' " said the researcher, Dr.
Michael S. Middleton of the University of California at San Diego.


3 White Officers Are Charged in Black Motorist's Death
In a case that has stirred racial tensions across Western Pennsylvania, three white suburban police officers were charged today in the asphyxiation death of a black motorist they scuffled with after pulling over the car he was driving.
Two officers were each charged with third-degree murder and involuntary manslaughter and the third with involuntary manslaughter in the death of Jonny E. Gammage, 31, a businessman from Syracuse and a cousin of a popular player on  the Pittsburgh Steelers, Ray Seals.
The United States Attorney's office is also  investigating.


A Test of Faith for a Father Who Longs for Grace
MR. IVES' CHRISTMAS By Oxcar Hijuelos 248 pages. HarperCollins. $23.


METRO DIGEST
AT DEATH, GIRL WAS CHARGE OF AGENCY When Elisa Izquierdo was placed in her mother's care around the time of her father's death last year, a Family Court judge ordered the city to supervise her new home through visits by a caseworker at least twice a month for a full year,  according to an official of the city's Child Welfare Administration who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Moreover, the agency remained responsible for safeguarding the child's welfare right up until her death, the official said, and did not close the case until receiving word that Elisa was dead. [Page A1.]


Max Fernandez, 51, Bolivian Brewer
Max Fernandez Rojas, one of the wealthiest people in Bolivia, died in a plane crash on Sunday.
He was 51.
Mr.
Fernandez and six other people were killed when his private twin-engine plane crashed outside Uyuni, a town about 190 miles south of La Paz, the capital.


Hopewell Shares Rise
Shares of Hopewell Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong rose as much as 4.6 percent as  its managing director prepared to discuss with analysts the company's plan to sell some assets and pay off debts caused by troubled construction projects.
The managing director, Gordon Wu, will meet with analysts on Wednesday.
Hopewell is  expected to have debt of 9.5 billion Hong Kong dollars by the end of 1995 and is seen by analysts as facing a cash flow deficit of 2.5 billion Hong Kong dollars  in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1996.
Bloomberg Business News


Spy Satellite Built by China To Hit Earth
A derelict Chinese spy satellite weighing more than two tons is getting ready to plunge back to Earth, which could create a hazard for people on the ground or an intelligence bonanza for any foreign country that can recover its film and cameras.
Federal experts and industry reports say the satellite may re-enter the atmosphere by March or April.


Crude Oil Prices Are Up Sharply As Strike in Venezuela Is Feared
Crude oil prices jumped on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday on concerns that a threatened strike by oil workers in Venezuela could disrupt oil  production and exports to the United States.
Prices for gasoline and heating oil also surged.
On other markets, gold rose  while lumber fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities rose 0.05 point, to 241.36.


Fokker Gets Orders For 24 Aircraft
Fokker N.V., a Netherlands unit of Diamler-Benz of Germany, said yesterday that it had won orders worth about $565 million for 14 Fokker-100's and 10 Fokker-50's.
The aircraft maker, which is fighting for its financial survival, has sold 59 planes so far this year, a Fokker spokesman, said.
The company sold  50 planes all of last year.
Fokker said the Brazilian regional carrier Transportes Aereos Regionais had  ordered eight Fokker-100 jetliners and 10 Fokker-50 turboprops while an unidentified company had asked for six F-100's.
Bloomberg Business News


Time to Talk, Israel and Syria Again Imply
Israel and Syria exchanged new signals of interest in renewing their stalled  peace talks when their Foreign Ministers met today at an international conference in Barcelona.
Neither Israeli's new Foreign Minister, Ehud Barak, nor his Syrian counterpart, Farouk al-Shara, offered any new negotiating position.
But the non-polemical tone of Mr.
Shara's reply to Mr.
Barak's strong appeal for renewing a search for peace was viewed by Israelis as a heartening preliminary reaction.


Purchase by Marriott Unit
Marriott International Inc. said today that Marriott Management Services, which it owns, had acquired Taylorplan Services Ltd., a British provider of custodial and food services.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
Marriott Management Services said Taylorplan had annual sales of nearly $100 million and  clients that included the British Ministry of Defense, the European Parliament, the European Commission and a number of hospitals.


Higher Standards for Police Recruits
In recent years, the New York City Police Department has been good at reducing crime in the city, but less successful in tackling crime within its own ranks.


CROCKER REALTY TO BUY SOME TOWERMARC ASSETS
Crocker Realty Trust Inc. agreed yesterday to buy a portion of the assets of  the Towermarc Corporation, a privately held real estate development company, for $81.5 million.
Crocker, based in Boca Raton, Fla., said it would buy the assets  through debt assumption, cash and the issuance of about 1.7 million shares of Crocker Realty Trust stock.
Crocker said the purchase included nine office buildings in Memphis, and in Tampa and Jacksonville, Fla.; four parcels of land totaling about 20 acres in Memphis and Tampa, and management contracts for  properties in Memphis and Tampa.


Stocks Climb in Tokyo
Stocks posted solid gains here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 145.28 points, or eight-tenths of 1 percent, at 18,688.42.
On Monday, the Nikkei rose 327.91 points.


INSIDE
Another Record for Stocks


Raiders Need Hostetler to Get Well. Soon
Jeff Hostetler was in denim, Vince Evans was in his 40's and the Raiders were in single digits.
Al Davis has not only returned to Oakland, he has returned to the senior citizen quarterback.
With Hostetler's left shoulder black and blue tonight (instead of silver and black), the Raiders handed the football tonight to a man  born in 1955 -- and lived to regret it.


Delivery Glitch Delays Vote on Teachers' Contract
Voting on the proposed New York City teachers' contract by union members, which was to have begun yesterday, was delayed until today because of a glitch in the distribution of ballots to more than 1,000 city schools, a spokeswoman for the United Federation of Teachers said yesterday.
As a result, the voting period, which was to have ended on Friday, has been extended through Monday.
About 90,000 union members, most of them teachers, are expected to cast secret ballots on the five-year agreement.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a University of Pennsylvania program in which professors live in residence halls and act as student advisers misidentified the university at which Dale Tampke is housing director.
It is Ohio University, not  Ohio State.


Proposal on Quebec
Seeking to head off another secession attempt, the federal government proposed today to recognize Quebec formally as a distinct society and offered to give it a veto over constitutional change.
The widely expected initiatives have been rejected in advance by Quebec's separatist government, which narrowly lost an independence referendum on Oct. 30 and intends to have another vote in a few years.


Corrections
A music listing in the On the Towns page of the New Jersey section on Sunday  misstated the address for a chamber concert by the Philharmonic Orchestra of New Jersey at 7:45 P.M. this Saturday in the Cathedral Basilica of the Sacred Heart, Newark.
The address is 89 Ridge Street.


Sports of The Times;70,000 People Can Be Wrong
THE New York Giants, or the New Jersey Giants, or whatever they are, should demand their money back from the salary they're paying their head coach, or whatever he is.
It is obvious that the money would be better spent by spreading it around to  the 70,000 or so fans who fill the stands of Giants Stadium.
It is these people who generally think they know more than the coach, anyway.


Kings' Player Is Suspended
Los Angeles Kings left wing Eric Lacroix was suspended yesterday by the National Hockey League for five games and fined the maximum of $1,000 for a checking incident last Wednesday involving Islanders defenseman Dennis Vaske.


Prices of Treasury Issues Higher in Quiet Trading
Treasury prices edged higher in quiet trading yesterday after a report showed sluggish home sales last month.
Prices rose in early trading after the National Association of Realtors, an industry trade group, said that the number of previously owned homes sold last month fell 1.9 percent, to an annual rate of 4.07 million, the first decline in six months and less than the expected annual rate of 4.15 million.


Getting Into the Holiday Spirit


Sacrifice Of Hands, Heart And Soul
The politically and socially committed left-wing Group Theater did not survive long.
Founded in 1931, it disbanded in 1940, but not before it had provided a kind of prewar staging area for some of the American theater's most militant talents.
Among them: Elia Kazan, John (then Jules) Garfield, Luther Adler, Robert Lewis, Martin Ritt, Howard da Silva and Lee J. Cobb.
All of these and others appeared as actors in "Golden Boy," the 1937 Clifford Odets play, which under the direction of Harold Clurman became one of the Group's most successful productions.
It's still an effective piece, at least to  read: a visceral and gritty tale of a poor but gifted young violinist, Joe Bonaparte, who sells out a promising career in music to get fame as a boxer, as  well as fortune and a fancy Duesenberg.


Camp Award to George
Ohio State's EDDIE GEORGE received the Walter Camp Football Foundation's player of the year award yesterday.
George, a 6-foot-3-inch, 227-pound senior tailback, rushed 303 times this season for 1,826 yards and scored 23 touchdowns.
The Camp award is selected by Division I-A coaches and sports information directors. (AP)


Grizzlies Deal Benjamin
The Vancouver Grizzlies traded center BENOIT BENJAMIN to the Milwaukee Bucks  yesterday, a move that may give the prize rookie BRYANT REEVES a chance to make  a more significant contribution to the team.
In the deal, the Grizzlies obtained the backup center ERIC MOBLEY and point guard ERIC MURDOCK. (AP)


Trying to Stem Emissions, U.S. Sees Its Goal Fading
For every step the United States takes to cut emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that scientists say are warming the earth's atmosphere, it seems to be slipping two steps back from its goal.
Across the country, for instance, more than 1,100 companies have signed up to do as the American Express Company is doing at its 51-story headquarters in lower Manhattan.
There, under an agreement with the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the company has installed new energy-efficient lighting that  saves it up to 40 percent on electricity bills.


Jets All Agree: They Want to Win
A week and a half ago, with the Jets wallowing at 2-8 and their hopes for a winning record long gone, Boomer Esiason worried that his teammates might give up on the season.
So he asked the team's skill-position players -- running backs, wide receivers and the other quarterbacks -- to write down their goals for the rest of the year.
In disclosing that today, Esiason said: "I had never done that before. But I  didn't want guys to quit."


Minorco to Acquire A BTR Unit in Britain
Minorco S.A. agreed yesterday to acquire Tilcon Holdings Ltd., a British construction-materials company, from the industrial conglomerate BTR P.L.C. for  $514 million.
Minorco, a natural-resources concern, said the acquisition of Tilcon was part of its drive to play a major role in the European construction-materials industry.
Minorco said it expected Tilcon to post an operating profit of about L29 million, or about $45 million, this year.
BTR will use proceeds to offset in part its recent L2 billion purchase of a  37 percent stake in Nylex, an Australian company.
Minorco is based in Luxembourg and is owned by the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa and its diamond-mining associate, De Beers Centenary A.G.
Dow Jones


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return  it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


G.M. Sales on the Rise in California
When Ann N. Pattyn arrived in California from Detroit to assume the job of trying to improve sales of General Motors cars and trucks here, she was stunned  at what she didn't see.
There were plenty of Toyotas, Hondas, Mazdas and Subarus, but G.M. vehicles were scarce.
"It was very sobering when you drove the neighborhoods and expressways," she said.


CLINTON LAYS OUT HIS CASE FOR U.S. TROOPS IN BALKANS: 'WE MUST DO WHAT WE CAN'
President Clinton tonight sought to rallyAmericans to support the dispatch of 20,000 United States troops to Bosnia, acknowledging that the peacekeeping mission will not be free of risks, but declaring that "there are still times when America -- and America alone -- can and should make the difference for peace."
In a 20-minute televised address from the Oval Office, Mr.
Clinton appealed to American idealism and to a lofty sense of the national interest, and accepted personal responsibility for the danger that the mission could present to American lives.


Chiefs' Dispute Threat to Merger Of 2 California Health Networks
The proposed merger of Wellpoint Health Networks Inc. and Health Systems International Inc. appeared to be on the verge of collapse yesterday after the chief executive of Health Systems withdrew his support for the $1.89 billion deal.
Health Systems said Dr.
Malik M. Hasan, its chief executive and biggest shareholder, with a 19 percent stake, and a group of other shareholders who together have a 6 percent stake, had rescinded their stockholder agreements and  revoked proxies to vote for the deal.


Frank Hammond, 66, Tennis Umpire With Flair
Frank M. Hammond, an umpire whose booming voice and flamboyant style earned him a reputation for controlling a tennis match better than anyone else, died Thursday at the St.
Elizabeth's nursing home on Staten Island.
He was 66.
The cause was Lou Gehrig's disease, said a friend, Eugene L. Scott, the editor and publisher of Tennis Week magazine.


Norwegian Shipbuilder Seeks a British Company
Kvaerner A.S. of Norway offered yesterday to buy Amec P.L.C. for L375 million ($580 million) in a bid to broaden its construction operations for oil and gas offshore platforms.
The London-based Amec rejected the offer of 100 pence a share, characterizing it as "wholly inadequate." Kvaerner, Europe's biggest shipbuilder, wants to use the British company's offshore fabrication assets in the Pacific Rim as a springboard to build its own business, now focused chiefly  on the Norwegian side of the North Sea.


Dollar Rises to a 7-Week High Against Mark on Rate-Cut Talk
The dollar rose yesterday to a seven-week high against the German mark, bolstered by new speculation that Germany's central bank would soon lower interest rates.
The dollar managed a small gain against the Japanese yen in light dealing, as many traders were still returning from last week's holidays in the United States and Japan.


Compass Bancshares Adds
Compass Bancshares Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy CFB Bancorp Inc. of Jacksonville, Fla., and its subsidiary, Community First Bank, for $43 million in stock.
The acquisition, when completed, will add $310 million in assets and $256 million in deposits to the Florida operations of Compass, which is based in Birmingham.
The number of Compass branches in Jacksonville will increase to 25 from 17.
Compass will also acquire CFB's two branches in Spring Hill, Fla., as well as loan offices in Dunedin and Tampa, Fla.


The Silent Opposition
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, chose not to make a formal,  nationally televised response to President Clinton's Bosnia speech tonight, though he agreed to do two brief interviews.
He did not have a Republican position to present, and he had no incentive to offer his own opinions even though no other Congressional view matters as much as his.
As Senate leader, Mr.
Dole controls the calendar.
As a wounded World War II veteran, he commands respect on issues of war and peace in the Senate, where the old-fashioned internationalism that spread from Wall Street Republicans in the late 1930's to Main Street in the 1950's is still alive, and NATO remains a concept of consequence.


Greater Role For Ballet, Off Season, Offstage
Forget about scarce money, shrinking touring dates and the sorry state of the world in general.
The greatest problem for American Ballet Theater, said its new executive director, Michael M. Kaiser, is that New Yorkers do not know enough about the company.
"We dance only two months in New York City every year," Mr.
Kaiser, who joined Ballet Theater in the summer, said recently at Ballet Theater headquarters just north of Union Square.
"And yet we have to maintain a currency in the market. It's a key issue for all arts organizations, but particularly for ones with limited seasons in New York. We must find other opportunities to address the public, with big events that make an impact out of season."


3 Banks Join Software Project
Meca Software said today that three banks would join the BankAmerica Corporation and the Nationsbank Corporation in a venture to make software for on-line banking services that use personal computers.
The three are First Bank System Inc., Fleet Financial Group Inc. and the Royal Bank of Canada.


Head of Chess Group Resigns
The president of the International Chess Federation, Florencio Campomanes, has resigned in response to criticism of his management of the group by its governing body.
The match for the federation's version of the championship -- between Anatoly Karpov of Russia and Gama Kamsky of Brooklyn -- has been scheduled for June in Montreal.


2 Shot in Failed Bank Robbery
A bank teller on her way to work yesterday knew something was wrong when she  saw two masked men escorting the branch manager inside.


Lawyers in Class Actions Should Make Certain Fees Are Fair
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 21 Business Day article on the Bank of Boston class action suit:


Atlanta Fed Chooses No. 2 To Be Its Chief
The Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank today named Jack Guynn, its vice president and chief operating officer, to be its president and chief executive.
The appointment ends a months-long search after the current president, Robert P. Forrestal, announced his retirement.
At a news conference where his appointment was announced, Mr.
Guynn, 52, said the Fed's top priority must be fighting inflation.
He added that while inflation had slowed during the last 15 years, it should be slowed further.


Q&amp;A
Asleep in the Deep


One Threat and One Fake Bomb
The device hidden behind a toilet at the McDonald's restaurant was not a bomb, but the police did not find that out until later.
They did not want to take any chances, because a bomb threat had been phoned in to the restaurant on Friday.
"It looked like six sticks of dynamite tied together with a timing device," said Sgt.
Frank D'Amore of the North Plainfield police.
About 40 people were evacuated from a nearby apartment complex and Route 22 westbound was closed for  four hours yesterday morning while the state police bomb squad investigated.


Italian Financier Is Released From Jail
The Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, the former head of Hollywood's MGM  studio, who was arrested in October on a French extradition request, has been freed by a United States appeals court.
In a two-page opinion issued last week, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that keeping Mr.
Parretti in jail might violate his  constitutional rights.
At the Justice Department's request, the court later issued an order requiring Mr.
Parretti to stay in the country.


Using a Feminine Edge To Open a Man's World
ROSALIE OSIAS'S blonded hair spills out of a white cowboy hat, cascading down her shoulders.
Holding a big fat cigar, she is wearing a blazer with the sleeves rolled up to her elbows, a skirt the size of a legal pad and spiked heels that would unnerve Sam Spade.
She means business.


Policy of Restraint in Riots Is Denied by Ex-Police Head
Lee P. Brown, the former New York City Police Commissioner, testified yesterday that he never approved, and could not remember being told of, a policy of curbing the police response to street violence during the four days of racial unrest in Crown Heights in 1991.
Some Hasidic residents of the Brooklyn neighborhood have contended that Mayor David N. Dinkins and officials at the highest levels of the Police Department intentionally ordered a scaled-back response to the unrest that roiled Crown Heights after a black child was killed by a car traveling in a Hasidic motorcade.
A Hasidic scholar was attacked by a black mob and stabbed to death in the violence that followed.


Flight to Comet Is Planned
An unmanned spacecraft called Stardust will fly within 62 miles of a comet, capture dust samples and send them back to Earth for analysis, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has announced.
"This is the first time since the Apollo program in the 1970's that a sample  of something interplanetary will be collected and returned to Earth," Dr.
Kenneth L. Atkins, the Stardust project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said today.


In Brooklyn, Wake for Slain Child Is a Forum of Grief, Shock and Rage
They waited in line for an hour, sometimes longer, their anger palpable just  beneath their grief.
They formed a battalion of women, mothers from Bushwick, Brownsville and Manhattan.


Nickell's Team Wins Bridge Championship
In a contest hinging on the final deal, the world champion team headed by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., captured the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match  Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here on Sunday.
Nickell and his teammates, Dick Freeman of Atlanta, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman of Dallas,  tied a record by winning for the third straight year.
Last monththey won the Bermuda Bowl title at the world championships in Beijing.


The 76ers Are Looking Deep-Sixed
A 2-9 start has put immediate pressure on Philadelphia's coach and general manager, John Lucas.
Would Lucas step aside as coach if he felt, as general manager, that a change needed to be made?
Lucas confirmed that he would consider it.


In Europe, Philip Morris beats the drum against government regulations on smoking.
TRAVEL in an airplane, eat in a restaurant, go to a bar or a sporting event,  and it's unmistakable.
Europeans smoke more than Americans do.
Almost 100 million people on the Continent and in Britain spend $90 billion a year lighting up.
Unlike the United States, where anti-smoking fever has made it unfashionable to smoke, Europe has far fewer restrictions -- public or private -- on smoking.
What is referred to as "European tolerance" has so far prevailed.


I.B.M. PLANS TO CREATE INTERNET SOFTWARE UNIT
The International Business Machines Corporation plans to start a new business unit to focus on developing software products for the Internet.
An I.B.M. spokeswoman, confirming a report in Computer Reseller News, an industry publication, said the company hoped to create new division by the end of the year.
An example of the type of software that the new unit would be expected to  develop is I.B.M.'s Web Explorer, which helps users navigate the World Wide Web on the Internet, the company said.
I.B.M. has not decided who will run the division, which will report to John Thompson, senior vice president and head of  software operations.


Unofficial Locker Room Visit
Jerry Bergman, the head linesman who worked Sunday's game between Tampa Bay and Green Bay, visited the Packers' locker room before the game to get Brett Favre's autograph.
"That's the first time I've ever seen that," the quarterback  said today.
Favre, whose team was a 35-13 winner, said that when he entered the locker room, Bergman, who was sitting near his locker, walked over and said, "I hate to do this, but I have a few cards for my grandson."


MARBLE FINANCIAL ACCEPTS ALBANK TAKEOVER BID
Shareholders of the Marble Financial Corporation yesterday approved an acquisition offer by the Albank Financial Corporation for $18 a share in cash, or $60 million.
The companies said that 99 percent of Marble Financial shareholders, who were represented at a special meeting yesterday, voted for the agreement.
The Office of Thrift Supervision, the primary regulator of Albank Financial, had already approved the acquisition before the vote.
Marble Financial, based in Rutland, Vt., is the holding company for Marble Bank, which  has seven bank offices in central Vermont.
Albank Financial is the holding company for Albank F.S.B., the oldest operating savings bank in New York.


Former Money Manager Settles S.E.C. Case
John J. Kaweske, a former money manager for Invesco Funds Group, agreed today to pay $115,000 to settle allegations with the Securities and Exchange Commission that he failed to properly disclose personal securities trades and other transactions.
The S.E.C. maintained in a complaint filed in February that Mr.
Kaweske, among other things, deceived Invesco management and fund shareholders when he did not report 47 personal securities transactions made for himself and 10 transactions in the name of his wife, Pamela Kaweske, and when he concealed from Invesco managers and holders that he was a founder, director and holder of the ID Biomedical Corporation, a Canadian company.


Too Soon to Celebrate a Victory Over AIDS;Treatment's High Cost
To the Editor:
As someone who has worked in the AIDS community more than 10 years, as a public health official and head of a national AIDS advocacy organization, I agree with Andrew Sullivan (Op-Ed, Nov. 21) that some in the AIDS community have maintained an atmosphere that tends to make hopefulness taboo.


A.A.R.P. Ends a Pact At Prudential
Saying it wanted to offer a greater variety of health insurance plans to its  30 million members, the American Association of Retired Persons said yesterday that it would end its exclusive arrangement with the Prudential Insurance Company of America when it expires at the end of 1997.
"Some of our members are finding traditional fee-for-service insurance plans  to be unaffordable," Susanne C. Bowman, the association's director of insurance services, said.
"We would like to offer more choices, including managed care, which would certainly be a more affordable option."


By Design;Gifts Aiding Charities
Stylish gifts that raise money for charity are a two-in-one motivator if the  holidays have you hesitating.
A bracelet from the Until There's a Cure foundation, with a raised imprint of the AIDS ribbon, comes in silver plate ($20), silver ($70) or 18-karat gold ($500).
It is at the Body Shop and Fortunoff, and will be in Bloomingdale's next week.


Strong Mark Hurt Profit, Lufthansa Says
Lufthansa said yesterday that it posted flat earnings in the first nine months of the year because of the strength of the mark.
The airline said its pretax profit before special items edged up eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 506 million marks ($357.8 million) from 502 million.
It added that the strong mark had cost it 440 million marks in lost revenues and write-downs.
Revenues rose 4.7 percent, to 14.2 billion marks ($10.04 billion), despite the mark's strength.
Lufthansa said it received 420 million marks ($297 million) less in revenues in the first nine months because of the weakness in most foreign currencies against the mark.
Reuters


Editorial Notebook;A Sloop Named Clearwater
I had seen her from a distance a few times, usually from the commuter train.
On the Hudson Line, the view out the window is largely the same as it might have been 100 years ago, with the unspoiled Palisades on the opposite shore and the wide, implacable river changing color and texture every day.
Even cluttered with barges and motorboats, the Hudson is a dreamscape.
Early on a bright summer day, a view of Clearwater's giant sails against the cliffs induces a strange serenity.
Built as a replica of the sloops that sailed the river for 150 years carrying most of its commercial traffic, Clearwater is 103 feet, with a 66-foot boom and  a 108-foot mast.
She is the brainchild of the folk singer Pete Seeger, who read  a book in 1963 describing these boats.
He got together with a friend and started raising money.
Back then the Hudson was full of untreated sewage and industrial  sludge and largely shunned by fish.
One would-be patron asked Mr.
Seeger why he  would bother building a boat to sail in the dirty Hudson when he could enjoy the clean Caribbean in the Virgin Islands.


Giuliani Cuts His Head on a Shower Door
Stepping out of the shower Sunday morning, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani hit his  head on the shower door and opened an inchlong cut in the center of his forehead, which required seven stitches to close, his aides said.
Aides to the Mayor said he had had little sleep the previous night, after visiting a subway token clerk who was seriously burned in an attack on his booth.
They said the Mayor's accident was a result of fatigue.


Ex-Star Wrestler, 20, Held in Father's Killing
When his father called a year ago and ordered him to leave college in Minnesota and move back home, Reiko J. Imazaki, a promising sculptor and art student, returned without quarrel.
When Mr.
Imazaki's job at a shoe store did not meet his father's expectations of success last month, he quit without offering an excuse.


DOLE GETS EXTRA PAYMENT FROM JUICE UNIT SALE
The Dole Food Company said yesterday that it had received an additional $37 million this month from the sale of its juice business to the Seagram Company Ltd., based in Montreal.
Seagram, which sells Tropicana juices, made the extra payment because of a balance-sheet adjustment, Dole said in a recent quarterly filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Dole had originally received $233 million for the sale, which was recorded as a pretax gain of $145 million in the second quarter ended June 17.
Dole used the additional money to pay down  debt, said Michael Karsner, Dole's chief financial officer.


Uncovered Short Positions Gain 2% on Nasdaq Market
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market rose 2 percent in the month that ended Nov. 15 to a new peak.
The short position in Nasdaq shares, which represented trading that took place between Oct. 16 and Nov. 10 and was settled on Nov. 15, totaled 929.4 million shares.
That compared with 927.5 million shares in the period ending Oct. 13, which had also been a peak.


Investors Display Concern About Woes of Intel Client
The Intel Corporation was confronted today by a new round of Wall Street jitters when analysts grew concerned that slow sales by Packard Bell, one of the chip maker's largest clients, could damage an otherwise strong season for Intel.
The company's stock fell 4.8 percent after Intel said that one of its five largest customers could not pay off its $470 million account and that Intel had  instead converted part of the bill into a loan.
Intel, the world's largest chip  maker, reported the conversion in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Nov. 14, but it was first noted today.


How a Little Girl Charmed a Prince
She was a lively, charming, beautiful girl." With those words, Prince Michael of Greece remembered the child who leaped into his arms one day a few years ago at the Y.W.C.A. Montessori School in Brooklyn.
Her name was Elisa Izquierdo.
"Until the end of that visit, she didn't leave  me," the Prince said yesterday.
"She hugged me. She held my arm."


No Headline
No one here knows her, but she's like my little girl.
She's everyone's little girl today."
CARMEN LUNA, at Elisa Izquierdo's wake. [B3:6.]


Nastase Enters Politics
The former tennis star ILIE NASTASE has become a leading member of Romania's  ruling party.
Nastase, 49, the world's No. 1 player in 1973, was elected Sunday  to the national council of the center-left Social Democracy Party, the party spokesman, ILIE PETRESCU, said. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
Blue Chips Keep Climbing, But Nasdaq Is Down Again A rally in bonds helped to lift the Dow Jones industrial average to another record-breaking advance; it surged 22.04 points, to 5,070.88, its 63d record close for 1995.


The Power of the Couture Photograph
Many dreams of a rich future have been articulated over the years -- a chicken in every pot, a car in every garage -- but no one ever imagined couture  in every closet.
Instead, couture has reached the masses through photographs, to be copiously copied by lesser talents.
It is the paper images that are burned in brains that have never registered the genuine-fabric article: William Klein's Courreges aliens, Helmut Newton's butch Saint Laurent suit or Richard Avedon's Dovima with her elephant escorts.


Gingrich, After Long Flirtation, Forgoes '96 Campaign for White House
After a year of flirtation, Speaker Newt Gingrich today ruled out a race for  the Presidency in 1996, saying he did not think he could mount a campaign while  also guiding the Republican agenda through Congress.
Mr.
Gingrich's announcement here further firms up the Republican field, in which his counterpart on the other side of the Capitol, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, is the clear front-runner.


John Craven, 79, Who Played George in Original 'Our Town'
John Craven, who created the role of George Gibbs in the original Broadway production of Thornton Wilder's "Our Town," died on Friday at his home in Salt Point, N.Y.
He was 79.
In 1938, Mr.
Craven made his Broadway debut at the age of 21 in the Pulitzer  Prize-winning play, acting alongside his father, Frank Craven, who played the Stage Manager.
In his review in The New York Times, Brooks Atkinson said that John Craven and Martha Scott (as Emily Webb) "turn youth into tremulous idealization," and that "some of their scenes are lovely past all enduring."


Phillies Sign Fernandez
Pitcher SID FERNANDEZ and the Philadelphia Phillies agreed yesterday to a one-year contract for $250,000 and the chance to earn $1.4 million more.
The left-hander had become a free agent at the end of the 1995 season.
Fernandez, 33, will also get $3 million from his deal with the Orioles, who released him on July 10. (AP)


Reeves (Boo!) Planned (Boo!) to Quick-Kick (Boo!)
Sometimes the honesty of Dan Reeves is refreshing, but sometimes it simply gets him into hot water.
Today, as he talked about his thinking on the controversial fourth-down play near the end of Sunday's loss to Chicago, he made an admission that is stunning for any pro coach -- that he changed his call because he was wary of how the crowd would react.
The play in question came with 55 seconds left in the game, the score tied at 24 and the Giants facing a fourth-and-4 at the Chicago 32-yard line.
Reeves decided to go for the first down instead of trying a 49-yard field goal, and Dave Brown's pass to Howard Cross was incomplete.
The Bears took over and drove  for the winning field goal.


A Threat to Minority Aid Worries Black Farmers
Wispy tufts of white still clung to the spindly cotton plants, as forlorn as  the three black men silhouetted against an endless mid-autumn sky in the Mississippi Delta.
Time for cotton harvesting was running out this year, and it  could be for these farmers as well.
Part of a dwindling band of black farmers whose extinction has been regularly predicted in the last several decades, these men struggle through the best of times.
This crop year has already been disastrous because of drought and insects.
Now, distant rumblings from Capitol Hill threaten to turn a bad present into an even worse future because Republicans in Congress are considering the idea of eliminating or sharply cutting an obscure 8-year-old program that offers low-interest loans to farmers who are members of minorities.


Dow Continues Its Record-Breaking Climb
The Dow Jones industrial average had another record-breaking advance yesterday, while the rest of the stock market showed little change.
"Money continues to pour into the blue chips like there's no tomorrow," said  Peter Grennan, senior vice president of Smith Barney.
"Money managers are locking in their performance gain for the year and parking it in the safe haven  of blue chips until the end of the year."


Corrections
A picture caption last Tuesday about adults studying for bar mitzvahs or bas  mitzvahs misspelled the surname of the couple shown.
They were Joan and Joe Rosenbaum, not Erosenbaum.


Samuelson's Training: It's All in the Juggling
She has divided her marathon career into two phases: B.C. and A.D., before children and after diapers.
Before children, Joan Benoit Samuelson was the 1984  Olympic champion.
After diapers, she schedules her running around her day, not her day around her running.
The 1996 Olympic marathon trials for women, scheduled for Feb. 10 in Columbia, S.C., are a little more than two months away.
Will Samuelson compete?
Can a 38-year-old mother of two make a run at a second gold medal 12 years after winning her first?
The questions have lingered like wood smoke this autumn, intriguing, unanswered.


New Premium Beer Is Seen for Miller
The Miller Brewing Company is expected to introduce next year a full-calorie, premium-priced beer named Miller in an effort to develop a new flagship brand, the trade publications Adweek and Brandweek reported this week.
They said Miller, a unit of the Philip Morris Companies, was talking to two of its roster  agencies about handling the account, which might reach as much as $100 million in introductory spending.
A spokeswoman for Miller in Milwaukee, Susan Henderson, declined to comment on the reports, though she said that "there is a lot of growth in the premium beer category" and that it was "a reasonable area for people to be exploring."


Good Luck, Sweet Prince


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


Dow Chemical Acquisitions
The Dow Chemical Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy all of the  shares of Polisur S.A. and an additional 21 percent stake in Petroquimica Bahia  Blanca in addition to the stake a Dow-led consortium has already acquired.
Dow Chemical, based in Midland, Mich., said it was paying a total of $193.4 million for Polisur and the additional interest in Petroquimica.
Both concerns are Argentine petrochemical companies.


Too Soon to Celebrate a Victory Over AIDS
To the Editor:


D.M.B.&amp; B. to Close Its Chicago Office
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles said yesterday that it would close its Chicago  office on Dec. 31 as part of its efforts to "streamline" operations in the Midwest.
Dick Hopple, president of the North American operations of D.M.B.&amp; B. in New  York, said the closing would enable the agency to concentrate on its larger Midwestern offices, in St.
Louis and Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Other agency units  in the Chicago market, handling duties like Yellow Pages advertising, public relations and health care accounts, would not be affected by the closing, he added.


GARTNER GROUP PLANS TO ACQUIRE DATAQUEST
The Gartner Group said yesterday that it would acquire Dataquest Inc. in a cash and stock transaction valued at about $75 million.
Dataquest, based in San  Jose, Calif., is a leading information-technology market research and consulting unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, which also owns slightly more than 50  percent of Gartner Group.
Gartner, based in Stamford, Conn., is also a leading provider of market research on information technology.
"The union of the two organizations will strengthen the value the individual products provide to clients," Judith Hamilton, the chief executive of Dataquest, said.


Way Beyond the Balance Sheet;In Japan, the Supernatural Is Often a Business Tool
Kosaku Iida, president of a Japanese drug-importing company, is standing in a line of about 100 people that snakes around a crowded gymnasium.
One by one, each person stands in front of the master Kozo Nishino, reaching up to touch the back of his extended hand.
Almost instantly, as if propelled by some invisible force, the person reels backward and crashes into a padded wall.
Some of the people then collapse to the ground, screaming and writhing until two of Mr.
Nishino's assistants jump on them to calm them down.


FOODBRANDS AMERICA AGREES TO BUY TNT CRUST
Foodbrands America Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire TNT Crust Inc., a maker of pizza crusts, for about $33.4 million in cash and the assumption of $21.7 million of debt.
Foodbrands, which makes processed foods, said it might pay more if TNT achieved certain performance targets.
TNT operates two plants in Green Bay, Wis., and had revenue of $24.4 million for the year that ended on Aug. 31.
Foodbrands, which had sales of $750.7 million last year, also said yesterday that it had reached a final agreement for its previously announced purchase of KPR Holdings L.P., a maker of pizza toppings and other foods, for $93.2 million, including about $18 million in debt.


Nets' Coleman Gets Clearance to Practice
After a miserable road trip that produced four losses in four games, the Nets were in need of some good news.
It came yesterday when Coach Butch Beard learned that power forward Derrick Coleman has been cleared to practice and should be ready for game action once he works himself into decent playing shape.
"He's going to have to have a couple of practices before we'll have an idea when he'll be able to play," Beard said.


Transactions
Baseball


For Elisa, More Than the System Failed
If there is anything more disturbing than the photographs of Elisa Izquierdo's sweet face next to articles about her tragic life, it is that her death could have been prevented.
Since last week, when 6-year-old Elisa's beaten body was found in an apartment on the Lower East Side and her mother was arrested for murder, it has  become increasingly clear that many people could have prevented this horror.
Elisa was born with cocaine in her system, and bruises and scars indicated that  she been been abused for years.
Caseworkers had visited the home several times,  but on the last visit, earlier this year, saw no reason to take action.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-19


Odd Microbe Survives Vast Dose of Radiation
NO ONE knows for sure whether any creature could maintain even a spark of life while drifting through the killing environment of interstellar space for thousands of years.
But Government scientists report that the likeliest candidate now known would be Deinococcus radiodurans (literally, "terrible berry that withstands radiation"), an astoundingly hardy bacterium that seems able to  repair damage to itself that would instantly destroy almost anything else.
In a brief paper published in the current issue of the journal Science, Dr.
Kenneth W. Minton and an assistant, Dr.
Michael J. Daly, both of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Md., report the startling results of exposing the bacterium to 15,000 grays (1.5 million rads) of ionizing radiation.


Law and Tax Publisher to Be Sold for $1.9 Billion
In a move that caught Wall Street by surprise, CCH Inc., a venerable business law and tax publisher, said yesterday that Wolters Kluwer N.V., an Amsterdam-based international publisher of print and electronic information for  professionals, had agreed to buy the company for $1.9 billion in cash.
Under the terms of the agreement, Wolters Kluwer will begin a $55.50-a-share  tender offer for all the outstanding shares of CCH.
In a statement, CCH said the tender offer was expected to be completed on Jan. 4.


Master Classes: The Play vs. 3 Recent Realities
For an aspiring singer, the mystique of the master class is understandably enticing: within the space of an hour a renowned artist is supposed to size up your problems, impart secret remedies and send you on the sure path to operatic  greatness.
The truth -- and all music students secretly understand this -- is that the process of becoming a fine singer and performer is a painstaking effort, and the best support students can have are teachers who stick by them week in and week out for years.
For the most part, master classes are better at opening a window to the master's art than at helping young artists in lasting ways.


Bernard M. Oliver Is Dead at 79; Led Hewlett-Packard Research
Bernard M. Oliver, who directed research at the Hewlett-Packard Company for four decades, died on Thursday at his home in Los Altos Hills, Calif.
He was 79.
The cause was heart failure.


Navy Is Releasing Treasure of Secret Data on World's Oceans
THE Navy is starting to release a treasure trove of physical data about the sea that was gathered in secrecy during the long decades of the cold war, exciting scientists who see it as a bonanza for understanding environmental change.
The riches include readings on ice depth, ice shape, ocean depth, sediment composition, sea-surface height, salinity, seabed magnetics, water temperature, bioluminescence and light transmissibility.
Over the decades, the Navy deployed thousands of ships, airplanes, submarines and satellites to collect such data.
Usually kept secret, the information was viewed as vital to the quiet war against the Soviet Union, helping submariners glide stealthily through the sea and hunt out the hidden assets of their adversaries.


Pataki Delay Puzzles Whitman
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman says she's a little confused about why New York's Governor, George E. Pataki, has not yet agreed to her selection of Lewis M. Eisenberg to bechairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
After all, she said yesterday at a State House news conference, Mr.
Pataki invited Mr.
Eisenberg to serve on his transition team, so "I know Mr. Pataki obviously has regard for him."


Right on Bosnia
To the Editor:
Re "Peace in Bosnia" (editorial, Nov. 22): World War I lasted 53 months and came to the peace table after 19 months of United States participation and thousands of American casualties.
World War II involved 68 months of strenuous fighting, including 41 months of United States participation and still greater American casualties.


HarperCollins Unit Is for Sale
The News Corporation Ltd., the media empire owned by Rupert Murdoch, said yesterday that it was putting up for sale the educational publishing division of HarperCollins.
The News Corporation said negotiations for the sale of the textbook publisher would start immediately, but it did not give a price or name any potential buyers.


Handling Shock and Frustration In Trying to Save a Great Athlete
SUMMONED from his office to help try to resuscitate a 28-year-old man whose heart had stopped, Dr.
Josh Schwartzberg left his car engine running and ran into the emergency room at the Adirondack Medical Center here last week.
"The first thing I saw was the black tights and ice skates of a man on a stretcher," Dr.
Schwartzberg said in an interview.
Rescue workers were electrically shocking the man's chest, injecting drugs and taking other cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) measures.
The doctor's initial thought was that the man was a tourist who had collapsed while exercising.


U.S. Concedes Lax Response In Daiwa Case
Bank regulators, led by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, conceded today that they failed to respond adequately in 1993 to financial irregularities at Daiwa Bank Ltd. and said they were considering tougher new rules.
"The bottom line is that we did not succeed in unearthing Daiwa's transgressions where we might have," Mr.
Greenspan told the Senate Banking Committee.
"Hopefully, this event will stiffen our resolve."


Bookshelf For Win95 Filling Up
IF Windows 95 is so easy to operate, why has every PC magazine for months offered long articles on mastering it?
Why are books flooding in?
In a sense it is easy to use, at least on the surface, and perhaps easier if  you are not moving to it from Windows 3.1.
But there are hidden depths to be explored.


Asbestos Violations Bring Fines
The improper handling of asbestos during demolition work on the Hoboken waterfront in 1988 will cost a real estate developer and one of his corporations nearly $3 million each, a Federal judge has ruled.
United States Attorney Faith S. Hochberg, who announced the penalty yesterday, said the fines against Harry Grant and the Sandalwood Construction Company were believed to be among the highest imposed for this type of asbestos violation.


Home Resales Show First Dip in 6 Months
Sales of previously owned homes slipped 1.9 percent in October for the first  drop in six months, despite lower mortgage rates, the National Association of Realtors said.
Resales of single-family homes were down in each of the four regions nationally, the group said.
The October pace was equivalent to 4.07 million sales at a seasonally adjusted annual rate.
Many analysts had expected a 4.11 million rate.


Polish Leader Vexed by Final Hurdle: His Past
President-elect Aleksander Kwasniewski, the model of a media politician in his Oxford-cloth blue shirt, smart tie and suit, says he is annoyed that as he tries to hitch Poland to the West he faces a huge obstacle: his image as a former Communist.
"I can imagine in the United States people asking, 'Since the post-Communists won the election in Poland does Poland want to be a Communist country again?' "  he said in an interview today.
"It's a stereotype. Totally wrong, totally wrong."


$3 BILLION SHARE REPURCHASE IS APPROVED
The board of Merck &amp; Company approved a $3 billion stock repurchase program yesterday.
The company, which is based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., said the stock would be repurchased on the open market and in privately negotiated transactions.
The shares will be available for use in the company's employee benefit programs and for general corporate purposes.
The buyback is in addition  to a $2 billion repurchase authorized in November 1994, the company said.
Through Sept. 30, Merck had spent $1.3 billion to repurchase 29 million shares under that plan.
Merck has about 1.23 billion shares outstanding.
The company's  shares closed yesterday at $59.50, up 87.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange, before the repurchase was announced.


Maurice Britt, 76; Helped Shift Arkansas Politics
Maurice Lee Britt, a highly decorated World War II veteran who helped to reshape the political landscape of Arkansas, died on Sunday in the John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans Hospital in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 76 and lived in Little Rock.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Celebrating the 80th Year Of a Generous Spirit Earl Wild, pianist Carnegie Hall


Fleer Closes Plant
The Fleer Corporation, a trading card and bubble gum maker, is closing its plant here and shifting operations to other states, leaving 90 workers without jobs.
Production stopped on Monday at the plant, where employment peaked at 650  four years ago.
The company said it would shift gum production to a company plant in Mississippi and move the card-packaging work to contractors in other states.
Fleer is a division of the Marvel Entertainment Group.


Henry Knott Sr., 89, Maryland Developer
Henry J. Knott Sr., a leading Maryland developer who shared his wealth with many medical, educational and cultural institutions, died on Sunday in Baltimore at Johns Hopkins Hospital, one of his beneficiaries.
He was 89 and lived in Baltimore.
Mr.
Knott started working in his father's construction business in the 1920's.
He became a brick contractor and made his fortune as a no-nonsense businessman whose various enterprises built thousands of homes, offices and shopping centers in the Baltimore area.


ROSEBURG FOREST PRODUCTS IN $303 MILLION DEAL
The Weyerhaeuser Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell three manufacturing plants, 600,000 acres of timberland and other assets to the Roseburg Forest Products Company for $303 million.
Weyerhaeuser, based in Tacoma, Wash., agreed to sell plants near Klamath Falls, Ore., that make hardboard, particleboard and plywood.
The forest land, also in southern Oregon,  contains mostly pine.
Nurseries and seed orchards are to be included in the sale.
John Creighton Jr., the president of Weyerhaeuser, said the company would  concentrate on its Douglas fir growing operations in Oregon and Washington.
Roseburg Forest Products, a subsidiary of RLC Industries, is based in Roseburg,  Ore.


New York City's Teachers Need More Than Feel-Good Jingles
To the Editor:


Cone Shakes Off Bad Pitch Slowly
On the long, dreary plane ride home from Seattle, David Cone and Mike Stanley engaged in serious conversation.
"I talked to Mike about not second-guessing ourselves," Cone said today, recalling the aftermath of the Yankees' fifth-game loss to the Mariners in the first round of the playoffs last month.
"I said don't worry about it. We did what we thought was right. We had a split second to decide. All I had to do was  make a pitch close enough; it would have worked if I executed it.


House Acts to Protect Gift Arrangement Used by Charities
The House of Representatives yesterday unanimously approved two bills that would shield charities from the antitrust and securities regulations that apply  to businesses.
The Senate is expected to pass similar legislation quickly.
The legislation is a response to an unusual class-action lawsuit against the  American Red Cross, United Way of America, the Salvation Army, Mount Holyoke College and about 1,900 other charitable institutions.
The suit asserts that these charities violated antitrust laws by colluding on the rates of return they pay donors who make gifts to them and who wish to earn income on those gifts for as long as they live.


Robitaille Cools Heels
Ranger Coach Colin Campbell and Luc Robitaille today tried to defuse a volatile situation that arose after Monday night's Rangers-Devils game at Madison Square Garden.
Robitaille, who was benched for a few shifts during the third period of the 1-1 game, stormed into Campbell's office afterward and they had an argument behind closed doors.
Robitaille, a proven scorer who earns $3 million a year on  a six-year contract, was replaced by Darren Langdon, who is mainly a fighter.


Tough '96 Spending Bills On Lawmakers' Agenda
Even as Republicans and the White House begin negotiations to cut billions of dollars from Government programs over the next seven years, Congress will continue this week to try to cut hundreds of millions from the 1996 budget through annual spending bills.
Although Congress has passed, and President Clinton has signed, six of those  bills, the remaining seven are fraught with political potholes over abortion, the environment and labor issues.


Jesse Jackson Jr. Wins Primary in Chicago
Jesse Jackson Jr. defeated State Senator Emil Jones today in the Democratic primary for the Congressional seat that Mel Reynolds resigned after his conviction on sexual misconduct charges.
Because the district's voters are overwhelmingly Democratic, Mr.
Jackson's primary victory makes him the favorite to win the Dec. 12 special election against the winner of the Republican primary.


Doping Penalties Increased
United States officials applauded stricter penalties on doping approved today by swimming's world governing body, calling the new sanctions "a giant step forward" for the sport.
At a special Congress convened here, the International Swimming Federation voted to extend to four years a mandatory ban on first-time steroid users.
The current suspension is two years.
That means swimmers who flunk drug tests will automatically miss an Olympic Games.


TASTINGS
Talley Vineyards Estate Pinot Noir, 1993, Arroyo Grande Valley (Calif.). About $22.


Caterpillar Is Said to Seek a Wage Freeze
Caterpillar Inc. is asking striking United Automobile Workers members to accept a six-year contract that includes a wage freeze for the length of the contract and other concessions, an industry news service reported today.
Company officials and senior U.A.W. negotiators were meeting here to seek agreement that would end an 18-month strike.


Sales Strong for BellSouth Unit's 100-Year Bonds
BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., a subsidiary of the BellSouth Corporation, sold $500 million of 100-year bonds yesterday, the largest offering ever for "century" bonds.
The telecommunications company originally planned to raise $350 million through the offering, but strong demand made it possible to sell more, said Mark A. Seigel, a managing director and head of worldwide debt syndication at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Morgan Stanley has made a specialty of selling 100-year bonds and was the sole underwriter of yesterday's offering.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Legislation May Go On Line
Will the State House be coming to cyberspace?
The Assembly Appropriations Committee approved a bill yesterday that would require the Office of Legislative Services to make information about laws and legislative activity available on the Internet.
The object, said Assemblyman Joseph Azzolina, one of the bill's sponsors, is to produce more aware and involved citizens.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Food Notes
Asia Society Goes Scandinavian


A new campaign brings a chunky Greek chorus and a hockey star together to sell soup.
WATCH out, Happiness Boys, Breck Girls and Gallant Men of Olds.
Here come the Chunky Guys.
The characters -- a plain-speaking trio of actors with thick necks and hearty appetites -- are the centerpiece of an ambitious advertising and promotional campaign from the Campbell Soup Company for its Chunky line of ready-to-serve soups.


No Headline
We may have fouled the atmosphere in the past, and that's our responsibility.
But we both are fouling the atmosphere for the future and that is both of our responsibilities.
TIMOTHY E. WIRTH, referring to the United States and China. [A8:2.]


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Support for Sand Replenishment
At a symposium sponsored by several groups concerned about the New Jersey shoreline, several speakers said yesterday that it was important for local leaders to explain to Congress why it made sense to spend money pumping sand onto beaches that draw tourists and their dollars.
"People will go where the beaches are," said James Houston, an official with  the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
"If they're not there, they'll go somewhere else."


Harare Journal;Where Roving Circus Goes, Rare African Species Vanish
The official logo of the Akef Egyptian Circus is the face of a large lion.
But in Zimbabwe, it was the punched face of a tiny 60-year-old woman that stuck  in the public mind.
Stella Killick's black eye, plastered all over the daily papers after she and other employees of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals tried to seize three dying pythons, probably did more than anything else to get the Akef  family's circus booted out of Zimbabwe, and to draw attention to one of this continent's oddest, and possibly criminal, business ventures.


N.H.L.
Penguins Dispatch the Senators Markus Naslund scored three times, his first multiple-goal game in the National  Hockey League, as the Penguins defeated the Ottawa Senators by 7-2 last night in Pittsburgh.
Jaromir Jagr had two goals and Mario Lemieux had three assists for the Penguins. (AP)


Commuter Uncertainty
The teamsters union broke off contract talks with Metro-North and refused to  say whether it would stage a walkout today, a day after a brief strike stranded  some riders.
Article, page B1.


Psychologists Dispute Value of Antidepressants
IN a challenge to prevailing guidelines in psychiatry, a study by psychologists, who cannot prescribe medication, contends that psychotherapy works as well as medication for the treatment of depression.
The conclusion, hotly contested by psychiatrists who specialize in the treatment of depression and who can prescribe medication, was based on a review  of dozens of studies involving several thousand depressed patients.
The studies systematically compared antidepressant medication with psychotherapy.


Market Place;Many mutual fund timers bailed out before the Dow hit 5,000.
THE fast money investors in mutual funds got itchy trigger fingers in October, and might have shot themselves in the foot.
Figures issued yesterday by the Investment Company Institute, a mutual fund trade group, showed that net exchanges out of stock mutual funds into bond or money market funds totaled $673 million in October.
It was the first time since January that the exchange was negative for stock funds.
In large part, these exchanges reflect the actions of investors who try to time the market by quickly moving between categories of mutual funds.
Over all, money market funds  gained nearly $1 billion in net proceeds from investors who switched from stock  and bond funds.


I.R.S. Backs Down on Frequent-Flier Miles
In a hasty retreat, the Internal Revenue Service suggested today that it did  not intend to tax the legions of business travelers whose employers allow them personal use of frequent-flier bonuses arising from company trips.
"We have no particular compliance activities geared toward the taxation of frequent flier miles and we don't anticipate any," said Frank Keith, a senior spokesman for the agency.
"I want to make sure that people don't overreact."


Pessimism Is Hazardous to Health, a Study Says
FOR years, doctors have recognized the placebo effect in medicine: that patients improve because they believe they will.
According to papers presented at a conference today, the opposite effect may be equally powerful: patients get sick because they believe they will.
The placebo effect has been studied in hundreds of experiments in medicine, but its negative counterpart has just begun to receive attention, and about two dozen experiments were cited today at the meeting in Manhattan.
To distinguish the positive from the negative effects of belief, the scientists use the terms placebo for positive effects and nocebo, or negative placebo, to refer to the negative effects.


Disney's Health Policy for Gay Employees Angers Religious Right inFlorida
Florida has become a battleground for the conservative Christian assault on the Walt Disney Company, whose recent decision to extend health benefits to the  live-in partners of gay employees has fueled complaints that it can no longer be trusted to provide wholesome entertainment.
In mid-November the Florida Baptist Convention passed a resolution at its annual meeting stating that "Disney's moral leadership has been eroded." It asked its one million members to "seriously and prayerfully reconsider their continued purchase and support of Disney products," and it plans to seek adoption of a similar measure at the annual meeting of the Southern Baptist Convention in June.


2 Are Sought In Subway Fire
Expressing cautious optimism, police officials said yesterday that they believed they had identified two suspects in the torching of a subway booth on Sunday that left the token clerk, Harry Kaufman, in extremely critical condition.
"We have a couple of people in mind," said a senior police official who spoke on the condition that he not be identified.
The official said he expected at least one arrest soon.


Looking for Hidden Injuries
A CRASH study conducted by researchers at the University of Miami School of Medicine for the United States Department of Transportation has found that drivers involved in accidents in which air bags are deployed may suffer serious  internal injuries that are not obvious at the crash scene.
"Rescue personnel and the public must be made aware that a driver may look fine and feel fine, but not be fine," cautions Dr.
Jeffrey Augenstein, a Miami trauma surgeon who directs the continuing study.
"Internal injuries can be fatal if not detected and treated appropriately and promptly."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 24
Nov. 17
Nov. 25
1995
1995
1994 Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.7
7.7 Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.4
3.3 Gasoline stocks
191.7
192.1
210.3 Distillate stocks
134.5
132.6
143.6 Crude imports, daily
7.6
8.1
7.2 Product imports, daily
1.8
2.0
1.7 Crude stocks
319.7
312.2
337.7 Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6 Refinery utilization (%)
91.7
90.4
95.0


In Gingrich Country, Bosnia Plan Is a Hard Sell
This small town northwest of Atlanta supported President Bush's summons to the Persian Gulf war nearly five years ago with flags, candlelight vigils and yellow ribbons.
But President Clinton's rallying cry Monday night to send American troops to Bosnia was met with broad skepticism.
Many residents responded to Mr.
Clinton's televised speech on Monday night by recalling America's recent military past.
Dr.
Frank Boone, the local veterinarian, said the Bosnia plan differed from the 1991 gulf war because "there had been an obvious land grab by Saddam Hussein" to justify American intervention, and the possible threat to American oil supplies "made the idea of war easier to sell."


TELEVISION REVIEWNext Stop, the Sight and Mind of Rod Serling
Public television's "American Masters," which is celebrating its 10th anniversary this season, tonight turns its focus on television itself with "Rod  Serling: Submitted for Your Approval." Made in association with CBS Enterprises, the 90-minute profile recalls the often tortured success of the television playwright, who will probably be best remembered for "The Twilight Zone," the series that insisted on exploring "the place that lies between the pit of a man's fears and the summit of his knowledge."
After its premiere in 1959, "The Twilight Zone" had a run of 156 episodes, 92 of them written by Mr.
Serling, who died in 1975 at the age of 50.
One especially recurrent character, drawn from the writer's own life, is the weary professional seeking consolation in evocations of an idealized past.
Mr.
Serling wanted to be a Eugene O'Neill, a playwright of undisputed stature.
Instead, he wound up tossing off the ingenious but thin plots of "The Twilight Zone," and even while railing against television's commercialism did lucrative pitches for  products like beer and, heaven help us, socks.


Japan to Cut Own Military, Keeping G.I.'s
At the same time that it is asking Washington to maintain American troop strength in Japan, the Government here approved far-reaching cuts tonight in its own military force.
At a special late-night session, the Japanese Cabinet approved a major new "defense plan" that is supposed to outline Japan's military needs in the post-cold-war era.


Cult of Celebrity Invades Sitcoms
When Yoko Ono decided to make a movie about the wind, where did she turn for  help?
Ingmar Bergman?
Wim Wenders?
Of course not.
She decided that the perfect person to help her was Paul Buchman, that unknown film maker played by Paul Reiser on "Mad About You." Appearing as herself in a mid-November episode of the sitcom, Ms.
Ono was droll about her image as the eccentric who broke up the Beatles, and she cheerfully traded off on every bit of celebrity she has.
"Everyone's entitled to one bad idea," she said, deciding to scrap the wind movie.
"Once, John even wanted to put Ringo in front. I said, 'Oh, come on, John.' "
"Mad About You" is onto the television season's favorite gimmick.
Ms.
Ono's appearance ushered in one of the most crowded periods of celebrity cameos in a season that has come to seem like the mini-series version of "The Player." In a  three-day period you could have seen Peter Tork of the Monkees bid on the Monkeemobile at auction on "Wings," Martha Stewart give tips on gracious living  on "Ellen," Florence Henderson explain gently that she really isn't Mrs.
Brady in "Caroline in the City," and Suzanne Somers pretend she had sued a tabloid that called her a hermaphrodite on "The Naked Truth." (She won.)


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Court Forbids Religious Displays
City officials cannot put a menorah and Nativity scene in front of City Hall, a Federal judge ruled yesterday.
The American Civil Liberties Union had challenged the city's practice, with the help of lawyers from Rutgers Law School who said the display "was a city endorsement of the Jewish and Christian religions, which is not permitted by the United States Constitution."


Of Walesa's Fall And Churchill's
To the Editor:
Re "The Fall of a Polish Patriot" (editorial, Nov. 21), analogizing Lech Walesa's defeat in the Polish presidential elections with Winston Churchill's fall from power after the German surrender:


New TV System Endorsed Amid Doubt on Future
Eight years after initiating an industry race to develop high-definition television, a Federal Communications Commission advisory panel today endorsed a  new system that can deliver sharper pictures, computer data and as many as four  programs at once over a single channel.
The trouble is, no one knows what to do with it.


Foreign Affairs;Why and How
In his speech Monday night President Clinton needed to accomplish two things: One was to explain why we have to send 20,000 troops to implement the peace in Bosnia, and the other was to explain how our goals there can be accomplished with a limited U.S. military involvement.
The President certainly made a strong case for the why, but he left the how disturbingly unclear.
As far as the why goes, it is hard to dispute Mr.


China's Inevitable Dilemma: Coal Equals Growth
Within a 300-mile radius of this energy capital, hundreds of thousands of coal miners are shredding subterranean seams thicker than ocean liners and hauling a black treasure to the surface to power the economic rise of China.
From the great forest of chimneys that punctures the haze of China's industrial landscape, a nimbus of carbon- and sulphur-based gases is billowing into the atmosphere.
It is mixing with the buildup of the century-long industrialization of Europe and North America and, many scientists say, it is contributing to the overall warming of the earth's atmosphere.


Regional Accord For Mediterranean
The European Union and a group of less prosperous countries in the Mediterranean region agreed today to forge a new political and economic partnership.
Foreign ministers from 15 European Union members, 11 Mediterranean countries  and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, agreed on a document calling for a free trade area by 2010 and outlining plans to combat regional poverty and religious extremism.


APPOINTMENTS ARE MADE AT MCA'S MUSIC OPERATIONS
The MCA Music Entertainment Group, a unit of the Seagram Company, said yesterday that it had named Mel Lewinter vice chairman and chief operating officer.
Zach Horowitz, the current chief operating officer, will become president.
The appointments were announced by Doug Morris, the new chairman of MCA's music operations.
Mr.
Lewinter was a longtime colleague of Mr.
Morris at the music division of Time Warner Inc., serving most recently as president of Warner's United States record operations.
He resigned under pressure last June in a shake-up that also resulted in Mr.
Morris's departure from Warner.
Mr.
Morris also said that Jay Boberg, the president of MCA Music Publishing, would become the president of the flagship MCA label in Los Angeles.


Algerian General, Coast Guard's Chief, Is Slain in Market
A general has been shot and killed in Algeria, officials announced today.
Gen.
Mohammed Boutaghene, commander of the coast guard, was shot Monday in a  south Algiers market and died on the way to the military hospital, the Defense Ministry said.
He was the highest-ranking officer slain in nearly four years of fighting between the military-backed regime and rebels who want an Islamic state.


Conde Nast Shuts Most Of Its French Magazines
Conde Nast France, the Paris unit of the United States magazine publisher, has closed all its magazines except Vogue after advertising revenues fell, the company said yesterday.
"There has been a very large drop in advertising revenue over the last year, too large," Christian de Romanet, a spokesman in Paris for Conde Nast, said.
"We will focus all our energies now on Vogue."
Conde Nast, a unit of Advance Publications, declined to specify how big the  drop in advertising revenues was.
It said the slump had also hit competitors.
Conde Nast France closed Vogue Homme, Maisons et Jardins, and Automobiles Classiques, leaving only its flagship women's Vogue magazine.
Mr.
De Romanet said all the other magazines had grown out of the success of Vogue.
He said Vogue Homme was aimed at a small market that never really developed.
(Bloomberg Business News)


INSIDE
A New Television Standard A Federal panel has endorsed a new television system that offers sharper images.
But it is unclear whether consumers will want it.
Page D1.


Evoking 'Thousand and One Nights' in TriBeCa
DREW NIEPORENT and his team of conjurers rolled out a magic carpet this week  and opened Layla, at 211 West Broadway (Franklin Street), the latest in the group of restaurants in TriBeCa that he owns with Robert De Niro and others.
This Middle Eastern fantasy was designed by Christopher Chesnutt with lifelike montages of belly dancers and water-pipe smokers, plus mosaics made of pottery shards.
Mr.
Chesnutt said he went to Sam's Souk, a shop on Lexington Avenue, and bought all the pottery damaged in transit from Morocco.
Layla (the name was picked simply because it appealed to the owners but is coincidentally from the Arabic title of "Thousand and One Nights") serves food from countries like Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt and Lebanon.
Telephone: (212) 431-0700.


Price of Gold Increases on Signs Of Strong Demand and Shortage
Gold prices jumped on the Commodity Exchange of New York yesterday on signs of a shortage of bullion.
On other markets, cotton prices fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of  21 commodities fell 0.20 point, to 241.12.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Roof Fire Disrupts Air Traffic
Roofing tar ignited atop a building under construction at Newark International Airport yesterday, causing a smoky fire that closed all runways for half an hour during the morning.
Some incoming flights were diverted to airports in New York City and New Haven, and 14 departures were delayed, said Bill Cahill, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Primary Season Under Way With G.O.P. Petition Drives
New York State's Presidential primary season officially got underway today, as hundreds of volunteers for the Republican front-runner, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and his main challenger in the state, Steve Forbes, began gathering signatures to qualify their candidates for the March 7 ballot.
The petition drives began on the day after Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal  District Court in Brooklyn eased the Republican Party's daunting petition rules, significantly reducing the number of signatures that candidates need to collect  to get on the ballot in four New York City Congressional districts.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Boston University Continuing displays of sympathy and support for Travis Roy and continuing victories for the varsity have marked the Terriers' season.


Wine Talk
IF wine had a patron saint in the United States it would be Thomas Jefferson.
O.K., patron saints are out of fashion.
But think about it: having someone up there who shares your interests is probably not such a bad idea.
Why Jefferson?
For one thing, he's there when wine people need him.
Let the new prohibitionists but raise their heads and someone is quick to smite them with Jefferson's memorable words:


Accounts
Northwest Racing Associates, Auburn, Wash., to Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, Seattle, a unit of True North Communications, to introduce the Emerald Downs race track.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.
Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners, New York, was named to handle advertising for two new  on-line service companies: Sportsline USA Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Teleres, Dayton, Ohio, a joint venture of Dow Jones &amp; Co. and Aegon USA.
The billings were not disclosed.


Rio Residents March and Samba to Protest Crime and Corruption
In this city of increasing violence, where sights of breathtaking beauty traditionally fuel an exuberant optimism, hundreds of thousands of people filled downtown streets today, expressing fear and anger over the captive crime has made of their city.
The common denominators in the demonstration were fear and frustration.
After a wave of kidnappings last month that peaked with three in a single day, hundreds of thousands of Cariocas -- rich and poor, children and elderly -- gathered under the banner of "React Rio."


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Congressmen Clash Over Bosnia
Two likely opponents in next year's race for Bill Bradley's Senate seat clashed yesterday over President Clinton's proposal to send 20,000 troops to Bosnia.


Anderson GETS NEW Pact OFFER
The Nets have gone through the formality of extending a contract offer to Kenny Anderson, who will become an unrestricted free agent at the end of the season.
Anderson rejected the multiyear offer, which was worth $5 million to $6 million a season, but the Nets say they have made it a priority to resign the point guard.


BRITISH AND IRISH BREAK ULSTER JAM
The British and Irish Governments broke a logjam in the Northern Ireland peace effort tonight, forging an agreement that they said should lead to participation by political representatives of the Irish Republican Army in negotiations over the future of the embattled province.
But in a clear sign of how difficult the path toward full-fledged negotiations remains, tonight's agreement deferred any immediate attempt to resolve the issue that has held up the start of talks for months: Prime Minister John Major's insistence that the I.R.A. give up some of the weapons it used in its long guerrilla campaign against Britain if it wants its political wing, Sinn Fein, to have a seat at the talks.
The I.R.A. has refused to turn over any weapons.


Oscar Kolin, 87, Head of Rubenstein Cosmetics
Oscar Kolin, who devoted his life to looking after the business and philanthropic interests of his aunt, Helena Rubenstein, died on Saturday at New  York Hospital.
Mr.
Kolin, who was 87, had been president of both her cosmetics company and the Helena Rubenstein Foundation.
He lived in Manhattan and had homes in East Hampton, L.I., and Palm Beach, Fla.
The son of one of the eight remarkable Rubenstein sisters, Mr.
Kolin, who was born in Poland, spent his entire career with the far-flung cosmetics empire founded by his aunt Helena on the basis of a family face-cream formula.


Making the 'Invisible' Clearly Visible
Billy Golfus was a Minneapolis rock-and-roll radio personality before the motor-scooter accident that left him brain-damaged and partly paralyzed more than a decade ago.
His professional irreverence is very much intact in "When Billy Broke His Head . . . and Other Tales of Wonder," a spiky, vigorous and often caustically funny documentary about problems faced by the disabled.
Serving as director (along with David E. Simpson), writer and acerbic narrator, Mr.
Golfus outlines the frustrations that confront this country's largest minority group.
There may be nearly 50 million disabled Americans, he notes, "but we're as invisible as Casper the ghost."


If Reeves Goes, Detroit May Be His Destination
If the Giants and Coach Dan Reeves decide to part ways at the end of the season, he would probably make the short list for a number of National Football  League teams with head coaching vacancies.
One of those teams, according to several people familiar with the situation, would be the Detroit Lions.
If Lions Coach Wayne Fontes does not lead his team to the playoffs -- and thus live up to the ultimatum delivered one month ago by the owner, William Clay Ford -- he could be let go.
If so, Reeves would become one of the leading candidates for the job.


Disney's Net Climbed 17% In 4th Quarter
The Walt Disney Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose  17 percent, matching Wall Street's expectations, as rising profits at its theme  parks offset a decline in film profits.
Still, the company's shares fell $1.375, to close at $61.50, as investors became concerned that Disney's earnings growth was slowing.


UNITED HEALTHCARE TO BUY PHP INC. FOR $142.5 MILLION
The United Healthcare Corporation said yesterday that it would acquire PHP Inc., a health maintenance organization based in Greensboro, N.C., in a stock deal valued at about $142.5 million.
Under the agreement, United Healthcare will issue about 2.43 million common shares in exchange for all outstanding equity ownership in PHP, which is privately held.
United Healthcare's stock rose $1.75  yesterday, to $60.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
PHP has more than 117,000 members, 3,000 providers of medical care and 45 hospitals in its network.
It plans to enter the Charlotte, N.C., and eastern North Carolina regions in 1996.
United Healthcare, which provides managed care services, is based in Minnetonka, Minn.


Malle Film Defined What Pornography Isn't
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 25 obituary of Louis Malle notes that his 1958 film, "The Lovers,"  aroused the "enmity of censors" in the United States.
The director may have sought to avoid legal difficulty by joining certain sensual scenes to a lofty score by Brahms.


Gaps in Adoption Law
To the Editor:
The decision by the New York Court of Appeals allowing an unmarried individual to adopt the child of her partner (editorial, Nov. 22) has invited cynical political attack.


High Court Protects Union Organizers From Dismissals
In an important victory for organized labor, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that paid union organizers who seek or take jobs with nonunionized employers with the goal of persuading co-workers to join the union  are protected by Federal labor laws to the same extent as any other employees.
The decision, upholding a policy of the National Labor Relations Board, means that employers cannot retaliate against paid union organizers in their work forces and cannot refuse to hire applicants whom they suspect of seeking work for the purpose of organizing a union from inside.


Thyra Johnston, 91, Symbol Of Racial Distinctions, Dies
Thyra Johnston, a blue-eyed fair-skinned New Hampshire homemaker who became a symbol of the silliness of racial distinctions when she and her husband announced that they were black, died on Nov. 22 at her home in Honolulu.
She was 91.
She was the real-life heroine of "Lost Boundaries," a movie that stunned the  nation in 1949.


Advertising Age Editor Shifts
Advertising Age, the trade publication owned by Crain Communications in Chicago, made changes yesterday in its top editorial ranks.
Steve Yahn, the editor, was dismissed after 14 months; a statement said he would "be leaving the company to pursue other interests." He did not return telephone calls seeking comment.


City Seeks Renewal In Absence Of Bomb
A casual visitor to this isolated mesa might find local real estate advertisements a bit off-key for a town long associated with designing nuclear Armageddon.
"Excuse me, but is this heaven?" one advertisement asks a visitor, who may be breathless from the 7,424-foot altitude or from a multihued Southwest sunset.
"Actually, it's Los Alamos! Once upon a time Los Alamos was a secret town. Now,  the cat's out of the bag. A great place to live."


AN ADDITIONAL STOCK BUYBACK IS PLANNED BY I.B.M.
I.B.M. said yesterday that it planned to buy back as much as another $2.5 billion worth of its common shares.
The International Business Machines Corporation, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., authorized a $2.5 billion buyback on Jan. 31 and a further buyback of $2.5 billion on July 25.
I.B.M. said it had  bought back about $4.2 billion worth of its common stock this year.
The computer giant's shares were up $1.25 yesterday, at $97.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN UNITED GLOBAL INC., Downey, Calif., has agreed to sell the assets of its American United Products Inc. and American United Seal Inc. subsidiaries to  Hutchinson Corp., a unit of Total America Inc., for $24.5 million.


Top Administrative Judge to Return to Courtroom
New York State's top administrative judge, E. Leo Milonas, said yesterday that he would step down effective Jan. 1 and return to the appellate bench, where he served with distinction for 11 years.
When he took over as the state's chief administrative judge in June 1993, he  vowed that the assignment would be temporary because he always hoped to return to the bench.
But he spent two and a half whirlwind years on the job, where, working with Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye, he has instituted dozens of changes that have been credited with improving the court system's fairness and efficiency.
At the same time, he administered the gigantic state court system, with an annual budget of $1.2 billion and 13,000 employees.
Each year, 3,200 judges around the state handle 4 million cases.


HUMANA WINS $3.8 BILLION MILITARY CONTRACT
Humana Inc. of Louisville, Ky., has received a $3.8 billion contract to provide health care to families of members of the military in the Southeastern United States, the Defense Department said yesterday.
The company's Military Healthcare Services division will provide health care in Florida, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, South Carolina and part of Louisiana, starting  on May 1.
If the Pentagon exercises all options under the contract, the arrangement will run until May 2001.
The announcement was made after Humana's stock closed at $24.75, up 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Jewish Executive Killed in Western Turkey
A Jewish businessman was killed today, and a caller to security officials said it was in retaliation for the recent killing of a militant Islamic leader in Malta, the state-controlled Anatolian news agency said.
The caller said the man, Nesim Malki, was killed in response to the assassination in Malta of the leader of a militant Islamic group, the news agency said.


Sports of The Times;This Coach Stays Calm In a Storm
FOR about 30 minutes last night at Alumni Hall, Brian Mahoney apparently didn't know how to coach again.
His team was trailing itty-bitty Manhattan College.
Mahoney was doing nothing about it, kneeling on one knee, looking absolutely hopeless.
Meanwhile, Fran Fraschilla was being a genius, just as he was last March, when Manhattan went all the way to the Final 32.
He stomped.
He stalked.
He screamed.
He was the star.


Moscow and NATO in Accord On Russian Troops in Bosnia
NATO and Russia said today that they had worked out an agreement in principle to send 1,500 Russian troops to Bosnia with the 60,000-strong peacekeeping force that is expected to begin moving in as early as next week.
The United States Defense Secretary, William Perry, said that 500 to 700 American troops would be among the NATO forces heading for Bosnia next week to prepare the way for the main force that will begin arriving after a peace accord is signed in Paris in mid-December.


Ozone Decay in '95 Is Unparalleled
The hole in the earth's ozone shield, which filters out cancer-causing ultraviolet rays, covered an area twice the size of Europe at its seasonal peak  in October and grew at an unprecedented rate in 1995, the United Nations said today.
The United Nations World Meteorological Organization said the ozone hole over the Antarctic began to expand earlier than usual this year.


Shifts Made at Top Of British Sugar Maker
The British sugar company Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C. announced sweeping changes yesterday in top management, including naming Larry Pillard chief operating officer and group managing director.
Mr.
Pillard, who is currently president of  the company's A. E. Staley Manufacturing unit, is eventually expected to take over leadership of the company from Sir Neil Shaw.
Sir Neil will remain as chairman until 1998.
Paul Lewis will relinquish his post as finance director and take on responsibility for corporate development, human resources, corporate affairs, corporate audit and compliance related to corporate governance matters.
He will  retain his post as deputy chairman.
The company secretary, Simon Gifford, becomes finance director.
(Dow Jones)


F.C.C. Rules on Foreign Stakes in U.S. Set
The Federal Communications Commission adopted guidelines today to approve or  reject investment by foreign telecommunications companies in the United States.
Currently, the F.C.C. reviews such deals on a case-by-case basis.
Officials hope a more predictable approach will encourage overseas companies to invest greater sums in United States companies.


2 Are Sought In Subway Fire
Expressing cautious optimism, police officials said yesterday that they believed they had identified two suspects in the torching of a subway booth on Sunday that left the token clerk, Harry Kaufman, in extremely critical condition.
"We have a couple of people in mind," said a senior police official who spoke on the condition that he not be identified.
The official said he expected at least one arrest soon.


A Showdown May Loom On Tabacco
After a tense day of courthouse maneuvers, a showdown was building tonight between Brown &amp; Williamson and Jeffrey Wigand, its former research chief, over whether Mr.
Wigand could divulge company secrets about safer cigarettes and the  health effects of smoking.
Both the State of Mississippi and the Justice Department plan to question Mr.
Wigand on Wednesday here in Pascagoula, where the state suing for compensation from cigarette makers for money spent in health programs to deal with tobacco-related diseases.


In Performance: POP
Latin Rhythms Wed to Jazz, With Echoes of the 1950's Orquesta Cubarama S.O.B.'s


Chinatown Alarms May Be Hoax to Get Quick Housing
In the last year, city officials have evacuated almost 200 people from dungeonlike cellars in Chinatown.
In poorly lighted hovels, they found adults and children living stacked like cordwood in makeshift bunks, sharing hot plates and dodging rats.
The televised pictures of some of the evacuations -- in which Chinese immigrants, squinting from the television lights, emerge from darkness clutching their possessions in plastic bags -- have provided striking images of  sordid living conditions in an underground immigrant existence.


Dancers Demand Pact
The dancers of Ballet Hispanico, who opened a two-week season yesterday at the Joyce Theater, have demanded that agreement on a new labor contract be reached by 12:01 A.M. tomorrow.
The dancers stopped short of threatening to strike during the engagement, which celebrates the company's 25th anniversary.
Alex Dube, dance administrator for the American Guild of Musical Artists, which represents the 13 dancers, said the chief areas of disagreement were working conditions and wages.


Explosions of Passion In Mild-Mannered Songs
Mandy Patinkin could be accused of many things, but a lack of passion is not  one of them.
The singer, who gave a benefit concert for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS at the Richard Rodgers Theater on Monday evening, works his material like an emotional demolitions expert.
Many of his interpretations are geared toward the strategic detonation of small, violent outbursts of feeling.
Take his version of a seemingly innocent ditty like "Me and My Shadow." It lopes along amiably until the narrator arrives home in the evening and discovers "nobody's there." Hitting those words, Mr.
Patinkin suddenly emits a bloodcurdling primal scream, then returns to his previously mild-mannered delivery as though nothing had happened.


Red Storm Makes a Statement With a 3-Guard Offense
It was only November, with the Big East opener still four days away, but there was a certain feeling of desperation to the play of St.
John's last night, a sense that a loss to Manhattan could start a nasty, irrevocable slide.
The home crowd had booed loudly and called for the head of Coach Brian Mahoney after Saturday's second-half collapse against Cal-Irvine in the Lapchick Tournament.
And things started so poorly against Manhattan that the simple act of catching and holding the ball seemed a hairy challenge.


Whitewater Panel Explores Clinton Link to Arkansas Judge
Republicans on the Senate Whitewater committee today accused the White House  of improperly obtaining information about a politically sensitive investigation  of a judge in Little Rock, Ark., who has said he was pressured by Bill Clinton into making a large, federally backed loan in 1986.
Entering new territory, the committee began exploring how the White House reacted in the summer and fall of 1993 to the accusations concerning the judge,  David Hale, who had been running a Small Business Administration investment company in Arkansas.


Catering a Party a la Carte;Restaurants That Offer A Dinner Party at Home
Does the spiced roast loin of lamb with braised salsify and sweet-potato confit from Daniel's new menu sound appealing for a dinner party at home?
No problem.
Last year, Daniel Boulud, the chef and an owner of the restaurant, set up a catering company called Feast and Fetes, mainly in response to requests from customers wanting to serve his food at home.


Treasury Prices End Lower On Concerns About Budget
Treasury prices ended lower yesterday, after paring most of their earlier losses.
Strong demand for new two-year Treasury notes and comments by a top Federal Reserve official suggesting that the Fed could still lower short-term interest rates in the coming months helped attract buyers yesterday.


Lemieux Comes Back To Haunt New York
Claude Lemieux prepared for his Wednesday night rendezvous at the Meadowlands by getting a hat trick in the first period of tonight's game against the Islanders.
Joe Sakic added a pair of power-play goals.
And the gifted young center Peter Forsberg assisted on four scores before getting a short-handed goal of his own to close out the second period.


CHRONICLE
As hugs go, it would have been hard to beat the warmth of an event entitled "A Hug for Craig" held Monday evening for CRAIG CLAIBORNE, the former food editor of The New York Times.
More than 100 people gathered at Tavern on the Green to pay tribute to Mr.
Claiborne, who retired in 1988, and to dine on some of his favorite dishes, including scrambled eggs with caviar and brandy Alexander pie.


Catering a Party a la Carte;It All Began In France (Of Course)
Commercial catering got its start in 1789, shortly after the French revolution.
It was no longer acceptable for rich people to maintain staffs of cooks, butlers, footmen and the like, so party-givers turned to outside purveyors.
One such source, Hilaire Germain Chevet, a former rose gardener to Marie Antoinette, began selling pates, and his sons expanded the business.
In 1820, they sold the company to Potel &amp; Chabot, a fledgling Parisian caterer that was started by a couple of chefs.


Chairman Says USAir Will Survive
USAir's survival is not in doubt even though recent merger talks with United  and American airlines have collapsed, USAir's chairman told shareholders today.
The executive, Seth E. Schofield, said that the airline did not necessarily need a partner to remain financially secure in the long run and that he had no intention of selling off the company in pieces.


Baxter Plans To Split Into 2 Companies
Reacting to gnawing uncertainty in the hospital market, Baxter International  Inc., the big, diversified health care company, announced yesterday that it would spin off its slow-growth hospital-supply business as a new company next year.
In the split-up, Baxter would retain its highly profitable international and  technology-related lines, which range from intravenous solutions to kidney-dialysis therapy.
Vernon R. Loucks Jr. would remain its chairman and chief executive.


Drug Company Pleads Guilty To Deceit in Product Testing
The Warner-Lambert Company, one of the nation's largest drug companies, pleaded guilty yesterday to criminal charges and agreed to pay a $10 million fine for hiding from the Food and Drug Administration faulty manufacturing processes used for several drugs, including Dilantin, the widely prescribed epilepsy treatment.
Also, the company's former vice president for quality control, Allan H. Doane, was indicted yesterday on criminal charges that he was involved in trying to hide the failures of the drugs to pass quality tests.
He faces penalties of as much as 19 years in prison and $1.25 million in fines.


CABLETRON TO BUY A UNIT OF STANDARD MICROSYSTEMS
Cabletron Systems of Rochester, N.H., said yesterday that it would pay $77.5  million to acquire a unit of the Standard Microsystems Corporation that makes switches designed to increase the speed of local-area computer networks.
The faster electronic switching capability is needed to accommodate systems and applications that combine voice, video and data capabilities, said Cabletron, which makes a range of products for computer networks.
The company's stock rose $4.25, to $80, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock of Standard Microsystems, which is based in Hauppauge, L.I., rose 75 cents, to $21.75


Ex-Guerrilla Wins Special Zimbabwe Vote
The size of the elected opposition in Zimbabwe grew today from two members to three as a popular former guerrilla from Harare, the capital, won a special election.
The new legislator is Margaret Dongo, who ran away at 14 to join the guerrilla army fighting the white Government in the former Rhodesia but has spent the last few years fighting President Robert Mugabe's governing Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front.
She lost an election for the seat in April but the results were canceled after widespread evidence of voting fraud was found.


FORD PLANS TO INSTALL SIDE-IMPACT AIR BAGS
The Ford Motor Company said yesterday that it would offer a new side-impact air bag on all its cars and light trucks in Europe and North America.
Ford is the first of the Big Three American auto makers to commit to the safety devices, which are intended to protect against head and chest injuries when vehicles are  hit from the side.
Neil Ressler, Ford's vice president of advanced vehicle technology, said Ford planned to start adding the air bags in two years.
While Ford officials declined to identify which vehicles would get the air bags first, the trade publication Automotive News reported that Ford's Lincoln Continental for the 1997 model year would be the first.


Bowing To Profits, Reluctantly
IT is 21 years since the release of "The Taking of Pelham One Two Three," and, unless the Transit Authority is sitting on a great secret, no one has imitated that popular movie by hijacking a New York subway train and holding its passengers for ransom.
Cinematic depictions of horror do not lead automatically to copycat crimes in real life.
There may be evidence that the phenomenon does sometimes occur, but it is difficult to predict.
True, a President was killed in Dallas only a year after "The Manchurian Candidate" filled theaters.
It seems quite a stretch, though, to say that Lee Harvey Oswald simply mimicked that movie's assassination theme.


Scholarships Investigated
Federal investigators are trying to determine whether the National Collegiate Athletic Association discriminates against student athletes with learning disabilities.
Under scrutiny are N.C.A.A. rules intended to prevent colleges from giving athletic scholarships to students unprepared to handle college academic work.
The Justice Department's civil rights division wants to know if the rules are unfairly applied to students with learning disabilities in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act.


Journal;Hillary Clinton, R.I.P.
Thanksgiving being a family weekend, I did what any self-respecting American  family man is obligated to do -- took my family to family movies.
Specifically,  I took them to "The American President" and "Toy Story," so far the two biggest  family hits of the holiday season.
Both funny films, both polished to a high Hollywood gloss, both without a subway-booth torching or other R-rated nightmare of depravity in sight.


Balkans 101: Not With a 10-Foot Pole
Even as President Clinton lobbied in the Capitol today on his plan to put 20,000 American troops in harm's way in Bosnia, lawmakers were searching history for adequately severe cautions against getting involved in the long centuries of Balkan discord and crossfire.
As the President's motorcade roared up to Capitol Hill, Bismarck's century-old warning to avoid the Balkans was being quoted before a concerned and highly attentive Senate Armed Services Committee: "Nothing in the Balkans is worth the healthy bones of a single Pomeranian grenadier."


What Happened to Elisa?
On the matter of Elisa Izquierdo, nobody in this city of supposedly bright people has so far been able to answer the central question.
How in the world could a child who had been battered and tortured for years, and whose plight was apparently no secret to the New York City child welfare authorities, be allowed  to die?
The city's Child Welfare Administration says that under New York State's confidentiality law it cannot discuss Elisa's case -- or even confirm details that have now become common knowledge.
That is a distortion of the law.
It is designed to shield troubled families, not to prevent responsible authorities from public accountability nor to hide what could be defects in a child welfare  system that places children at risk.


Paper to Pay $214,285 in Singapore Libel Case
The International Herald Tribune agreed on Monday to settle the last of three libel cases brought against it in Singapore courts because of two opinion articles that officials of the authoritarian Government said defamed them.
In the settlement, the paper agreed to pay $214,285 to Lee Kuan Yew, the former Prime Minister, who has dominated the politics of the Southeast Asian city-state for 30 years, officials of the paper said.


Murdoch Plans News Channel
Rupert Murdoch said today that he planned to start a 24-hour all-news cable television network to compete with the Cable News Network.
"It's about time CNN was challenged," Mr.
Murdoch told 250 business executives at Boston College's Chief Executives Club.


Timeless Contemplation of the Ordinary
Just about the only thing we know for certain about the 17th-century Dutch master Johannes Vermeer is the thing that matters most: he was a miraculous painter.
What was miraculous about him, among other things, was that he painted  nothing, or mostly nothing: a woman reading a letter, or asleep at a table.
But he made it seem as if time had nearly stopped in these pictures, and the effect is like slow-motion film: the ordinary suddenly looks extraordinary.
Put  another way, Vermeer eternalized moments that we all live, the ones when nothing much is happening, and gave them an almost mystical gravity.
Is this what makes him so popular?
Partly, perhaps.
The Vermeer show, here at the National Gallery of Art, has been mobbed.
People have even lined up out on the street hours before the gallery opened, as if the exhibition were a holiday  sale.


Senate Votes For Demise Of the I.C.C.
Republicans won a small victory today in their campaign to dismantle or shrink some Government agencies when the Senate, following the lead of the House, voted to abolish the Interstate Commerce Commission.
The Senate passed the legislation on a voice vote.
The House approved similar legislation on Nov. 14, and negotiators will now reconcile differences between the two bills.
The I.C.C., an independent agency, was established more than 100  years ago to control the excesses of the railroad robber barons.


Eating Well
WITHIN two weeks, the Federal Government will put into place a system for regulating seafood -- one that is meant to prevent health problems.
The regulations, under consideration by the Food and Drug Administration for  two years, will require the seafood industry to keep detailed records of its safety procedures and to label all shellfish to show processors where it comes from.


A Skeptical District
In Newt Gingrich's home district, there were doubts both about President Clinton's message on Bosnia and about the messenger.
Page A19.


B.A.T. Unit To Sell Brands To Lorillard
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation agreed yesterday to sell six of the cigarette brands it acquired in its $1 billion purchase of the American Tobacco Company to the Lorillard Tobacco Company for an undisclosed price that analysts estimated at $75 million to $100 million.
Industry analysts said the purchase was an astute investment for Laurence A., Preston Robert and James S. Tisch of the Loews Corporation, which owns Lorillard, because it gave the company strong premium and discount brands.
But it was unclear whether the Federal Trade Commission would approve the transaction.


Lebanese Rebels Fire Rockets Over Northern Israeli Border
Muslim guerrillas of the Party of God fired salvos of Katyusha rockets into northern Israel today, wounding several Israelis and raising tensions at a time  when Israel and Syria seemed to be exchanging new peace feelers.
The attacks also threatened to undermine a two-year-old agreement between Israel and the Party of God not to strike at each other's population centers around the 9-mile-wide buffer zone in southern Lebanon controlled by Israel and  its client Lebanese force, the South Lebanese Army.


Making the 'Invisible' Clearly Visible
Billy Golfus was a Minneapolis rock-and-roll radio personality before the motor-scooter accident that left him brain-damaged and partly paralyzed more than a decade ago.
His professional irreverence is very much intact in "When Billy Broke His Head . . . and Other Tales of Wonder," a spiky, vigorous and often caustically funny documentary about problems faced by the disabled.
Serving as director (along with David E. Simpson), writer and acerbic narrator, Mr.
Golfus outlines the frustrations that confront this country's largest minority group.
There may be nearly 50 million disabled Americans, he notes, "but we're as invisible as Casper the ghost."


CHRONICLE
Six years after leaving the Bolshoi Ballet in anger, MAYA PLISETSKAYA, the legendary Russian ballerina, celebrated her 70th birthday in the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow last night, The Associated Press reported.
The audience was dominated by Russia's elite, dressed in black tie, including Prime Minister VIKTOR CHERNOMYRDIN, whose political party sponsored the event.


Suffolk Legislature Asks U.S. to Investigate Catterson
The Republican-controlled Suffolk County Legislature today called for a Federal investigation of charges that James M. Catterson, a Republican, abused his power as Suffolk County District Attorney.
By a 16-to-0 vote with 2 abstentions, the Legislature asked Attorney General  Janet Reno to determine whether Mr.
Catterson broke any Federal laws by threatening to investigate county officials who were at odds with him.
Five county officials have said he threatened them in this way.


Roosevelt District Is Given a Deadline
In a tersely worded order, the State Education Commissioner today gave the board of the troubled Roosevelt school system four weeks to improve the administration of the district, the first in New York to be placed under state supervision.
The board, Commissioner Richard P. Mills said, has failed to carry out significant aspects of a state plan to overhaul the district, which include appointing head teachers, compiling a list of school safety-code violations and  assembling a team of administrators to advise the district on its makeover.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
We cannot wait to hear about Gary's kindergarten play this year.
Two years ago, his school put on "Snow White," with 27 "dwarfs," so that more of the children could be in the play.
Last year, it presented "The Nativity." Joseph came to the inn and knocked on the door.
The little boy playing the innkeeper decided to be inventive.
When Joseph asked if there was room at the inn, he answered by saying: "You are so lucky. We have just had a cancellation."


President Signs Measure Repealing U.S. Speed Limit
President Clinton signed a $6 billion highway bill today that ends the Federal 55-mile-an-hour speed limit that has been in place since 1974 and gives  states the power to set their own, starting in 10 days.
But Mr.
Clinton said he had serious misgivings about the measure, fearing that its provisions will lead to more accidents, highway deaths and injuries.


UMASS TOPPLES NO.1-RANKED KENTUCKY
UMass 92, Kentucky 82 Marcus Camby scored 32 points, 16 in each half, as No. 5-ranked Massachusetts opened its season with a victory over No. 1-ranked Kentucky in the Great Eight basketball festival last night in Auburn Hills, Mich.


The Life and Love of a Single Father
The day his baby girl came home with him from the hospital in 1989, Gustavo Izquierdo called every mother he knew for advice.
What kind of Pampers should I  use?
Can I give her plain milk?
Are you sure she won't drown in the bathtub?
They were questions the 34-year-old man never imagined uttering, friends said.
But the sudden switch from bachelor to single father came as a blessing to Mr.
Izquierdo, a Cuban immigrant who worked for the city welfare department as a community aide in a Brooklyn homeless shelter.
He took on the task of caring for Elisa, his newborn, with solemn, sometimes uproarious, single-mindedness.


Reducing Risks in Eating Seafood
AS a general rule, commercial seafood is safe.
Most deep-ocean species tend to be free of hazards that some near-shore species can be subject to, like chemical contaminants and pesticides.
And cooked shellfish are safer than raw.
There are additional ways to minimize the risk of eating seafood.
Cooking food to an internal temperature of 137 to 145 degrees Fahrenheit will kill most organisms capable of producing disease.
It will not, however, kill staphylococcus toxins, which may have been introduced by someone who has handled the food.


Dollar Trades Broadly Lower While the Pound Is Hit Hard
The dollar slipped yesterday against most leading currencies as traders took  profits after two days of gains.
The dollar was also buffeted by trading between other currencies as the market focused on a new budget in Britain.
The pound sterling weakened when the  Conservative Government's budget proposals failed to satisfy the markets.


Stocks Lower in Japan
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues  was down 154.44 points, or about eight-tenths of 1 percent, at 18,533.98.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei rose 145.28 points.


The Date for King's Retrial Depends on a Court Ruling
The retrial of DON KING on wire-fraud charges will most likely occur between  April and July of next year, but a definite date must await a Federal judge's ruling on the promoter's motion for an acquittal.
A mistrial was declared on Nov. 17 in King's first trial when the jury was deadlocked.
PETER FLEMING JR., King's lawyer, argued yesterday in United States District  Court in Manhattan for a July date to allow King to return to his business.
The  Government asked for a March date to retry King in a scheme to recover insurance money after a canceled JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ fight in 1991.


In Home Schooling, a New Type of Student
On a sunny weekday when most young people are in school, 16-year old Anna Coman-Hidy is home alone, immersed in "Anna Karenina."
Anna left school after a miserable ninth-grade year, becoming one of a new breed of older students being schooled at home.


Starts of Housing Fall 3.7% In Biggest Drop Since March
Construction of new homes and apartments fell surprisingly for the third straight month in October, the Commerce Department said today, raising doubts about the housing sector's ability to support economic growth.
Despite falling mortgage rates, housing starts dropped 3.7 percent in October, to an annual rate of 1.34 million, seasonally adjusted.
Analysts said that while starts were weaker than anticipated, the drop was concentrated in apartment construction, which plunged 11.2 percent, to an annual rate of 238,000.
Single-family home building fell 2 percent, to 1.10 million units a year.


AT LUNCH WITH: Carol Channing;Hello? Yes. Goodbye? Never.
WHERE else would she be seated but in the first booth to the left in the Russian Tea Room, which in the world of celebrity and status means you are a top-ranked someone.
It also means that no one can miss you, and if you are Carol Channing, once again the "Hello, Dolly!" toast of Broadway, that translates into a busy lunch.
The tourists and even the theater people are nudging each other and trying to look as though they were not looking, and the waiter is already hovering, seemingly enchanted at her order of hot coffee.
The coffee leads to a story -- telling stories is one of Miss Channing's favorite forms of communication.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Charges in an E-Mail Deluge
A Monmouth University student sent an "E-mail bomb" to get even with officials who had revoked his computer privileges, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The "bomb," 24,000 computer messages sent in just three hours, temporarily disabled the university's electronic mail system.
The student, Dominick S. LaScala, 21, of Bethpage, L.I., faces both felony and misdemeanor charges.


Amid Hope, Budget Talks Are Resumed
The White House and Republicans in Congress warily resumed an autumn-long haggle over the Federal budget tonight, hoping to agree at the least to try to keep their feud from causing another messy Government shutdown next month.
After some two hours of talks, the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, pronounced the session "a good start," and said the two sides had agreed to meet again on Wednesday.
But others said little was accomplished.


Just Say No, Mr. Dole
Bob Dole's volunteers hit the streets yesterday to round up the signatures to get him on the Republican Presidential primary ballot in New York State.
These campaign volunteers are performing a valid service for the nation's political system.
It is not their fault that Mr.
Dole's principal minders in New York, Gov.
George Pataki and Senator Alfonse D'Amato, have turned the state's G.O.P. primary into a process that mocks democracy.
For months they have been defending a plan that effectively denies other Republican candidates a fair chance to challenge Mr.
Dole in New York's primary election on March 7.
Luckily, the lawyers serving the Dole protection team were dealt a setback Monday in a complicated but valuable ruling by Federal Judge Edward Korman of Brooklyn.
Judge Korman found the onerous petition requirements set by the State  Republican Party to be unconstitutional, and ordered modifications to make it easier for candidates to qualify for the ballot.


Spending-Cap Issue In Connecticut Court
In an unusual case that tests the balance of powers in the Connecticut government, the State Supreme Court was urged today to force the Legislature to  put into effect a spending cap that voters overwhelmingly approved three years ago.
The problem facing the justices is that it is far from clear what the voters  had in mind and whether the Supreme Court is responsible for figuring that out.


Yanks First In Average Salary
In a season when the average major league salary computed by the Players Association dropped by 5 percent, the Yankees became the first team to hit the $2 million mark.
According to figures the union presented to its executive board today at the  first session of its annual winter meetings, the Yankees had an average salary of $2,000,271, eclipsing the record of $1,827,539 the Yankees established last year.


Apartment Owners Challenging Business District
In a challenge to the business improvement districts that have sprouted up throughout New York City, apartment owners in midtown Manhattan charged yesterday that the board of the city's largest district -- the Grand Central Partnership -- violates constitutional guarantees of one person, one vote.
The lawsuit asserts that the district's board -- which levies fees on property owners to provide security, sanitation and other services -- does not adequately represent apartment owners, even though they are assessed fees to help pay for the operations of the partnership, the largest business improvement district in the city.


October Visions for Mets' Isringhausen
Jason Isringhausen gazed at the oversized photographs in a conference room at Shea Stadium yesterday, photos that depicted memorable scenes from Mets history.
Isringhausen's head bobbed.
He saw Mookie Wilson, he saw Tom Seaver.
He thought  of 1986 and 1969 when the Mets won the World Series.
Then he thought of 1996 and beyond.
"I think that would be amazing to have people celebrating something we've done as 25 guys and the whole city comes to see it," said Isringhausen, the awe  in his voice, the delight in his eyes.
"That would be something else. Hopefully, one day we'll be able to witness it again."


Disclosure Laws at Issue After Girl's Death
The death of Elisa Izquierdo echoed through the worried ranks of government yesterday as politicians in New York and Washington pushed to loosen the secrecy laws that tightly restrict public disclosure of information on child abuse cases, even after a child has died.
Saying the confidentiality laws "have really created an enormous problem," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appointed a committee of eight high-ranking city officials to recommend improvements to the city's Child Welfare Administration,  which investigates allegations of child abuse.
He said he had charged the panel  specifically with finding ways to allow greater public scrutiny when a child dies while under the agency's protection.


Euro RSCG Founder Plans to Join BBDO
Jean-Michel Goudard, a founder and top executive of Euro RSCG in Paris, unexpectedly resigned yesterday to join BBDO Worldwide in the long-vacant post of president for international operations, effective Feb. 1.
"It's a dream of mine to relocate to the United States," said Mr.
Goudard, 56, who has been the chief executive of the international operations of Euro RSCG since 1991.


McMahon Joins the Packers
The Green Bay Packers, looking for a backup to quarterback BRETT FAVRE, claimed JIM McMAHON on waivers from Cleveland yesterday.
McMahon, who is 36 and  in his 14th season in the National Football League, will be joining his seventh  team.
He played for the Chicago Bears from 1982 to 1988, leading them to the Super Bowl after the 1985 season, and he has a 67-30 record in games he has started, the best among active N.F.L. quarterbacks.
The Browns released McMahon this week at his request. (AP)


Researchers Say Newly Identified Gene May Promote Breast Cancer
Scientists have identified a gene that might play an early role in producing  breast cancer.
They found that the gene was frequently overactive in early breast cancers but only rarely so in noncancerous breast abnormalities.
If further research shows that the overactivity promotes breast cancer, drugs intended to slow the gene down may prevent some breast cancers in women at high  risk, said one researcher, Dr.
David Page of the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Nets Have The Knack At Home
As easy as the Nets tend to fold when playing on the road, they have a certain resiliency when playing in the familiar setting of Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Maybe there really is no place like home.
How do you explain a team that is unbeaten at home and without a victory on the road?


Oakland's Schools Are All but Empty as Teachers Begin a Two-Day Strike
Protesting crowded classrooms and demanding a raise, thousands of Oakland teachers today began a two-day strike that received strong support from parents  and virtually emptied the city's schools of students.
More than 43,000 of the district's 52,000 students were absent, as were all but 287 of the 2,500 teachers, school officials said.


Pataki Accepts Whitman Pick For Port Authority Chairman
Gov.
George E. Pataki agreed last night to accept Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's choice for chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,  settling a dispute that had caused friction between the two Republicans.
After weeks of contending that the authority was biased against New York, Mr.
Pataki said Mrs.
Whitman had given him assurances that her selection for the chairman's post, Lewis M. Eisenberg, would treat the state fairly.
Mr.
Pataki said he also wanted to be certain that Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Eisenberg agreed with him on the need to revamp the authority and cut its budget.


Minority Lending Doesn't Depend on Law
To the Editor:
Re "Redlining, Not Red Tape" (Op-Ed, Nov. 25):


BUSINESS DIGEST
Big Drug Maker Pleads Guilty to Criminal Charges Warner-Lambert pleaded guilty to criminal charges and agreed to pay $10 million  for concealing faulty manufacturing processes in several drugs.
One was Dilantin, a widely used epilepsy treatment.
The fine is one of the largest against a brand-name drug maker.


No Headline
The University of Massachusetts trustees today appointed William M. Bulger, the longtime president of the State Senate, as the institution's 24th president.
In doing so, they put the five-campus system in the hands of a man who many believe can provide the political clout it has long lacked with the State Legislature.
"There is a sense at the university that people don't see it as a quality place of learning, and I think we have to do something about that perception," Senator Bulger said after the trustees voted at the university's Medical Center  in Worcester.
"We need people to understand this is not a place to come as a fallback."


A Society Decides It Can't Go It Alone
After a three-year scramble back from the brink of insolvency, the New-York Historical Society has virtually given up hope of remaining independent and is actively seeking a merger or partnership with another institution.


Two Boys Sentenced for Killing 5-Year-Old
Two boys who dropped a 5-year-old to his death from a 14th-floor apartment because he would not steal candy for them will be confined to a youth home for no more than 10 years, a juvenile court here ruled today.
The boys, now 11 and 12, were convicted of the juvenile equivalent of first-degree murder.
They could be kept in custody until they are 21 years old,  but could be released earlier if a court determines they have made enough progress.


Toy Story: Knicks Play With Hawks a Bit Too Long
Derek Harper tried to steal the game with a 3-pointer at the end of regulation -- a 26-footer that traveled, oh, maybe 23 feet.
He had the same idea in overtime with 11.3 seconds, but Craig Ehlo stole the inbounds pass.
The Knicks mastered the art of coming up short last night, ruining a fourth-quarter comeback and losing to the Atlanta Hawks, 102-97, at Madison Square Garden.


Packard Bell Is Said to Face Market Woes
Packard Bell Electronics, which became the leader in home computers last year by selling low-priced PC's at stores like Wal-Mart, suddenly seems to be falling behind at its own game.
As the holiday shopping season kicks into high gear, the privately held company is being forced to compete head-on with Compaq Computer, Hewlett-Packard and some of the nation's other leading computer makers in the home PC market it helped create.
And analysts say that Packard Bell, having underestimated consumers appetite for powerful machines, is having trouble selling its inventory of lower-powered machines -- and having trouble paying its bills.


Personal Health
AIR bags save lives: more than 911 in the United States since 1987, and 374 last year alone, according to the National Center for Statistics and Analysis.
More important, perhaps, just in the terms of numbers, they have prevented many  thousands of serious and deforming injuries.
A friend said she would never again drive a car without an air bag after witnessing a brutal accident in which the driver would almost certainly have been killed but instead walked away with a few bruises because he had been protected by an air bag.
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety reports that there are 23 percent  fewer deaths than expected among drivers involved in head-on and front-angle crashes of cars equipped with air bags.
The devices are more effective at savings lives among those driving large cars (a 30 percent reduction) than among those driving small cars (a 14 percent reduction).


Judge Fines Belle $100
ALBERT BELLE of the Cleveland Indians pleaded no contest yesterday to a charge of reckless operation of a motor vehicle on private property and was fined $100.
He appeared in Lyndhurst (Ohio) Municipal Court before Judge ROBERT  GROGAN with his lawyer, JOSE FELICIANO, for a hearing that took one minute.
Belle was charged with a misdemeanor as a result of a dispute with five teen-agers who, the police said, had thrown eggs at his home while trick-or-treating on Halloween night.
Belle called the police and then chased the youths in his car off a road and onto private property, the authorities said. (AP)


Wilkens Quietly Nears Milestone
He entered Madison Square Garden with little fanfare.
He left with another victory that wasn't expected.
Lenny Wilkens has been doing this for 23 seasons -- coaching, and winning, with quiet style.
Atlanta's 102-97 overtime triumph against the Knicks last night gave him 976 victories during his brilliant career.
Barring a major collapse by the Hawks, Wilkens this season will become the first coach in history to win 1,000 games in the National Basketball Association.


Westinghouse Chief Pledges to Rebuild and Expand CBS
Michael H. Jordan, chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, promised yesterday to rebuild the recently acquired CBS Inc. and move the beleaguered network into new business areas like cable television and international broadcasting.
Mr.
Jordan said at a news conference that the combination of CBS and Westinghouse would "produce a sense of dynamism and excitement," but he offered  few specifics of future decisions, other than to say he would retain much of CBS's top management.
He said "time will tell" what vision he would bring to CBS, adding that "a strategic plan" was "something that will evolve."


CHRONICLE
FRANKLIN A. THOMAS, who will step down as president of the Ford Foundation in March after 15 years in the post, has been approached by numerous organizations  that want to proffer honors to him.
He has politely said "No, thank you" to most.
But he could not resist agreeing to receive the National Equal Justice award  tonight from the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund at its 55th anniversary dinner at the Sheraton New York.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Monday with an article about overseas growth by American producers of children's television programs misattributed a cartoon, "Jin Jin and the Panda Patrol." It is produced by Saban Entertainment and the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television of China, not by the Fox Children's Network.
A series of maps with the article mislabeled figures for the overseas audiences of three American producers.
The figures represented subscribers for each network, not reachable households.


Club Europe's Tough Doorman
Behind closed doors at the German Parliament, Theo Waigel had just told the finance committee that because of Italy's excessive debt, it did not yet meet the requirements for joining Germany and other countries in a single European currency in 1999.
What Mr.
Waigel, Germany's Finance Minister, said in September was certainly  no revelation to even the dullest student of European economics.
But within an hour, a parliamentary aide had slipped out and told the news media, and the firestorm began.


Gartner to Acquire Dataquest In $80 Million Bid to Expand
In a move to broaden its market in the analysis of information technology, Gartner Group Inc. has agreed to buy Dataquest Inc., a unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, for about $80 million in cash and securities.
Gartner, which announced the deal late Monday, is itself 51 percent owned by  Dun &amp; Bradstreet.


Book Notes
Posthumous Revelations


Mayor Wants Welfare Recipients To Handle Some Teacher Duties
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is pushing the use of welfare recipients to supervise students during lunchtime, at recess, in hallways when they change classes, and before and after school -- duties that teachers will no longer have to perform under a new contract worked out with City Hall.
The Mayor's plan, which has yet to be endorsed by the city's Board of Education or Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew, would place welfare recipients in the schools their own children attend.
While Dr.
Crew, through a spokesman, said the proposal was still in the preliminary stage, board officials already have begun talks with school unions about starting a test program involving 200 welfare recipients.


Dark Thoughts on the Fate of an Enlightened Era
ON THE EVE OF THE MILLENNIUM The Future of Democracy Through an Age of Unreason By Conor Cruise O'Brien 168 pages.
The Free Press. $12.


Lunar Atmosphere Higher, Scientists Say
The wispy atmosphere of the Moon has been found to extend at least 9,000 miles above its surface, almost twice the distance previously believed, scientists say.
Many people, with visions of astronauts bounding on the lunar surface in spacesuits, believe that the Moon is an airless body.
But scientists have known  for decades that Earth's rocky satellite is enclosed by an extremely thin atmosphere caused by gaseous particles dislodged from its surface.


Chinatown, Where Fish Are Cheaper
WHEN Jeffrey Murray, executive chef and owner of Boom, a restaurant in SoHo,  bought a 26-pound whole salmon for $98 in the Lien-Phat Meat and Fish Market in  Chinatown one recent Sunday, he was beaming.
"I would have to pay at least twice the money in other places," he said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Hearst Magazines President Ousted and Replaced
Three weeks after being named chairman of the Magazine Publishers of America,
the most prestigious post in the magazine industry, D. Claeys Bahrenburg was ousted yesterday as president of the Hearst Magazines division, a unit of the Hearst Corporation, after five years at the helm.
His successor is Cathleen P. Black, 51, president and chief executive officer of the Newspaper Association of America and former president and publisher of USA Today, which is owned by the Gannett Company.


Aeromexico Accord
Aeromexico has signed a code-sharing agreement with Air France that allows it to offer more flights and easier connections between Mexico and Paris.
Under a code-sharing arrangement, one airline is allowed to sell seats on another as if  it were its own flight.
In addition, passengers will accumulate frequent-flier mileage under both airlines' programs, Aeromexico said late Monday.
The two carriers will offer eight flights a week between Mexico and Paris.


LEGISLATORS GET PLEA BY CLINTON ON BOSNIA FORCE
President Clinton personally appealed to Congress today for support in sending American troops to Bosnia, but he encountered many lawmakers skeptical that America has a compelling national interest in the deployment or that engagement in the Balkan conflict is worth one American life.
Persuading the House of Representatives to support him at this stage, said Representative Dick Armey, the majority leader, "would be like pulling teeth through the back of your head." He added, "It's not going to be, I think, in any respect, an easy proposition."


UNITS TO BE SPLIT OFF IN REVAMPING AT AEG OF GERMANY
The German rail and engineering company AEG A.G. said yesterday that it would split off its power transmission and industrial automation units on Jan. 1.
AEG, a unit of Daimler-Benz A.G., said the rest of the company would be reorganized to form a holding company.
AEG said it was still investigating whether the change to a holding company would require shareholder approval.


Single Union Fails to Delay City Pact Vote
Fearing the loss of job security for his members, the head of the largest union local for city hospital workers yesterday intensified his campaign to block ratification of New York City's five-year agreement covering 140,000 municipal workers.
After holding a demonstration in front of City Hall to protest the agreement, the official, James Butler, president of an 11,000-member local of municipal hospital workers, sought at a board meeting of the city's main municipal employees' union to postpone a ratification vote.
Such a delay might give him time to win better terms for his local.


Yahoo Sells Stake To New Investors
The Yahoo Corporation said yesterday that it had sold a 12 percent equity stake in the Internet search service to new investors, including Reuters Holdings P.L.C. and the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company.
Yahoo said it would use the money from the equity sale and partnerships with  the investors to expand its products and services domestically and internationally.
Yahoo, based in Mountain View, Calif., did not disclose the amount of money raised though the sale.


Teamsters Break Off Metro-North Talks
After a brief strike that shut down part of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and left thousands of people stranded yesterday morning, the teamsters' union broke off contract talks last night and refused to say whether this morning might bring another walkout, feeding the uncertainty that has plagued the railroad's riders.
With only the issue of vacation leave unresolved, teamsters' officials walked out of the Sheraton New York in Manhattan at 10 P.M., after five hours of talks, and no new talks were scheduled.


MOODY'S RAISES CREDIT RATINGS FOR CHEMICAL AND CHASE
Moody's Investors Service has raised the credit ratings of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Chase Manhattan Corporation, citing the benefits of  their planned $10 billion merger, which would create the nation's largest bank.
Moody's, the New York-based ratings agency, on Monday raised the banks' senior long-term debt one notch, to A1 from A2.
About $20 billion in debt securities is affected.
The grade is the third highest that Moody's uses.


Whitman Hires a Company For Health Care in Prisons
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who has been seeking to curb state spending by putting government services in the hands of outside contractors, said today that a private managed-care company would take over health care in New Jersey's state prison system early next year.
The Governor said the outside contractor could provide the same or a higher level of medical services to the state's 26,000 inmates while saving taxpayers $20 million a year.
The $64.2 million contract was awarded to Correctional Medical Services, a managed-health-care company based in St.
Louis that operates prison health services in 27 other states, as well as the Middlesex and Camden County jail systems in New Jersey.


Clinton's Bosnia Stand: Political Risks Remain
When President Clinton called in his advisers last week to complete plans for sending 20,000 American troops to Bosnia, he told them that there would be no more soul-searching or wavering.
"Whatever ambivalence any of us ever had in the past, it's over," a participant in the meeting quoted Mr.
Clinton as saying.
"We're going to make this work."


Israel Goldiamond, Psychologist Of Behavior Patterns, Dies at 76
Israel Goldiamond, an experimental psychologist who found novel ways to investigate animal and human behavior patterns and used this knowledge to help patients overcome unwanted habits, died on Nov. 19 at his home in Chicago.
He was 76.
The cause was a cancer of the bone marrow, multiple myeloma, the University of Chicago Medical Center said.
Dr.
Goldiamond had retired from the university in 1990 as professor emeritus of psychiatry and psychology.


Bagel Chain Selects Fallon
Progressive Bagel Concepts Inc., a retail bagel chain based in Golden, Colo., said yesterday that it had named Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis as the first agency to handle advertising for its Einste!n Bros. retail bagel stores.
The billings have not been determined.
Gary Gerdemann, a spokesman for Progressive Bagel, said Fallon McElligott was awarded the account after an informal review in which the other participants were not disclosed.
Progressive Bagel owns and operates 57 stores in 7 states including California, Colorado and Florida, and plans to open 275 to 300 stores by the end of 1996.
The company has a loan from  Boston Chicken Inc. that can be converted into a majority equity stake in Progressive Bagel.


Egyptians Vote Today, but Islamic Opposition Group Is Barred
Egyptians are to vote on Wednesday in parliamentary elections that have emerged less as a challenge to President Hosni Mubarak's Government than a window on a widening rift between the Government and its outlawed Islamic opponents.
With the country's most influential Islamic organization, the Muslim Brotherhood, barred from competing as a political party, Mr.
Mubarak's governing National Democratic Party is widely expected to maintain its commanding majority in Parliament, where it now holds 348 of 444 elective seats.


Paper Evicted From Office At City Hall
Editors at The Star-Ledger of Newark said today that they were ordered to vacate their City Hall office just hours after they warned city officials that they planned to go to court to obtain public documents that might be related to  a Federal corruption investigation.
Charles Cooper, managing editor of The Star-Ledger, said the eviction notice  was slipped through the mail slot in the room the bureau occupies on the second  floor of City Hall about 90 minutes after the newspaper's lawyers formally notified the administration of Mayor Sharpe James that it would go to court on Friday to obtain the papers.
The eviction order takes effect on Friday.


Heat Bounds Back Behind Mourning's 38 Points
Heat 111, Mavericks 89 Alonzo Mourning scored a season-high 38 points and pulled down 10 rebounds last  night to lead the Miami Heat to its second straight come-from-behind victory, 111-89, over the visiting Dallas Mavericks.


Diana, Royal Icon
To the Editor:
Re A. N. Wilson's "What the Princess Is Up To" (Op-Ed, Nov. 25): I doubt the  Princess of Wales intended to unravel the monarchy by exposing its foibles in the BBC interview.
Like any celebrity under scrutiny, she wanted to set the record straight on who did what to whom.
But in seeking retribution against her  husband's side, she has indeed encouraged her adoring public to join the bandwagon against the Establishment.


How to Be Sure Our Last Wishes Are Honored
To the Editor:
Working in the area of end-of-life medical decisions myself, I found your Nov. 22 front-page article on how doctors ignore patients' last wishes informative yet incomplete.


Jets Applaud Murrell For His Solo Effort
In every sense of the word, Adrian Murrell had to carry the ball for the Jets on Sunday against the Seattle Seahawks.
Richie Anderson did not dress because of a badly sprained ankle.
Ronald Moore suffered a concussion on the opening kickoff.
Brad Baxter was limited by a bruised shoulder and Sherriden May had been signed only days before.
So Murrell was the only sound running back, and he played the part.
He carried 24 times for 116 yards, both career highs and well above his season average of 11 carries and 48 yards.
His contributions to ball control helped the Jets upset the Seahawks, 16-10.


Stocks Continue Up, With Dow Gaining 7.22, to 5,078.10
The stock market continued to move higher yesterday, overcoming a sharp early selloff in a volatile trading session.
The Dow Jones industrial average set its fifth consecutive record and its 64th of the year, closing up 7.22 points. at 5,078.10, its high for the day.


In Performance: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A New York Recital Debut By a Contest Winner Margarita Shevchenko, pianist Alice Tully Hall


Cowboys Switching to Grass
EMMITT SMITH should be running on grass in Texas Stadium by 1997.
At least that's what the Dallas Cowboys' owner, JERRY JONES, promised yesterday, saying:  "There will be grass. Make no mistake about it."
Smith, the National Football League's leading rusher, sprained his left knee  trying to make a cut on the slick artificial Texas Stadium turf in the third quarter of a 24-12 victory over Kansas City on Thanksgiving.
"There is a concern about the turf because we don't have the traction that should be out there," Jones said.
"The turf is worn out enough that we're pushing the envelope." Jones said he hoped construction would begin at the end of the 1996 season to lower the field by 15 feet and plant grass.
He also wants to close the stadium's open roof.


Kansas Congresswoman Won't Run Again
Representative Jan Meyers, Republican of Kansas, said today that she would not seek re-election in 1996, ending 12 years in Congress.
"There are other things in life I want to do, and being a member of Congress, if you take the job seriously, simply does not leave time," Ms.
Meyers, 67, said in a statement.
She said she wanted to spend more time with her family.


A Time for Reconciliation in Algeria
Elections do make a difference, even when flawed, and can open the way to a political resolution of bitter civil conflict.
This might well be the case in Algeria, whose military rulers a few weeks ago permitted the first pluralist presidential vote since independence in 1962.
Three of every four eligible voters turned out, defying boycott calls by Islamic militants.
They elected Liamine Zeroual, a former general who was appointed head of state by the army in 1994.
At his inauguration on Monday, he promised more elections and called for a "national dialogue," an offer that some Islamic opponents suggested they could not reasonably refuse.
All this has infuriated hard-liners in the outlawed Islamic Salvation Front,  as evidenced by the assassination Monday in Algiers of Gen.
Mohammed Boutaghene, commander of the Coast Guard.
The killing followed a factional split within the  front that developed when one of its leaders expressed willingness to negotiate  with President Zeroual.
The split, as well as the voter turnout, speaks to a widespread yearning to end an armed struggle that has claimed as many as 40,000  lives.


Student, 17, Is Killed After Leaving School in Queens
A 17-year-old student was shot to death yesterday in a confrontation with at  least two young men minutes after he abruptly walked out of class at his high school in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
The victim, Quentin Gamble of 138-07 Lakewood Avenue in Jamaica, was shot by  one of two youths who pursued him after he and his assailants got out of a car that stopped by a park and playground a short distance from the school, witnesses told investigators.


Agassi, Absent and Ailing, Is Out of Davis
They have seen Red Square and Lenin's Tomb, and have smiled for the camera in front of St.
Basil's Cathedral.
The only tourist attraction the American Davis Cup team has not seen is Andre Agassi.
It remains unclear whether Agassi will make an appearance in Moscow for the Davis Cup final against Russia, which begins Friday.
But this much is clear: Agassi will not be playing in it.
"You've got to go with healthy people," said the American team's captain, Tom Gullikson, after naming Richey Reneberg as Agassi's replacement on the four-man  United States squad that already included Pete Sampras, Jim Courier and Todd Martin.


Chernobyl Trust Fund Depleted as Problems of Victims Grow
An international trust fund set up in 1991 to help the victims of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident is out of money, while effects of the disaster continue to threaten millions of people and their environment, a senior United Nations official said today.
Thyroid cancers, many now being diagnosed in children, are 285 timespre-Chernobyl levels in Belarus, the official, Peter Hansen, Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, said at a news conference.


Lincoln Center's Welcome Festival
In the center of Manhattan Island is another island known as Lincoln Center -- home to some of the greatest music and dance in the Western Hemisphere.
This  summer that small island will be the site of a very big festival.
Lincoln Center Festival 96, the first in a three-year cycle, will run from July 22 to Aug. 11, packing in 206 performances of 61 programs and providing its audiences with a kind of total immersion in the performing arts.
Most of the theaters and performance spaces, more often than not dark in summer, will be blazing.
So will many of the resident companies, along with imports like Reigakusha, a gagaku ensemble (traditional court orchestra with dancers) from Japan.


Tasty Sesame Noodles
Home cooks can prepare sesame noodles as easily as restaurant chefs.
The noodles are nicely complemented by a tangerine salad.
Sesame Noodles And Broccoli


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Limit on Late Fees Is Upheld
The State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that national banks and federally insured out-of-state banks must follow New Jersey law and charge a fee of no more than $10 for late credit card payments.


At Burn Unit, Vigil for Subway Clerk
The burn unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan is at  the end of a long white corridor.
Stella Kaufman, a churchgoing woman, hopes it  is the path to her husband's healing.
But as she holds vigil by her husband's bedside, she admits that with the waiting, comes worry.
"He is not doing well," Mrs.
Kaufman said yesterday about her husband, Harry, a token clerk who was set afire early Sunday as he worked overtime in a Brooklyn subway token booth.
"I really appreciate all the effort everyone is making, but right now he is really not doing well. He is breathing. That is all."


Joseph Hintersteiner, Arts Promoter, 80
Joseph Hintersteiner, a watercolor painter who promoted the arts in northern  Manhattan, where he lived, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Paul.


METRO DIGEST
HOUSING HOAX SUSPECTED IN CHINATOWN In the last year, city officials have evacuated almost 200 people from dungeonlike cellars in Chinatown.
In poorly lighted hovels, they found adults and children living stacked like cordwood in makeshift bunks.
But city housing officials now suspect that some of the emergencies were a hoax, and that the horrific living conditions were bogus. [Page A1.] MAYOR BACKS WORKFARE PLAN IN SCHOOLS Mayor Giuliani is pushing the use of welfare recipients to supervise students during lunchtime, at recess and in hallways when they change classes and before  and after school, duties that teachers will no longer have to perform under a new contract. [A1.]


How to Be Sure Our Last Wishes Are HonoredMedicare Covers Hospice
To the Editor:
The study on end-of-life treatment (front page, Nov. 22) confirms that the medical establishment does not respect the wishes of the dying, expressed in written and verbal directives, to relieve pain and avoid intrusive and unproductive death-delaying, but not life-prolonging, actions.


James Brady, Condition Critical, in Hospital
James S. Brady, the White House press secretary who was gravely wounded in the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan in 1981, was admitted to Fairfax County Hospital today in critical but stable condition.
Officials of the hospital, in Washington's Virginia suburbs, would not describe the illness afflicting the 55-year-old Mr.
Brady.
But The Washington Post quoted his wife, Sarah, as saying his heart stopped earlier in the day at a dental office where he was being treated.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN BRANDS INC., Old Greenwich, Conn., named Charles H. McGill senior vice  president for corporate development.


Ignoring Dalai Lama's Choice, China Installs Cleric in Tibet
Battling the Dalai Lama for the soul of Tibet, the Chinese authorities orchestrated an elaborate ceremony there today to choose a 6-year-old boy as the officially approved reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, Tibet's second most important religious figure.
Conducted at dawn in the Johkang Temple in Lhasa, Tibet's capital, the ceremony was a bizarre mixture of ancient Tibetan ritual and modern Communist Party protocol.
Parts were broadcast on Chinese state television.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: The Humbling of a Heavyweight;In Hong Kong, Change Jolts a Colonial Business Power
In the spring of 1840, it was just a good business decision.
The Qing dynasty had decided to enforce a ban on opium sales in Canton, slamming shut the market that had made one of Asia's great trading partnerships, the Jardines and the Mathesons, fabulously wealthy.
And so, William Jardine, one of the leading partners of the eight-year-old British trading firm Jardine, Matheson &amp; Company, visited Lord Palmerston, the Foreign Secretary, and described the sort of warships needed to reopen the opium markets.


Ontario Slashes Its Budget
Undeterred by widespread protests, Ontario's conservative provincial Government today unveiled the biggest budget cuts ever made by a Canadian province, a $4.4 billion cutback over the next three years.
Premier Mike Harris, who had already reduced welfare payments by 22 percent,  said he plans further cuts to allow for a 30 percent tax cut.


INSIDE
Clinton Reassures British


With Anger and Shame, a Child Is Buried
Their faces tinged with sorrow, rage and shame over the grisly death of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, 300 relatives, friends, politicians and strangers filed quietly into St.
Joseph's Patron Church in Bushwick yesterday.
They watched and listened, some of them unflinchingly, others with downcast eyes, as  the Rev.
Gianni Agostinelli gazed solemnly at the congregation and posed the heartbreaking questions so many New Yorkers have asked themselves in the last week.
"Who are the silent partners of this tragedy?" Father Agostinelli asked in a  soft but stern voice.
"Elisa was not killed only by the hand of a sick individual, but by the impotence and silence of many, by the neglect of child welfare institutions and by the moral mediocrity that has intoxicated our neighborhoods."


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 226 issues was up 210.44 points, or 1.14 percent, at 18,744.42.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei declined 154.44 points, or eight-tenths of 1 percent.


Overdrawn Securities Reform
The securities bill that Congress is about to pass addresses a nagging problem, frivolous lawsuits by investors against corporations, but in such cavalier fashion that it may end up sheltering some forms of fraud against investors.
President Clinton should veto the bill and demand at least two fixes  to protect truly defrauded investors.
The bill seeks with good reason to protect corporate officials who issue honest but unintentionally optimistic predictions of corporate profitability.
In some past cases, opportunistic shareholders have waited for a company's stock price to fall, then sued on the grounds that their money-losing investments were based on fraudulent misrepresentations of the company's financial prospects.
Their game was to use these "strike" suits to threaten companies with explosively expensive litigation in the cynical attempt to win lucrative settlements.


Clintons' Tree: Politics And Mice
In this company town, where the business is politics, partisanship has even struck the White House Christmas tree.
An ornament provided by an architecture student for the 18 1/2-foot Fraser fir from North Carolina makes no bones about  its creator's sympathies: Hung by the chimney with care are stockings marked "Bill" and "Newt," the former filled with candy and presents, the latter with lumps of coal.
While the White House may not be thrilled with the decoration, made by Rene Spineto, one of 10 winners in a competition at Oklahoma State University, Ann Stock, the White House social secretary, said the ornament would go up.
"You can't control the creative process," she said.
"We're going to hang every one."  The tree and its decorations will go on display Monday in the Blue Room.


Anderson Can Talk To Interested Teams
Wanting to see whether there is any trade interest in Kenny Anderson, the Nets have made it known that they will let teams interested in trading for the point guard hold contract talks with him.
According to people familiar with the situation, a few teams have already asked the Nets about what it would take to trade for and then sign Anderson.
The Nets are listening to trade possibilities because they could lose Anderson without getting anything in return should he sign with another team once he becomes a free agent on July 1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- ADDENDA;Accounts
*
Frierson &amp; Mee, New York, was awarded two accounts for which the billings were not disclosed: Besnier USA, New York, a unit of Besnier S.A., to introduce its President brand of specialty cheese in the United States, and the Lighthouse, New York, to handle the nonprofit group's account, which had previously been inactive.


Fight Over Browns Goes to Washington
Outside the packed hearing room, a road show Dawg Pound of 200 Cleveland Browns fans woofed and barked loudly today to keep their team from moving to Baltimore.
Inside, United States senators, mayors and sports officials debated whether to grant the National Football League an antitrust exemption that would enforce its toothless rules on franchise relocation.
The hearing's stew of rhetoric featured a characterization of N.F.L. owners by Mayor Bob Lanier of Houston as lease-breaking gougers, and a hyperbolic vow by Mayor Michael R. White of Cleveland: "As long as there is no team in Cleveland, there will be no peace."


Moscow Embraces Showdown With U.S.
There was a time, not very long ago, when tennis was about as popular in this very chilly neck of the woods as capitalism.
But tastes have evolved rapidly along with borders, prices and ideologies.
This year, the Americans are in town for the Davis Cup final, and every ticket has been sold.
The three-day, five-match event begins Friday and ends Sunday in the cavernous arena built for the 1980 Olympics.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;20-Year Sentence for Assault
A New Jersey man was sentenced yesterday to 20 years in prison for beating and sexually assaulting a Maine state trooper in Pittsfield, Me., in April.
But  prosecutors told The Associated Press that they expect to send Steven Fortin back to New Jersey where he faces charges -- and possibly the death penalty -- in the August 1994 rape and murder of a woman in Woodbridge Township.


Convention Of Burmese Is Boycotted
Defying the military Government, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese opposition leader, announced today that her political party would boycott a military-run convention to draw up a new constitution for Myanmar, formerly Burma.
The move was Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's most direct challenge to the junta since she was freed in July after spending nearly six years under house arrest.


Why U.S. Troops Don't Belong in Bosnia
To the Editor:
As there is an implied social contract between the state and society, so too  is there a social contract between the United States military and the civilian authorities it is sworn to obey.
In return for its obedience, the military expects -- and deserves -- not just civilian authority, but competent civilian authority.
So when President Clinton invokes moral desiderata to justify sending troops to Bosnia, we should be asking more than whether there is some worthy humanitarian purpose to be served.


Token Clerk Is Threatened In 3d Attack
A man squirted an apparently flammable liquid into a subway token booth in Brooklyn early yesterday, but unlike in a similar case three days before, the liquid never ignited.
The incident, at the Park Place subway station along the Franklin Avenue Shuttle, was the third attack on a token booth involving the use of flammable liquids or fire in as many days.
On Sunday, a token clerk was burned over 70 percent of his body when attackers sprayed flammable liquid in his booth and set fire to it in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
In a second incident Sunday, a man was arrested after lighting a match and threatening a token clerk with it, the police said.


Ruelas Title Fight a Benefit for Late Boxer
The children of the late Jimmy Garcia will benefit from GABRIEL RUELAS's World Boxing Council superfeatherweight title defense against AZUMAH NELSON tomorrow night in Palm Springs, Calif.


Prices for Gasoline Move Higher On Report of Falling Inventories
Gasoline prices rose sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday after a report showed a sharp drop in American inventories.
On other markets, wheat prices rose while coffee fell.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities rose 0.54 point, to 241.66.


Both Sides Take Silent Approach
Maybe it bodes well for the prospect of a new labor agreement; maybe it means nothing.
But the Major League Baseball Players Association seems to be getting more and more like Major League Baseball owners.
Three signs of similarity have been present this week at the annual winter meeting of the union's executive board:


Jets Look Forward to December Thaw
They are little signs. But on a 3-9 team with little success, they could be important.
The Jets, for all their failings, have not fallen apart.
Significantly, there has not been the locker-room moaning and griping that marked last season's tailspin.
In fact, on Tuesday, their day off, 31 players turned out to hang out, work out and chill out.


City Doubles Its Officers To Cut Down
Some New Yorkers think double-parking for a quick trip to the store is an inalienable right, and delivery truck drivers, particularly in Manhattan, accept traffic tickets as a cost of doing business in the city.
But the Giuliani administration said yesterday that enough is enough, and to free up the city's streets, it would have "zero tolerance" of anything that blocks traffic flow during peak drive times.
Pledging to ease street congestion by Christmas, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would double the number of police officers responsible for restricting double-parking, gridlock at intersections and unauthorized construction that blocks traffic.
The effort, which would include arresting some traffic offenders, is part of the Mayor's attack on so-called quality-of-life offenses.


More Cuts in Store For New York City
After two years of deep cuts, New York City's budget stands to face even further reductions in the months ahead.
The Giuliani administration yesterday proposed another $100 million in new cuts, and projected that the gap between revenues and spending had grown to $1.36 billion -- 50 percent larger than estimated four months ago.
The administration said it hopes to keep the budget in balance by cutting city agencies and saving money on welfare and Medicaid.
Article, page B10.


In Suburbs Of Sarajevo, Serbs Firm On Leaving
Marjana Slijegovic remembers what it was like before the war in the southern  neighborhood of Grbavica, where Serbs like herself lived alongside Muslims and Croats, and nobody bothered to ask who was which.
"Everybody lived together, and it was very good," she said.


CHRONICLE
MARLENE SANDERS, the former television correspondent and anchor who has been  with ABC, CBS and Channel 13 in New York, plans to return to broadcasting next year on a new cable channel called Prime Life Network.
"The channel will be geared to attract the more than 65 million Americans over the age of 50, and no one is doing that," she said the other day from her office at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, where she teaches and is the director of program development.
"I think of it as the network for grown-ups. It won't have silly sitcoms or programs that appeal to the group that most networks try to appeal to, the 18- to 39-year-old viewers."  The channel will probably begin broadcasting in late spring, she said.
It is being started by Michael Eisenberg, a former CBS executive.


No Headline
I've always been hard to paper-train."
REPRESENTATIVE PATRICIA SCHROEDER.  [B16:1.]


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Survey on H.M.O.'s Released
Elsewhere on the health-care front, health maintenance organizations, facing  increasing criticism from both the public and politicians, told their side of the story yesterday.
The New Jersey H.M.O.
Association released a survey concluding that 79 percent of state residents enrolled in managed care programs are satisfied with  their health plans.
The survey comes after the Whitman administration proposed tough new regulations on health maintenance organizations, including a requirement that they reveal financial incentives offered to physicians to limit care.


Clinton Invokes British-American Link in Speech to Parliament
Invoking the most cherished traditions of Anglo-American friendship, President Clinton promised the British Parliament today that the United States would take the lead in policing a Bosnian peace accord because the public "will  see that this hopeful moment cannot be lost without grave consequences to the future."
"We must help peace to take hold in Bosnia because so long as that fire rages at the heart of the European continent, so long as the emerging democracies and  our allies are threatened by fighting in Bosnia, there will be no stable, undivided, free Europe," Mr.
Clinton told a solemn gathering of the Commons and  the Lords in the gilded Royal Gallery at Westminster Palace.


Officials Assure Democrats of a Veto of the Welfare Bill
Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, today catalogued the Administration's objections to a Republican welfare bill in an effort to reassure Democrats who fear the President may ultimately sign the measure.
Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, has said Mr.
Clinton will veto the bill.
But Democrats in Congress and even some Administration officials  say they are unsure of the President's intentions because he has shifted position on the issue in the last two years.


World News Briefs;P.L.O. Faction Detains, Then Releases, 2 Israelis
A Palestine Liberation Organization faction briefly detained two Israeli soldiers today in Jenin, a West Bank enclave under Palestinian rule.
Palestinian and Israeli security officials said two men from the Fatah faction of the P.L.O. picked up two Israeli members of a joint Palestinian-Israeli patrol in retaliation for Israel's attempt to arrest a Fatah man in a nearby town.


After 30 Years, New Clue Pursued In Unsolved Killing
Almost three decades after a 7-year-old girl was stabbed to death in broad daylight in downtown Elizabeth, N.J., eight witnesses have re-surfaced and are trying to help detectives crack one of New Jersey's most puzzling homicides.
Over the years, the authorities had lost touch with these witnesses, who married and changed their names or moved out of state.


Papandreou Condition Worsens; Question of Successor Still Open
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou continued to battle for his life tonight in a hospital outside Athens after undergoing a third dialysis treatment to help his failing kidneys filter blood.
Mr.
Papandreou, 76, was put back on a respirator on Tuesday, after his condition took a sudden turn for the worse, 10 days after he was admitted to the Onassis Heart Center for pneumonia.
In official statements issued throughout the day, doctors described his condition as "difficult," and reported that he was continuing to lose weight.


John S. Burke Jr., 72, Executive Who Led the B. Altman Chain
John S. Burke Jr., who was chief executive of the once-popular B. Altman &amp; Company department store chain from 1962 until 1986, died yesterday at home in Watch Hill, R.I.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, John W. Townsend, a son-in-law, said.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Vagabond Lampposts Returned
The two lampposts from outside Plainfield's post office are back where they belong.
No one knows how the 10-feet-high, 300-pound posts were stolen last month or why they were outside the Fluets Corp. machine shop.


Pactel to Acquire Two Wireless Cable Systems in California
Pacific Telesis Group said today that it would pay as much as $175 million for two wireless-video systems, expanding its ability to beam 100 digital TV channels to millions of homes in California by early 1997.
The regional Bell operating company, based in San Francisco, said it had agreed to acquire Wireless Holdings Inc. and Videotron Bay Area Inc., both of which are joint ventures of Transworld Telecommunications Inc., based in Salt Lake City, and Le Groupe Videotron Ltee of Montreal.
Both provide wireless cable service, which transmits programming on microwave frequencies licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.


A Jackson Family Celebration


So Who Won the Sweeps? Ask NBC and ABC
It was time for network entertainment executives to sound like pee-wee football coaches again yesterday, as the November sweeps rating period ended, bringing with it the obligation to brag about the many ways your team beat their team.
This time, the undisputed prime-time leaders, NBC and ABC, verbally duked it  out over which was better: a team that wins because of one superstar -- in this case NBC, with its powerful Thursday night -- or a team that is well balanced overall, like ABC.
Meanwhile, Fox tried to poke its nose in by crowing  about its popularity with viewers under 35.
And CBS could say little to hide its steep ratings decline in every category since last year.


Nomura Fined $1 Million in Bond Trading
Nomura Securities International Inc. was fined $1 million yesterday by the New York Stock Exchange, the third-largest sanction ever levied by the exchange, for rule violations involving Mexican bond trading.
The trades, which Nomura carried out for its own account, resulted in the firm's failing to meet capital requirements, the exchange said.
These require brokerage firms to maintain a minimum amount of capital to insure that they can meet all their obligations to customers and others.
The exchange also said that Nomura fell short in its supervision and control of its traders.


GARDEN Q.&amp;A.
Moving Rosemary Indoors


Negotiators on Budget Make Some Headway
White House and Congressional negotiators agreed today on the framework for their talks to balance the budget in seven years.
But even as the two sides celebrated that bit of progress, the House was giving a stark reminder of how tortuous budget negotiations can be, voting to reject one of the main 1996 spending bills.
Dissatisfied with the allocation of money in the $61.3 billion appropriations bill for veterans, housing, environmental and other programs, 25 Republicans joined all but two of the minority Democrats and the lone independent in the House on a 216-to-208 vote that sent the legislation back to a Senate-House conference committee.


Solvay to Sell Enzymes Unit
Solvay S.A. said on Tuesday that it would sell its industrial enzymes business to Genencor International Inc., a biotechnology company in Rochester, for an undisclosed amount.
Genencor is a joint venture between the Eastman Chemical Company of the United States and Cultor Ltd. of Finland.


Couple Accused of Trying to Sell Children
An Oswego couple tried to sell their two young daughters to another couple for $200 and a used car, the police said.
Bryan Crowe, 24, and Donna Howard, 25, of Oswego, were each charged on Tuesday with attempted sale of children and endangering the welfare of a child.
They contended that it was the other couple  who tried in September to buy the two children, then 1 month and 13 months.
Ms.
Howard said the other couple had "helped them out" and kept the children  for a few weeks while she and Mr.
Crowe went through some difficult financial times.


Joseph Coulter, 71, Co-Founder Of Medical Diagnostic Company
Joseph R. Coulter Jr., co-founder, president and chief executive of the Coulter Corporation, a world leader in manufacturing medical analysis equipment  and diagnostic instruments, died on Monday at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
He was 71 and lived in Miami.
The cause was complications from prostate cancer, his family said.


An English-Only Law Makes Common Sense
To the Editor:
Re "America Needs No Language Law" (editorial, Nov. 25): It is not the first  time you have taken an editorial position against the statutory implementation of English as the common tongue.
I disagree with your position.
I do not see it  as a partisan issue but as a practical, common-sense step that will benefit our  nation in the long run.


Sports of The Times;King, Tyson, Philadelphia And a Beard
ONLY three hours after Don King had been evicted by New Jersey yesterday, he  crossed the Delaware to Philadelphia, where Mike Tyson will now test his healing right thumb against Buster Mathis Jr. on Saturday night, Dec. 16, in the Spectrum and on the Fox network's free television.
"Philadelphia is the home of Rocky," the promoter shouted in a conference call.
"Philadelphia is the home of the Constitution."


Society Styles, Reproduced
FOR the last 10 years or so, Michael Formica, a New York interior decorator,  has been collecting elegant pieces of furniture by T. H. Robsjohn-Gibbings.
The  English designer came to the United States in the 1930's and had a career as a society decorator, specializing in furniture that was custom-made for special projects or rooms.
Many of his designs were inspired by classical Greece.
Two years ago, Mr.
Formica obtained the trademark and design copyright to reproduce some of the furniture.
The materials used -- walnut veneer and solid maple or birch -- are true to the original designs.
Nine pieces have just been introduced, and five more will be ready in the spring.
Prices range from under $1,000 for a dining chair to about $3,000 for a dining table.
Included are end tables, coffee tables, the magazine table shown at right ($1,850), a dining table, dining chairs and the Gibby lounge chair, also at right ($1,950).


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball


Making Slipcovers Behave
PAULA RILEY, a former fashion designer in New York, is a woman with a mission: to make those inexpensive, throw-them-over-the-sofa slipcovers look in  real life as crisp and well-mannered as they do in photographs.
Anyone who has ever tried to freshen up an old sofa with loose slipcovers knows how quickly they can turn into a mess when children and pets -- never mind the odd guest --  sit down.
Ms.
Riley has devised what she calls a "fitting pretty system." It consists  of flexible plastic V-shaped pieces that are pushed into the crevices of the chair or sofa to hold the loose fabric securely in place.
The pieces are sold in sets that cost $19.99 for a chair, $24.99 for a love seat and $29.99 for a sofa.
The grips can also be used to secure quilts or sheets thrown over a sofa or chair.
Information: (800) 748-3487.


BURNHAM PACIFIC PROPERTIES CUTS ITS DIVIDEND 30%
Burnham Pacific Properties Inc. slashed its dividend by more than 30 percent  yesterday and said it would sell part of its office portfolio in an effort to focus on retail properties.
Burnham Pacific, a real estate investment trust in San Diego, said the sale of office properties would reduce its fourth-quarter earnings by about $22 million.
The company said that it would record additional  expenses of $2.8 million.
The company also said it had agreed to sell Beverly Garland's Holiday Inn Hotel for an undisclosed sum.
The company, which had more  than 17 million shares outstanding on Sept. 30, said it would use proceeds from  the sale to buy back up to one million shares.
Burnham Pacific will pay a quarterly dividend of 25 cents a share, down from 36 cents.


Of Humor, Anguish And Songs Of Loss
Humor, quirkiness and an unsettling gravity sat side by side in Speculum Musicae's program on Monday evening, the final concert in the Sonic Boom new-music series that has been running this month at the Miller Theater.
Called  "An American Excursion," the program spanned just over three decades, from John  Cage's "Variations II" (1961) to Elliott Carter's "Fragment" (1994).
The Cage provided the evening's measure of humor, a peculiarly Cageian form of straight-faced slapstick.
The score is a handful of clear plastic strips bearing straight lines, with directions by which the musicians deduce the pitch, duration and volume of each "event." The instrumentation is not specified: the players here were Susan Palma Nidel, flutist; William Purvis, hornist; Christopher Oldfather, pianist, and Daniel Druckman, percussionist.


From Law Firm to Merrill
Thomas J. Casey, formerly co-head of the communications practice at the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, has joined Merrill Lynch &amp; Company as the managing director in charge of its telecommunications, media and technology investment banking efforts in London.


Chemical to Keep Center, and Its 2,500 Jobs, on Long Island
Chemical Banking Corporation, the largest private employer on Long Island, intends to keep its credit card processing center in Hicksville, along with the  center's 2,500 jobs, after Chemical's pending acquisition of Chase Manhattan, people familiar with the banks' plans said yesterday.
Chase moved all of its credit card facilities to regions with lower costs years ago, and Long Island politicians were worried that the combined bank would take the Chemical jobs out of the state as well.


INVESTMENT GROUPS TO BUY UNITS FROM TROUBLED INSURER
Penncorp Financial Group Inc. and a related investment group said yesterday that they would buy two units of the ICH Corporation, a troubled insurance company in Dallas, for $260 million.
In an auction supervised by the Bankruptcy  Court, Penncorp and Knightsbridge Capital Fund I L.P. said they would pay $210 million in cash, $40 million in convertible debt securities and $10 million in stock for the Southwestern Life Insurance Company and Union Bankers Insurance Company.
Once the deal is completed, Penncorp will own 55 percent, Knightsbridge will own 27 percent and ICH will retain 18 percent, assuming the conversion of the securities.
ICH began Chapter 11 proceedings last month.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;2 More Killings in Camden
The police know now the identity of the two people who were shot in the head  and left in a car with the motor running Monday night.
They are still searching  for a motive and suspects in the slayings, the A.P. said yesterday.
The deaths of Maria Adelaida Estrada Ramirez, 22, of Colombia, and Edwin Posada, 22, of Elmhurst, N.Y., raised Camden's homicide toll for the year to 56.


Company Men, and Women


Talking Tough, U.N. Condemns Bosnian Serbs
Using unusually strong language, the United Nations today issued an unequivocal report on atrocities in Bosnia in which the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said Bosnian Serbs had been engaged in "a consistent pattern of summary executions, rape, mass expulsion, arbitrary detentions, forced labor and large-scale disappearances."
Although the report repeats extensive news accounts of atrocities by the Bosnian Serbs, it is unusual for the United Nations to so roundly condemn any group.
It also provides new details on forced labor that enslaved thousands of Muslim males.


Raging Cabby Accosts Mayor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was walking to a meeting with Gov.
George E. Pataki yesterday when a taxi driver jumped out of his cab and threatened to kill him because he had Yasir Arafat ejected from a concert last month, Mr.
Giuliani said.


Hoechst Unit Is Sold
The German chemical company Hoechst said yesterday that it had sold its chemical factory design unit to Krupp-Hoesch for an undisclosed amount.
The sale of Uhde G.m.b.H., based in Dortmund, Germany, is part of Hoechst's move to concentrate on core pharmaceuticals, agricultural and industrial chemicals businesses, a spokesman said.
News reports said the deal was worth as much as 700 million marks ($500 million).
AP


Study Treats Restaurant to Good News on Low-Fat Menus
After a drumbeat of warnings about the health hazards associated with a diet  of greasy Mexican, Chinese and Italian restaurant food, not to mention movie theater popcorn, the public was treated today to some good news about restaurant meals.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, the advocacy group that has drawn a lot of criticism from the restaurant industry for highlighting the excessive fat content of some of its most popular dishes, decided to see whether the industry had taken its criticisms to heart.
What the Washington center learned should bring joy to the hearts of people who eat out a lot and want to feel less guilty about it.


CHRONICLE
The wedding cake was one story high, and now, after the ceremony, the couple  will be able to choose which of their several homes to live in.
They are certainly not your average couple.
Last night, IVANA TRUMP, the former wife of DONALD TRUMP, married the Italian businessman RICCARDO MAZZUCHELLI in a double-ring ceremony at l'Orangerie of Le Cirque, according to  The Associated Press..


Giuliani Says Plan's Foes Stereotype Welfare Cases
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that critics of his proposal to use  welfare recipients for hallway and lunch room duty in the city schools were giving in to negative stereotypes of people on public assistance.
"This is really a heck of a commentary on what people think of people who are receiving welfare," the Mayor said at a press conference at City Hall.
"That out of thousands and thousands of people that we assign to work, it's not possible to find those who are highly responsible people."


Baylor Sues Coach Who Left In Scandal
The former Baylor basketball coach DARREL JOHNSON, who left in disgrace amid  a 1994 recruiting scandal, was sued by the university yesterday for allegedly breaching his contract.
The lawsuit, filed in United States District Court in Waco, Tex., alleged that Johnson violated his contract by either violating the National Collegiate Athletic Association rules himself or allowing others in his program to do so.


Liberties;The Impression of Green
After Bloody Sunday in 1972, when British soldiers fired on a Catholic demonstration in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, killing 13 unarmed men, women and children, my mother went to the Kennedy Center in Washington to picket the British Ambassador.
To get to the performance by a royal regimental band, the Ambassador had gone through the back door.
Out front, my mom was subversively attired in a green cape, waving a placard reading "Stop killing innocent civilians."


Rangers Play as a Team To Extend Home Streak
Luc Robitaille played last night. Played well, too.
For a team known for its top two lines, though, it was the third line of Stephane Matteau, Sergei Nemchinov and Niklas Sundstrom that shined brightest last night at Madison Square Garden.


Economic Changes Are Urged for Japan
A high-level advisory group told the Government today that the Japanese economy needed to undergo major structural changes to achieve significant growth in the next five years.
With the changes, the economy could grow an average of 3 percent each year over the next five years, the group said.
Otherwise, growth would be only about  1.75 percent.


Villanova Wins After a Fight and Ejections
Villanova 70, Bradley 63


Eagle Federal Bank Sales
Eagle Federal Savings Bank, which wants to concentrate on the Hartford-area market, said this week that it would sell its seven branches in the Danbury area to Union Savings Bank.
Under the transaction, Union Savings will assume about $181 million of deposits at seven Eagle Federal branches in Danbury, Newtown, Ridgefield, New Fairfield and Brookfield.


Buckley Takes Seat; Miller Returns
When the defense was told on Tuesday that linebacker Marcus Buckley would be  benched for Corey Miller, Buckley couldn't stand it.
He stormed out of the meeting, afraid he might erupt at the coaches.
So when the Giants play the Arizona Cardinals on Thursday night, look for Miller, who didn't deserve to be benched in the first place (it was partly done  because he is outspoken), to be back as a starter.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Search for Body Continues
Investigators are searching for the body of a 61-year-old Palisades Park woman believed to have been killed by her daughter's live-in boyfriend.
Bergen County officials said yesterday that Do Young Yoo was arrested on Tuesday in Massachusetts and awaits extradition.
Officials said Kyu Su Chun was killed on Monday in the apartment she shared with her daughter and Mr.
Yoo.


Drug Plane Lands in Mexico and Is Unloaded, Possibly by Police
The entire Federal Police detachment in the state of Baja California Sur has  been transferred after failing to intercept -- and possibly even helping -- narcotics traffickers who landed a passenger jet loaded with tons of cocaine on  a dry lake bed, the authorities said.
Witnesses said 20 men wearing the black windbreakers of the Federal Police helped unload the $100 million cargo from the French-made Caravelle jet at an airstrip less than a mile from the Pacific Ocean near the southern tip of Baja California Sur.


An English-Only Law Makes Common Sense;Freedom of Babble
To the Editor:
Re "America Needs No Language Law" (editorial, Nov. 25): The plea against the bill that would make English the official language of the United States culminates in your statement that "the glue that truly binds this nation is a common belief in freedom, including freedom to speak any language you please."


Events: Art and Craft Shows ans a Tour of a Cathedral
Contemporary Jewelry American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.


Grand Central Renovation Will Require Zaro's Bakery to Close
To the Editor:
I read your Nov. 26 news article on the redevelopment of Grand Central Terminal and must bring to your attention one of the consequences of the master  plan.


Apple Computer Co-Founder Strikes Gold With New Stock
In the world of high technology, which keeps score in part by tracking the ups and downs of the stock market, Steven P. Jobs, the co-founder of Apple Computer, re-emerged today as a captain of industry.
Mr.
Jobs's company, Pixar Animation Studios, the maker of the blockbuster movie "Toy Story," offered its stock to the public today, and by the end of trading the shares had almost doubled in price.
As such, his Pixar stake of 80.2 percent was worth more than $1 billion on paper -- more than the value of his Apple stock at any time during the eight years he ran that company.


Toyota Truck Plant Expected in Indiana
The Toyota Motor Corporation is expected to announce on Thursday that it has  selected southwestern Indiana, an area hurt by a declining coal industry, as the site for a $1 billion pickup-truck plant with 1,300 jobs.
Toyota scheduled "a major business announcement" for Thursday afternoon in Princeton, Ind.
State and local officials, cautioning today that a deal had not  yet been signed, were nonetheless cheered by the prospect of new jobs.


Japan's Invisible Minority: Better Off Than in Past, but StillOutcasts
A 23-year-old woman had just given birth to her first baby when she learned something devastating about her husband.
He was secretly a burakumin, a descendant of outcasts.
So the woman refused to touch her own baby.
She returned to her parents' house and abandoned her husband and child forever.


ALBANY REVIEWING MEDICAID QUOTAS IN NURSING HOMES
At the urging of the nursing home industry, the Pataki administration is taking steps to repeal a regulation that requires hundreds of nursing homes to set aside large numbers of beds for Medicaid recipients.
The regulation was established in 1988 under the Cuomo administration to curb discrimination against Medicaid recipients -- who make up 80 percent of nursing  home patients -- in favor of higher paying, privately insured patients.
The rule requires all nursing homes that were built or expanded after 1988 to set aside many of their vacant beds, in some cases nearly half, for people on Medicaid, the Federal and state health program for the poor.


Tax-Law Changes Perplex G.M. and Others in China
Imagine negotiating for years to open a $1 billion manufacturing plant in China, factoring in all the costs and maneuvering a business plan over dozens of bureaucratic hurdles.
Yet only weeks after finally winning approval from the Government, one of the major incentives that made the deal attractive -- the duty-free import of machinery -- suddenly evaporates.
General Motors faces just such a shock.
To a lesser degree, so do dozens of other Western companies that have recently signed deals in China.
They are now waking up to the news that a sizable tax increase is at hand.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt


Tutu to Head Panel On Political Crimes
President Nelson Mandela today named Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu, a fellow Nobel Peace Prize winner, to head a commission to investigate political crimes committed under apartheid.
The Truth Commission, as it is called, will gather evidence of abuses by both the Government and anti-apartheid groups like the African National Congress and  make recommendations for either prosecution or amnesty.


Snow Comes Like a Slap . . . Or a Gift
Just a day after spring agreed to a surprise encore in the metropolitan area, winter produced its hearty retort yesterday with the first substantial snowfall  of the season.
The juxtaposition could not have been more striking.
On Tuesday, people in shorts played tennis and basketball outdoors.
Yesterday, encased in parkas and scarves, they rode sleds and pelted each other with snowballs.


This One-Two Punch Packs No Wallop
Derrick Coleman appeared genuinely happy to be coming back to the Nets yesterday, but Kenny Anderson wasn't denying that he was ready to go.
One more time, these would-be cornerstones demonstrated that, as a tandem in concert, that they will never be the second coming of John Stockton and Karl Malone.
It's always something that keeps them off the same page, if not out of the same box score.
Injury here.
Feud with the coach there.
Some late-night trouble, or a self-centered snit.
This is their fifth year together, after the Nets thought they lucked out with the first and second picks in 1990 and 1991.
It's just not happening for these two, and probably never will.


ALLEGHENY TO BUY REMAINING INTEREST IN GENERATING UNIT
Allegheny Power System Inc. of New York agreed yesterday to buy the Duquesne  Light Company's half-interest in a coal-fired generating unit near Morgantown, W.Va., for about $170 million.
Allegheny Power said that its AYP Capital division planned to sell the 276 megawatts of generation capacity as an independent marketer.
Duquesne Light, a unit of DQE Inc. in Pittsburgh, said it  planned to use the money to help offset the reduced value of its investment in nuclear power plants.
The Monongahela Power Company and the Potomac Edison Company, both units of Allegheny Power, already own the other half of the No. 1  unit at the Fort Martin Power Station.
Allegheny Power subsidiaries jointly own  the No. 2 unit at Fort Martin.


COURT BLOCKS LOMAS FINANCIAL FROM SELLING ASSETS
The Lomas Financial Corporation was denied court permission yesterday to sell substantially all of its remaining assets to First Nationwide Bank for $150 million.
Still, Peter Walsh, a Federal Bankruptcy Court judge in Wilmington, Del., called his decision conditional and ordered the creditor committee to vote on the sale.
Creditors are entitled to take the risk of shopping the company if  they believe they can get a higher offer, he said.
The judge said creditors had not been provided enough information about the proposed sale to First Nationwide to make an informed judgment.
First Nationwide Bank of San Francisco, is a subsidiary of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Group Inc., which is controlled by the investor Ronald O. Perelman.


Bridge
Midway through the final session of the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship, at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Atlanta on Sunday night, Lynn Deas and Juanita Chambers, both of Schenectady, N.Y., Ralph Cohen of Memphis and Mike Cappelletti of Red Bank, Tenn., seemed headed for victory.
But one disastrous round wiped out their lead, and with one deal remaining, they were fractionally behind Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and his  world championship team.
Cappelletti and Cohen saved in five hearts against four spades.
But could that contract be made?


Keep U.N. Force in Rwanda to Protect Tribunal
To the Editor:
As your Nov. 26 news article on the Rwanda refugee crisis indicates, it does  not appear the Rwandan Government will want the United Nations peacekeeping mandate extended beyond its Dec. 8 expiration.
However, when a United Nations Association inspection group of which I was a member visited there, Rwandan officials were quick to recognize the need for effective security for the International Tribunal for Rwanda and associated personnel.


Where Old Does Not Mean Sedentary
TO drive along Dorchester Avenue is to thread your way through an ethnic quilt whose patches change from block to block -- Haitian, Vietnamese, Latino, Irish, African-American.
The patches all come together in the Kit Clark center,  where on a wet and wintry morning a dozen older women were gathered for their four-times-a-week exercise class.
Their physical capacities were as varied as their backgrounds, but one way or another they managed to stretch their arms and lift their legs and march around  the room for 20 minutes.


A Nice Sight For the Nets: Coleman At Practice
Derrick Coleman was so eager to take part in his first full-scale practice of the regular season that he arrived two hours early for the 11 A.M. workout today and began shooting jump shots long before his teammates arrived.
Imagine that.
First to arrive, last to leave.
This isn't the Coleman the Nets' followers have come to know.


The Lifelong Pursuit of a Father's Love
In "The Whispers of Angels," the choreographer David Rousseve has created an  imaginative fable for our time.
Above all, this mixed-forms piece at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music packs an authentically emotional wallop.


CONGRESS PASSES BILL TO DISCLOSE LOBBYISTS' ROLES
Congress completed action today on the first effort to regulate lobbying in 49 years, as the House voted to require thousands of lobbyists who escape existing law to report who pays them, how much they are paid and what issues they work on.
The vote was 421 to 0, a result that, in a cheery cloud of political virtue,  masked preliminary opposition and delay.
The House's action followed a 98-to-0 vote for the legislation by the Senate on July 25.


A Poet Takes The Long View, 90 Years Long
On a cold, gray New York afternoon, Stanley Kunitz lingered in the dimly lighted hallway of his Greenwich Village apartment, reminiscing about a lifetime of poetry that has wound through the better part of this century.
His focus was not on the thousands of books that line his office and library, spilling into chairs and cardboard cartons.
And it was not on the multitude of honors awarded him, most recently a National Book Award.


Treasury Securities Surge; Yields at Nearly 2-Year Low
Prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday, driving yields down to their  lowest levels in nearly two years, as a sale of five-year notes came close to expectations.
Some of the early buying was attributed to anticipation of strong demand at the sale of $12 billion in new five-year notes.
And indeed the yield at the auction was slightly lower than expected, at 5.625 percent, and the lowest since Feb. 24, 1994.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.


Pecos Journal;  New Courthouse Is Raising Texas-Size Questions
Things have gotten a bit more complex in the judicial system since Judge Roy  Bean, known as "the law west of the Pecos," held court in his frontier saloon southeast of here a century ago.
Take the case of the brand-new Federal courthouse that will open in Pecos early in December.
The Pecos division of the Western District of Texas, a 10-county region that  stretches across the lonely prairie of West Texas, is not exactly a beehive of legal activity.
There have been 40 felony indictments issued this year in the division and an average of just one or two criminal jury trials a month held in  the Depression-era courtroom above the Post Office.
No Federal judge or magistrate is based here.


Exercise Helps Severe Hypertension Patients, Study Finds
Severe high blood pressure and the amount of medicine used to treat it can be reduced with regular, moderate exercise, a study has shown.
Researchers at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Washington said today that the study of African-American men, who suffer disproportionately with high blood pressure, has implications for many of the estimated 50 million Americans afflicted with hypertension.


Mayor Calls for $100 Million in New Spending Cuts
The Giuliani administration proposed changes in New York City's budget yesterday that included $100 million in immediate spending cuts and foreshadowed still deeper cuts in the months and years ahead.
The announcements demonstrated that even after two years of deep budget cuts, the city's fiscal problems are far from solved.


A Distrust of Easy Pleasures
Smiling, clapping and singing "la-la-la," Sonya Aurora Madan was the image of a pop singer as Echobelly played "King of the Kerb" at Irving Plaza on Tuesday night.
But the music had other ideas: a stark beat and a surge of shrieking, enveloping guitar noise, suggesting that no catchy chorus could hold back chaos.
Echobelly, like many other alternative rock bands, distrusts pop's easy pleasures.
Ms.
Madan's clear, cheerful voice sounds optimistic even when she's telling people to go away, and she and the guitarist Glenn Johansson write well-made songs that hark back to folk-rock, the Beatles and the Smiths.
Then Debbie Smith's distortion-edged guitar scuffs up the tunes.


Brady's Condition Stable
James S. Brady, President Reagan's press spokesman who was shot in the head in the 1981 assassination attempt on Mr.
Reagan, was in stable condition today in a Northern Virginia hospital after suffering a heart seizure on Tuesday at an oral surgeon's office.
Mr.
Brady spent a comfortable night at Fairfax Hospital after being admitted  at 10:45 A.M.
Tuesday to the cardiac care unit in critical condition and on a respirator, a night nursing supervisor said.


New Chief Administrative Judge Appointed
Judge Jonathan Lippman has been named New York's new chief administrative judge, Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye announced yesterday.
Judge Lippman, who is to  take office on Jan. 1, 1996, succeeds Judge E. Leo Milonas, who is stepping down after two and a half years to return to the appellate bench.
In his new position, Judge Lippman, who was appointed a Court of Claims judge by Gov.
George E. Pataki in June, will supervise the state court system, which has an annual budget of $1.2 billion and includes 3,200 judges and 13,000 support employees.


Former Tobacco Official Begins Giving Deposition
Despite legal efforts to silence him, Jeffrey S. Wigand, the former research  chief at the nation's third-largest tobacco company, today began giving evidence to Government authorities that could prove to be the most damaging disclosures ever concerning tobacco industry practices.
"This man knows so much that we are just going to scratch the surface today," said Ronald Motley, a lawyer on the team pursuing the State of Mississippi's lawsuit against the tobacco companies.
The suit seeks damages from cigarette companies for money spent in public health programs to deal with tobacco-related diseases.


Corrections
A chart yesterday tracing China's carbon emissions misstated figures for carbon emitted in the production of electricity to power refrigerators.
Emissions were 2.4 million tons in 1985 and 31.2 millions tons in 1993.
The projected figure for 2000 was 67.6 million tons.


Child Welfare? Less So, Workers Say
MOST New Yorkers are likely to forget Elisa Izquierdo's awful death soon, as  they move inexorably from this crisis to another and yet another in a city that  allows little respite from shock.
But the public is paying attention now, just as it did eight years ago, when the death of another victim of child abuse -- Lisa Steinberg -- so riveted New York that its political leaders made tangible improvements in the city's child welfare system.
It is with the hope that the same might happen today that three women who work for New York City's Child Welfare Administration came forward one evening this week and talked at length about their jobs working with troubled families.
They would not theorize about Elisa's death -- whether caseworkers could have prevented it, or whether budget cuts played a role.
They do not know the particulars and are too professional to guess.


Partisan Gridlock Blocks Senate Confirmations of Federal Judges
While fights over Bosnia and the budget flare in the public eye, a different  partisan battle is raging just below the surface in the Senate over several judicial nominations, a battle that has the potential to cripple President Clinton's ability to shape the Federal bench in the final year of his term.
The controversy has created a kind of gridlock in which the Senate has not confirmed anyone to be a Federal judge since early last summer.


Student, 17, Survives a Leap From His Classroom Window
A 17-year-old junior at William H. Taft High School in the Bronx calmly walked to a window in his classroom yesterday morning and, as horrified classmates looked on, jumped four stories in what appeared to be a suicide attempt, the authorities said.
The student, Andy Genao, landed in a snowy patch of grass that may have saved his life.
He escaped serious injury, according to a statement released by officials at Lincoln Hospital, where he was taken by the Emergency Medical Service.


World News Briefs;6th Day of Rail Strike Keeps Paris on Its Toes
With subways and buses idled, thousands of Parisians walked home from work today, the sixth day of the worst rail strike in a decade, which has crippled much of France.
Virtually no trains were running across France, which normally depends heavily on the rail system.
The streets of Paris were filled with people walking home this evening.
Suburban commuters turned to their cars, causing traffic jams on 300 miles of roads around Paris.


INTEL ANNOUNCES PLANS FOR A CHIP FACTORY IN SHANGHAI
The Intel Corporation said yesterday that it would build a semiconductor assembly and test plant in Shanghai.
The computer chip maker, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said construction was scheduled to begin soon and should be completed by the end of 1997.
It did not disclose how much the plant would cost.
The plant will be the company's third in Asia and will employ about 900 people.
Intel also said it had signed an agreement with Shanghai officials to "preferentially recommend Intel Pentium processors" in future projects.


NEWS SUMMARY
International
A3-19


CONVERSE TO CUT MORE JOBS AND ELIMINATE PRODUCT LINES
Converse Inc., the maker of athletic shoes, announced a reorganization yesterday that would cut jobs, eliminate some product lines and save $25 million a year, starting in 1996.
The company, based in North Reading, Mass., said it would stop making its outdoor, running, walking, tennis and football shoes, and  would concentrate on its basketball, cross-training, children's and "athleisure" products.
Converse, which announced the elimination of 496 jobs in October, said that another 98 jobs would be lost, leaving a work force of 2,504.
The company also said it expected to take a pretax charge of $2.5 million in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of the reorganization.
The company's shares fell 25 cents yesterday, to $4.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


On Chromium Dosages
To the Editor:
A Nov. 6 letter in response to a report (Health page, Oct. 25) of our research on chromium picolinate criticized the dosages used to obtain our findings.
The number cited by the letter writer is in error and is not based on  the complete data presented in our report.
The relevance of the laboratory dosages to human tissue levels of chromium picolinate is discussed in detail in  an article in the journal of the Federation of American Society of Experimental  Biology.


So Cheap, Unmusical And Funny
Only connect," E. M. Forster wrote many years ago. The advice applies, surprisingly enough, to comedians. In a prime-time special last season, Jerry Seinfeld paid tribute to Abbott and Costello, whose goofy antics might seem miles away from the cerebral whinings of Seinfeld. But take away the broad pratfall humor and stick with the verbal games, the "who's on first" routines, and it is blazingly apparent that Seinfeld's conversational gyrations owe much to the classic Abbott and Costello routines.
The past has a habit of clinging to us in the most unexpected places.
Latest  example: "Kelsey Grammer Salutes Jack Benny," on NBC at 10 this evening.
As "Frasier," Mr.
Grammer at first glance may seem to have little in common with Jack Benny, the vaudeville comic who created the immortal character who always lied about his age, played a good violin badly and gave new meaning to the word  "cheap." But watch Mr.
Grammer closely for the deadpan reactions, the pomposity  that is always being deflated hilariously, the uses of silence as a punch line.
Mr.
Benny was obviously an influence.
And it would be hard to think of a better  one.


Giuliani Has a Plan to Battle Mafia Grip on Trash Hauling
Drawing on tactics he used in cracking down on organized crime at the Fulton  Fish Market, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is preparing a new push to break the Mafia's hold over the lucrative commercial garbage-hauling industry in New York  City.
Under the Mayor's plan, a new commission would be created to regulate and license carting companies.
It would have the authority to investigate and fingerprint executives and employees of companies, audit their records, set maximum fees, establish standards for service and insure that safety and health  laws were observed.


Bundesbank Raises Money Market Rate
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, unexpectedly raised its main money market rate yesterday, but economists said the rise -- the first in three years  -- did not preclude the Bundesbank from cutting interest rates at a meeting on Thursday.
The 14-day securities repurchase rate, known as the repo rate, is the interest rate charged for short-term loans to commercial banks.
The increase in  the repo rate yesterday of one basis point, to 3.98 percent, ended years of gradual easing.


Carquest Picks North Carolina
Despite a 6-5 record, North Carolina accepted a bid yesterday to the Carquest Bowl at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami on Dec. 30.
But the Tar Heels will not know  their opponent until at least tomorrow.
The situation depends on whether Miami, facing a possible National Collegiate Athletic Association ban, risks participation in bowl play.
North Carolina's opponent might be another team from the Big East or a team from the Southeastern Conference.


THE POP LIFE
Gift Sales, Hot and Tepid


Boomers: The 'Not As I Did' Parents
LIKE millions of others, Janet and Norman Dill went a little wild in college  back in the early 70's.
Between them, they used to drink and drive, puffed marijuana routinely and joined in waging a sexual revolution.
Now in their 40's, the Dills are parents of five children, ages 12 to 17, and they cringe at the thought that any of them might follow their lead.
Not long ago they faced a rite queasily familiar to many 90's parents: their 17-year-old son asked about their drug history.


Election Panel Says Gingrich Got Hidden Aid
The Federal Election Commission has charged that Gopac, the political organization led for years by Speaker Newt Gingrich, provided him with more than $250,000 in hidden support in 1990 as he faced his most perilous re-election campaign.
In court documents released today, the commission said the support included paying the salaries and expenses of Gopac political consultants who devoted much of their work to helping Mr.
Gingrich, who was then the group's chairman.


Regulators Delay Merger of Two Utilities
Federal regulators dealt a setback today to plans by the Washington Water Power Company of Spokane, Wash., and Sierra Pacific Resources of Reno to complete their proposed merger by late December.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission said that because the companies had  not demonstrated that the merger would produce $450 million in estimated cost savings, or that the merger was in the best interest of customers, the agency would hold hearings on the deal.


Astronomers Confirm the Existence of Failed Stars
There are stars and there are planets, and now astronomers are more certain than ever that there is something in between, elusive dim objects known as brown dwarfs that never made it to stardom.
Astronomers working at Palomar Observatory in California have produced the first photograph of one of these mysterious objects, sometimes called failed stars, and also detected the infrared signature of methane there, evidence that the object is much too cool to be a real star.
Their findings were confirmed this month with other pictures and measurements made by the Hubble Space Telescope.


Dorothy Jeakins Dies at 81; Designed Costumes for Films
Dorothy Jeakins, who won three Academy Awards for costume design while collaborating with directors like John Huston and Victor Fleming and stars like  Ingrid Bergman and Ava Gardner, died on Nov. 21 at a nursing home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 81 and lived in Montecito, Calif.
In the course of a long career, Ms.
Jeakins designed costumes for films including "Samson and Delilah," "The Night of the Iguana," "The Sound of Music," "The Way We Were," "The Misfits," "Reflections in a Golden Eye," "The Ten Commandments," "The Greatest Show on Earth," "The Music Man," "Elmer Gantry" and "Catch-22."


Bundling Against the Winter


Connecticut Mixes It Up And Cruises
Jim Calhoun has plenty of good players for Connecticut's Big East campaign this season.
And the UConn coach used tonight's game to fiddle with various combinations, blending known talent with the unknown.
The opponent for the home opener here before a crowd of 15,522 at the Civic Center was Northeastern, a compliant foe that fell by 86-39.
The halftime score  was 42-16, and UConn led by as much as 52, 79-27, with 6 minutes 14 seconds to play.


Losing House Candidate Is Indicted for Ad
A candidate who lost a 1994 Congressional bid has been indicted for a campaign advertisement that indirectly blamed his opponent for the kidnapping and rape of a Minnesota woman and her two daughters.
The advertisement asserted that the opponent, Bill Luther, had blocked a crime bill in the Minnesota Legislature that could have kept a serial rapist in  prison.


Governor Weld of Massachusetts Is to Challenge Senator Kerry in '96Contest
William F. Weld, the Republican Governor of Massachusetts, announced today that he would challenge Senator John Kerry, a Democrat, in next year's election, setting the stage for a battle between two wealthy Massachusetts Brahmins who are both formidable politicians.
In announcing his decision to seek a Senate seat only a year after being overwhelmingly re-elected Governor, Mr.
Weld said, "I've spent some time recently considering where I can do the most good for the people of Massachusetts, and right now the fights that matter most to the people of this state are in another arena, Congress."


Rite Aid Is Poised to Acquire Revco in a $1.8 Billion Deal
The Rite Aid Corporation is expected to announce today that it is acquiring Revco D.S.
Inc. in a cash and stock deal valued at $1.8 billion.
The acquisition, which has been approved by the boards of both companies, would cement Rite Aid's position as the largest drugstore chain in the country,  creating a company with $11 billion in revenues and more than 4,500 stores.


World News Briefs;Seoul Executive Held In Plot Linked to Roh
South Korean state prosecutors arrested a business executive today on charges of helping the former President, Roh Tae Woo, launder millions of dollars from a secret fund, a Government prosecutor said.
The executive, Chung Tae Soo, chairman of the Hanbo steel, construction and pharmaceuticals conglomerate, is the first business executive held in connection with the growing scandal over Mr.
Roh's hidden accounts.


Melting Snow Causes Washington Floods


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Singapore libel judgment against The International Herald Tribune misspelled the given name of one of the newspaper's co-chairmen.
She is Katharine Graham, not Katherine.


Air Agreement Is Called Off
Mercury Air Group Inc. and Carnival Air Lines Inc. said today that they had terminated their proposed $50 million merger agreement, citing an inability to agree on certain terms and closing conditions.
Mercury, a Los Angeles-based provider of petroleum products, cargo and aviation services, said last month that it would acquire all of Carnival's shares for 50 percent of Mercury's stock.


Cherishing Landscapes as Living Art
IF a landscape is invisible to people, they won't notice when it changes.
They may not even register the fact that the glade of tall elegant sycamores in  front of the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center has been replaced by big  fat stranded-looking pear trees.
Or that a playground in Central Park at West 67th Street, with its wooden "Egyptian" pyramid and undulating Noguchi-like forms, has lost much of its original spirit and only narrowly escaped demolition.
Few people can remember when the tunnels through its cobblestone mounds were closed because parents were worried about homeless people sleeping there or syringes left around.


Essay;The Politics of Bosnia
Most Democrats are shameless demagogues on the budget while behaving responsibly about Bosnia.
Most Republicans are courageously reducing the budget  deficit while demagoguing about Bosnia.
Is America a stable democracy, or what?
On the Balkans, the sitting President has made his belated decision to intervene.
Now the focus shifts to the shadow President; we will see how Bob Dole rises to the occasion.


Does Life Imitate Violent Films?;Experts Say Much Evidence Indicates Yes, in All Cultures
The furor over "Money Train," a film that New York City officials say may have inspired the burning of a subway token-booth clerk on Sunday, is familiar territory for David S. Ward.
Mr.
Ward directed a 1993 film, "The Program." It included a scene in which high school football players tested their courage by lying down on the center line of a highway, a ritual that was blamed for inspiring several real-life imitators, one of whom died.


Olivetti to Lay Off 1,000 Workers in Italy
Olivetti S.p.A. told its unions yesterday that it would lay off 1,000 workers tomorrow as part of a reorganization plan announced at a previous board meeting.
The announcement comes after Olivetti rejected a reorganization plan offered by  three unions.
The two sides, which have been in negotiations since September, must still reach an agreement on the fate of an additional 1,000 workers in Italy.
Olivetti, the financially troubled computer maker, plans to reduce its work  force by a total of 5,000 jobs, 3,000 of which are overseas.
Talks will continue about the possibility of keeping the other 1,000 Italian workers on the job, an  Olivetti spokesman said.
Workers from the three unions have called for a strike  tomorrow.
Bloomberg Business News


Senator Faces Criticism on Wife's Lawsuit
While Senator Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire was voting with his fellow Republicans to limit damage awards in lawsuits, his wife was seeking $3 million  in a personal injury case, court records show.
Mr.
Smith's wife, Mary Jo, has amended her damage request to an unspecified amount, consistent with a formula in a Senate bill her husband supported.


A Break in the Irish Impasse
The agreement announced in London on Tuesday night by Prime Ministers John Bruton of Ireland and John Major of Britain provides a welcome nudge to the peace effort in Northern Ireland.
That drive was dangerously stalled until President Clinton's visit to London and Belfast "concentrated the mind," as Mr.
Major put it, and the British and Irish Governments tried to break the deadlock.
They fell well short of a breakthrough, but the agreement should keep the parties engaged.
In an atmosphere in which political rivalries have long been expressed through violence, the 15-month cease-fire in Northern Ireland has left nationalists and Unionists searching uneasily for a way to pursue their goals through a political process.
The institutions for doing so were long ago destroyed.
By setting up interim talks, and leaving the agenda completely open,  the agreement sustains some momentum toward peace and reduces the temptation to  resort again to violence.


Joseph Youngerman, 89, Aide To Directors on Film Backlots
Joseph Youngerman, a onetime Hollywood prop man who became an assistant director of a string of acclaimed movies and then built the directors' union into an industry force, died on Nov. 22 in Los Angeles, where he lived.
He was 89.
In a creative industry in which first-line directors are often former writers, actors or free-floating auteurs with more ineffable artistic vision than expertise, Mr.
Youngerman became a first choice as first assistant director.
He was viewed as a nuts-and-bolts man, a master of backlot trades who  knew which switches to flick, which knobs to turn and which egos to massage.


Representative Schroeder Plans to Quit
Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat who crusaded against excessive military spending and for women's rights, who described Ronald Reagan  as the "Teflon President" and who then nearly ran for his job, said today that she would retire next year after 24 years in the House.
Her departure, for what Mrs.
Schroeder said remained an uncharted second career, deprives Congress of its longest-serving female member and one of its most durably liberal -- and pithiest -- political gadflies.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;State's Senators Support Clinton
Senators Frank Lautenberg and Bill Bradley joined five Democratic colleagues  yesterday in urging President Clinton to stand firm against what they called Republican efforts to gut environmental protection.
"The Contract With America really said nothing about destroying our environment and giving away our natural resources at bargain basement prices," Senator Bradley said.
"Each of us is here to say, 'enough is enough.' "


Two Are Sentenced In 6 Queens Killings
Two men convicted of murdering six people in a Queens condominium last January were each sentenced yesterday in State Supreme Court to more than 170 years in prison.
The six murders, at 25-34 120th Street in the Skyline Terrace condominium complex, came to be known as the College Point massacre, after the neighborhood  in which they occurred.
The defendants were also convicted of related robbery charges and of trying to murder a seventh victim, a 19-year-old woman who survived being shot in the head and slashed in the throat and later testified against her attackers.


The Marriage Warning
A Massachusetts legislator wants to revise marriage license applications to include a warning that abusing one's spouse is a crime.
"Neither you nor your spouse is the property of the other," says the warning  drafted by State Representative Barbara Gray, Democrat of Framingham.


Bailey Sets Earnings Record
Jerry Bailey has set a national record for earnings in one year.
By winning the Matriarch Stakes aboard the filly Duda last Sunday at Hollywood Park, he added $385,000 to his purses, which reached a total of $16,153,065.
The 37-year-old rider, who plans to take the rest of the year as vacation time, broke the record of $15,979,820 set last year by Mike Smith.
Bailey ran up his total principally aboard Cigar, the great stakes champion who won 10 straight races this year, including the $3 million Breeders Cup Classic last month.


Key Rates
In percent


Democrats Asking for Help on Image
Senator Christopher J. Dodd says a big part of his job as general chairman of the Democratic Party is "listening to people." So when it came time to jazz up his party's battered image, he sought to listen -- but not to the usual suspects inside the Beltway.
Instead, he turned to New York image makers for advice on advertising, speeches and party themes: to people like David Letterman's producer, the chairwoman of Elektra Records, the chairman of Miramax Films, the editorial director of Conde Nast and several creative minds on Madison Avenue.


Supreme Court Roundup;Justices to Hear Wife's Appeal Over Property Forfeiture
Government lawyers were on the defensive in a Supreme Court argument today over whether the Constitution protects property owners from losing their property through forfeiture if someone has used it without their knowledge to commit a crime.
A better case to feed the Justices' growing doubts about the aggressive use of government forfeiture authority could hardly have been concocted by a committee of Hollywood screenwriters.
The case is an appeal by a Detroit woman,  Tina Bennis, whose husband was arrested for having sex with a prostitute in the  family car.


Boggs Likely to Re-sign by End of Week
WADE BOGGS wants to finish his career with the Yankees.
His agent said yesterday that the five-time batting champion will probably sign a contract before week's end that would enable him to do that.
Boggs, who made $4.6 million last year and told one teammate that he would accept less to return to New York, and his agent, ALAN NERO, met with the owner, GEORGE STEINBRENNER, and General Manager BOB WATSON on Monday in Tampa, Fla., to discuss specifics of a contract.
"I believe we'll conclude a contract, probably this week," Nero said.


For Holiday Warmth
Once again this holiday season, the New York Cares coat drive is offering New Yorkers an incentive to clean out their closets and donate old and rarely used overcoats and parkas to people who lack warm clothing for the winter months.
This valuable recycling program -- now in its seventh year -- collects used but wearable coats and distributes them to homeless shelters, centers for battered women and community organizations that help new immigrants, poor seniors and children.
The goal this year is to distribute 75,000 adult and kid-sized coats before the drive ends on Dec. 31, topping last year's impressive record of 71,000 coats.
There is a need for all types of garments.
But the organizers say the item for which there is the heaviest demand each year -- and which, for some unknown reason, is always in short supply -- is men's coats.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI TO REGULATE GARBAGE HAULERS Drawing on tactics he used in cracking down on organized crime at the Fulton Fish Market, Mayor Giuliani is preparing a new push to break the Mafia's hold over the lucrative commercial garbage-hauling industry in New York City.
A new commission would regulate and license carting companies. [Page A1.]


Joseph M. Fox, a Senior Editor At Random House, Dies at 69
Joseph M. Fox, one of the most prominent and independent senior editors at Random House, died yesterday at his office in Manhattan.
He was 69.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said an official at Bellevue Hospital Center.


FLAGSTAR AGREES TO SELL ITS STADIUM FOODS UNIT
The Flagstar Companies has agreed to sell its Volume Services unit for an undisclosed sum and has ended talks to sell its Quincy's Family Steakhouse restaurants.
The nation's No. 4 restaurant company said late on Tuesday that it  would sell Volume Services, which sells food and merchandise at sports stadiums, to an investor group formed by the unit's management and Blackstone Capital Partners II.
Volume Services has revenue of $200 million a year.
Flagstar, based in Spartanburg, S.C., also said it had ended talks to sell its Quincy's restaurants to a management-led group.
Flagstar is 47 percent owned by the investment firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Company in New York.


Metro-North Progress
The prospect of a strike against Metro-North grew more distant last night when the militant teamsters' local that staged Tuesday's partial walkout said it would resume talks and ruled out a strike until Friday.
Article, page B1.


Economic Scene;With Japan hurting, the U.S. mutes chauvinist trade fears.
SOMETIMES the news from Washington is not what they say but what they don't say: Have you noticed that the Clinton Administration has stopped bashing Japan?
It's possible, of course, that the White House has simply been distracted by more urgent matters like the budget and next year's election.
But the true explanation, it seems, was signaled earlier this month in a speech by Lawrence H. Summers, the Deputy Treasury Secretary.
Without quite saying so, he suggested that the sophomoric notion of trade as war had lost its  appeal now that the Japanese economy has been badly wounded by recession.
"Prosperity, unlike power, is not a zero sum game," he said.


Athletes Without Umpires: Male Aggression Off the Field
Is there something about sports, particularly football, that encourages players, particularly among the University of Nebraska Cornhuskers, particularly Lawrence Phillips, to commit violence off the field, particularly against women?
The question is raised in "Violent Athletes," tonight's edition of "48 Hours."
No case is made here that athletes are born more violent than other American  males, but there are some suggestive observations from fellow players and from sportswriters and assorted sportologists.
One is simply that many teen-age stars are recruited from neighborhoods where violence is not a sometime thing.
But the program's real point is that whatever the cause, off the field athletes are not  troubled by umpires.


GQ Publisher's Departure Spurs Shifts by Conde Nast
The departure of a top publisher compelled Conde Nast Publications to make two new appointments yesterday.
The magazine group, a unit of Advance Publications, said that Michael Perlis, the publisher of GQ, had decided to leave the company, which he joined in August 1994.


Mexican Stocks Rise 4%, Accelerating a 2-Week Recovery
Mexican stocks surged to their highest level in 13 months today, in a rally that has propelled the market upward on 9 of the last 10 trading days and all but dissipated the gloom that prevailed here last month.
"It's been really incredible, the strength of this thing, and how fast it has whipped around," said Robert J. Pelosky, director of Latin American research at  Morgan Stanley.


Berlin Journal;They're Coming Again! Russians Relish Germany
Resplendent in flowing robes and a jeweled crown, Patriarch Aleksy II, spiritual leader of the Russian Orthodox Church, spent several days this month visiting one of his fastest-growing congregations.
There was nothing unusual about the Patriarch's celebrating Mass in a packed  cathedral, meeting with local dignitaries and opening an exhibit at the House of Russian Arts and Sciences.
What made his visit extraordinary was that it took place not in Russia or elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, but in Berlin.


Put On Your Dancing Boots


Company Briefs
COASTAL CORP., Houston, said it planned to divest most of its generic wholesale  gasoline business in the upper Midwest to concentrate its activities near its core refineries, terminals and pipelines.


Pension Funds Reverse Decade Of Deterioration
Corporate pension funds moved into a much better position last year to pay promised retirement benefits, reversing more than a decade of deteriorating finances, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation said yesterday.
Last year, about 8,000 companies with Government-insured pension plans -- about one-fifth of the total -- fell approximately $31 billion short of covering what they owe to roughly eight million workers and retirees, the Government agency said.
That is a sharp improvement from 1993, when about 10,000 companies  faced a gap of some $71 billion.
In 1983, the shortfall was $10 billion, or about $15.4 billion in today's dollars.


Senate Hearing Touches on Clinton's Integrity
An effort by Democrats on the Senate Whitewater committee to discredit an investigator who examined a failed savings and loan association appeared to backfire today when it wound up raising the subject of Gennifer Flowers and President Clinton's character.
The investigator, L. Jean Lewis, who worked for the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Government agency responsible for the savings and loan bailout, appeared before the committee to repeat what she said under oath last summer to  a House committee: that there had been a deliberate effort to obstruct her inquiry into Madison Guaranty, the savings and loan at the center of the Whitewater case.


Computer-Guided Orders Push Dow Above the 5,100 Level
The Dow Jones industrial average broke through the 5,100 level yesterday, only five sessions after it topped 5,000, spurred by computer-guided buy orders  at the end of the day.
The Dow rose 27.46 points, to 5,105.56.
It was the sixth straight new high and the 65th in 1995.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the President-elect of Poland misspelled the name  of a previous Polish leader.
He was Wladyslaw Gomulka, not Gromulka.


Amahl' Performances
Amahl and the Night Visitors," Gian Carlo Menotti's Nativity opera, is to be staged by the Little Orchestra Society on Dec. 9 at Avery Fisher Hall at 11 A.M., 1 P.M. and 3 P.M.


3 Cable Giants in Modem Deal With Motorola
Three of the nation's largest cable television companies announced a $175 million order with Motorola Inc. yesterday for high-speed cable modems, signaling their move into the fast-growing on-line and Internet market.
Tele-Communications Inc. is buying 200,000 modems, the Comcast Corporation is buying 100,000 and Time Warner Inc. 50,000.
The devices are to be installed in homes by April 1996.


Tensions Build Again in Haiti, Imperiling Peace
Even as the United States prepares to send troops to Bosnia, the Clinton Administration suddenly finds itself struggling to prevent the unraveling of a fragile peace that began here barely a year ago with the arrival of 20,000 American soldiers at the head of an international peacekeeping force.
In little more than a month, the American commitment to Haiti and to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, whom American military might restored to power in an effort to rebuild democracy in Haiti, has gone from showcase to headache.


Pact Reached On Return Of Rwandans
Leaders from five African countries agreed here today on a plan to provide for the safe and voluntary return of nearly two million refugees who fled Rwanda after a mass slaughter of minority Tutsi by majority Hutu last year.
The agreement, announced after a two-day meeting brokered by Jimmy Carter, does not provide a timetable for the refugees' return but envisions reaching an  eventual rate of 10,000 a day "within a short time."


Corrections
A theater review on Saturday about "I Ain't Yo' Uncle: The New Jack Revisionist Uncle Tom's Cabin," at the Hartford Stage Company, misattributed the design of the masks used in the production.
They are by Barbara Pollitt; Karen Perry designed the costumes.


A 'Superlong Debt' Offering Is Said to Draw Little Interest
The recent boom in "superlong debt" -- 100-year and 50-year bonds -- may be short-lived.
Yesterday, News America Finance Inc.'s offering of $600 million in 50-year bonds and $150 million in 100-year bonds was a hard sell for the lead underwriter, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, and its co-managers, UBS Securities Inc., Citibank and First Chicago, according to analysts and bankers who follow the market for corporate debt.


A Child's Kingdom Of Words and Pictures
Childhood is the kingdom where nobody dies," Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote.  "Nobody that matters, that is." After spending an agreeable day in that kingdom, this reviewer came away with the following 10 picture books, which are the best  of this year's superior lot.
THE NIGHT IS LIKE AN ANIMAL, by Candace Whitman (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux; $13.) A bedtime poem in which a very large, brown, fuzzy, unthreatening bear gradually blots out the daylight, and nighttime steals over the earth in muted watercolors.
Then:
Out on the horizon,


On Top of Things Near the White House


New Budget Director Named, Giuliani's Third in Two Years
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appointed Joseph J. Lhota yesterday as his latest budget director, filling the influential position for the third time in less than two years.
Mr.
Lhota, 41, the city's Commissioner of Finance, replaces Marc V. Shaw, who announced on Monday that he would step down after only 11 months as budget director to become the chief executive of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Mr.
Shaw had replaced Abraham M. Lackman, who resigned in January to  become a senior aide to the Republicans of the State Senate.


Lemieux Returns, But Richer Steals Show in Overtime
Stephane Richer, looking like Claude Lemieux in the playoffs last season, spoiled Lemieux's return to the Meadowlands tonight with a goal 57 seconds into  overtime that gave the Devils a 4-3 victory over the Colorado Avalanche.
Richer is the player the Devils rely on a great deal for a clutch goal, and the explosive right wing with the burning speed came through tonight before a smallish crowd of 13,002 at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Richer's goal gave the  Devils their first victory in seven games (1-4-2) and gave Colorado its first loss in seven games.


Buckley Takes Seat; Miller Returns
When the defense was told on Tuesday that linebacker Marcus Buckley would be  benched for Corey Miller, Buckley couldn't stand it.
He stormed out of the meeting, afraid he might erupt at the coaches.
So when the Giants play the Arizona Cardinals on Thursday night, look for Miller, who didn't deserve to be benched in the first place (it was partly done  because he is outspoken), to be back as a starter.


Movement on Immigration Bill


Coaxed Back Down the Mountain
The arranger and composer Chico O'Farrill has spent a good portion of his career in darkness and exile, a strange place for one of the better writers of orchestral jazz.
Though Mr.
O'Farrill has written and arranged for Benny Goodman, Stan Kenton, Charlie Parker, Machito, Dizzy Gillespie and others, he has kept his distance from the American jazz scene, waiting for situations that  have allowed him to present his art the way he prefers to hear it.
Mr.
O'Farrill has worked as a musical ghostwriter, turning out arrangements for the better-known composer and arranger Gil Fuller.
He also spent a decade or so in Mexico.
And in the late 1970's he retreated into the world of commercials, writing background music for products like toothpaste and hamburgers.
Tonight, the 74-year-old Mr.
O'Farrill steps back into the mainstream when he leads his big band, with a guest appearance by Wynton Marsalis, at Alice Tully Hall as part of Lincoln Center's jazz program.
A few months ago, he released his first album in some 30 years, "Pure Emotion" (Milestone).


Market Place;Hondo Oil's fortunes brighten, but some investors are wary.
AT the beginning of the year, it looked as if Robert O. Anderson, the former  chief executive of ARCO, had run out of luck in founding the Hondo Oil and Gas Company instead of kicking back on his New Mexico ranch to enjoy his retirement.
Having sold off most of what he owned to pursue a single natural gas project in  the foothills of the Colombian Andes, he had only a vague idea of how much he would find.
He had no customers.
Creditors and short-sellers were closing in.
But in the last few months, almost everything has gone right for Hondo.
A second well has indicated that the project is probably sitting on 9 to 12 trillion cubic feet of gas, about twice the earlier estimates, analysts said.
That amount of gas would be valued at billions of dollars, even before counting  petroleum liquids that might be worth almost as much.


Royal Nedlloyd Reports 47% Drop in Profit
The Dutch transport company Royal Nedlloyd Group N.V. said yesterday that its third-quarter profit fell 47 percent as the strength of the guilder offset revenue gains and the company's ocean shipping division lost business.
Nedlloyd, one of Europe's largest sea and land transport companies, earned 23 million guilders ($14.3 million) in the quarter that ended Sept. 30, down from 43 million guilders in the comparable period a year ago.
The company said it expected its full-year profit before one-time charges to be about 53 million guilders ($33 million), or half of last year's profit.
Nedlloyd said it would take a substantial one-time charge in the final quarter to cover "serious irregularities" at its Nedlloyd Road Cargo unit in Austria.
Bloomberg Business News


Kite and Ryder Cup a Perfect Fit
Tom Kite has never looked the part.
From the time he was a skinny kid at the  University of Texas, with that curly hair and those thick glasses with lenses like the bottom of a Mason jar, to the time he was winning the United States Open on one of history's hardest setups in 1992 at Pebble Beach, he has never been anybody's picture-perfect anything.
Appearance and image are very ephemeral things.
Maybe this is what makes the  man from Austin, Tex., such a fine selection as the captain of the 1997 Ryder Cup team.
Because when it comes to Kite, substance is everything.


CURRENTS&lt;HEADLINEThe Lighthouse For Lighthouses
THE Maine lighthouse that stands tall and serene is a bold visual anchor in a new series of paintings by Jamie Wyeth (far left), on view at the James Graham &amp; Sons gallery (1014 Madison Avenue, near 78th Street) through Dec. 21.
The show reflects Mr.
Wyeth's affection for the 1857 lighthouse, in which he  lives, located on the 22-acre Southern Island, which he owns.
Although its light was extinguished in 1934, the lighthouse and its adjoining clapboard building (left) were restored about 20 years ago by Mr.
Wyeth's mother, Betsy.


Eerie Liberal Hush? Blame the News Media
To the Editor:
"Liberal Urging Has Given Way to Eerie Hush" (front page, Nov. 24) points to  the absence of progressive voices in policy debates.


Point-and-Shoots: From Size to Zoom
WITH the holiday gift season approaching, and the picture-taking season well  under way, many people are thinking about giving a camera, or replacing or upgrading their old equipment with newer models.
Lurking just over the horizon are technological developments that may eventually transform amateur photography, including digital cameras that don't use film and new photofinishing programs like the Advanced Photo System.
With this system, to be introduced next year by Kodak and Fuji, among others, technological information about exposure will be recorded directly onto frames of film.
But such devices and processes aren't likely to be perfected for years.
For now, manufacturers have developed amateur cameras that are remarkably sophisticated and easy to use.


32 Million in Penalties Sought In Motel 6 Insider Trading Case
The Securities and Exchange Commission is seeking about $32 million from two  men charged in an insider trading case involving Motel 6 L.P. and the Norton Company, according to a court order made public by the S.E.C. today.
That amount ranks among the highest penalties ever sought by the agency in an insider trading case, current and former S.E.C. officials said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Apple's Co-Founder Reaps $1 Billion in Pixar Offering Steven P. Jobs has re-emerged as a captain of industry, as far as the stock market is concerned.
In one day, he has become a billionaire on paper, after his company, Pixar Animation Studios, offered stock to the public, and the shares almost doubled in price.
Pixar made the hit animated movie "Toy Story," and plans two more films for Disney.


RHONE-POULENC TO SELL STAKE IN A PRODUCER OF SODA ASH
Rhone-Poulenc S.A. agreed yesterday to sell its 51 percent stake in the soda  ash producer Rhone-Poulenc of Wyoming to Oriental Chemical Industry for $150 million.
The rest of the company is owned by the Union Pacific Resources Company, a unit of the Union Pacific Corporation.
The transaction does not include Rhone-Poulenc's sodium bicarbonate business.
Rhone-Poulenc of Wyoming produces more than two million tons of soda ash annually from natural deposits in Green River, Wyo.
It has about 500 employees.
Soda ash, or sodium carbonate,  is a raw material used primarily in making glass.
It is also is used in the chemical industry and in making detergents.
Oriental Chemical Industry is a Korean chemical company.


Swalec Rejects Bid By Welsh Water
South Wales Electricity P.L.C. rebuffed a takeover offer yesterday from Welsh Water P.L.C. and said Welsh Water had agreed to meet today to offer a higher price.
South Wales Electricity, known as Swalec, said Welsh Water made an offer  of 825 pence to 840 pence a share.
The offer valued Swalec, which has 92.8 million shares outstanding, at about L780 million ($1.2 billion).


Another German Trial for H.I.V.-Tainted Blood
The co-owner of a German drug laboratory went on trial today on nearly 6,000  counts of murder or attempted murder for selling blood products tainted with the virus that causes AIDS.
The owner, Dr.
Gunter Kurt Eckert, 55, is accused of distributing blood plasma after his laboratory, Aprath, failed to test the plasma for the virus, H.I.V.
The case is being heard in Gottingen.


Union Offers A Brief Pause In Rail Threat
The teamsters' union, which staged a limited strike on Tuesday against the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, said last night that it would not carry out any further job action at least until Friday morning, assuring passengers a fairly routine commute today.
The announcement came last night as both sides said they would resume talks today at 10:30 A.M.
There were no talks yesterday, and in a move that labor leaders said amounted to daring workers to walk out, Metro-North announced that, starting tomorrow, it will stop keeping buses on standby in case of a strike.


Clinton Urges All Sides to Accept Ulster Pact as Basis for Peace
Seeking to give additional momentum to peace efforts in Northern Ireland, President Clinton today urged all parties involved in the province's conflict to accept the agreement reached late Tuesday by the British and Irish Governments as the basis for forging a permanent settlement.
The agreement "provided a mechanism for all of the parties honorably now to bring their concerns to the table and to be heard," Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference here on the first stop of a European trip that will take him to Northern Ireland on Thursday.


U.S. Fighting to Save Frail Peace in Haiti
The Clinton Administration suddenly finds itself struggling to prevent the unraveling of a fragile peace in Haiti that began last year with the arrival of  20,000 American soldiers at the head of an international peacekeeping force.
In little more than a month, the American commitment to Haiti has gone from  showcase to headache.
Relations with President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, whom the  American military restored to power in an effort to rebuild democracy, are deteriorating.
Political violence has re-emerged, the economy is on the skids, and Haitians express dissatisfaction with the foreign presence.


Child Safety Found Lacking On Helmets and BB Guns
Despite the proven role of bicycle helmets in preventing serious head injuries, only 14 percent of children wear them regularly when cycling.
The use of helmets for in-line skating and skateboarding is even worse: only  8 percent of children use them all the time.


Seagram Reports a Deficit Of $55 Million in Quarter
The Seagram Company said yesterday that it took a pretax charge of $290 million in the third quarter to trim its wine and spirits business, resulting in a loss of $55 million.
The charge, which was higher than what analysts had expected, will cover job  cuts and closing some warehouses, bottling plants and distilleries, mostly in Europe, where business has been weak.


First U.S. Troops Scout Bosnia Positions


MAF BANCORP IN DEAL TO BUY N. S. BANCORP
MAF Bancorp Inc. said late yesterday that it had agreed to buy N. S. Bancorp  Inc. in a stock and cash transaction valued at $277.2 million.
The acquisition will give MAF Bancorp 20 branches in Chicago and its western suburbs, with about $3 billion in assets.
MAF Bancorp, based in Clarendon Hills, Ill., is the parent company of Mid America Federal Savings Bank.
N.
S.
Bancorp, based in Chicago, is the parent company of Northwestern Savings Bank.
Under the agreement, each common share of N. S. Bancorp will be exchanged for 0.8466 common share of MAF Bancorp, plus $20.34 in cash.
Based on yesterday's closing price of $26 a share  for MAF Bancorp, the deal values N. S. Bancorp shares at $42.35 each, $6.10 above their closing price of $36.25.
Both companies trade on the Nasdaq stock market.


Forging Communities, Performing and Otherwise
Year by year, Ballet Hispanico has steadily grown, until it is now a group of strong individuals who can dance harmoniously together.
The troupe, which is directed by Tina Ramirez, celebrated its 25th anniversary on Tuesday night when  it opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater.
Each work on the program concerned a festive or troubled group or community.
Ramon Oller's new "Tears for Violeta" was a choreographic elegy for a vanished society.
Christopher Barreca and Zhanna Gurvich, the production's set designers, filled the stage with enormous candelabra, and the candles were lighted in the course of the action.
Eight people made up the community that danced in this space: Marc Calamia, Alessandra Corona, Pedro Ruiz, Lynne Morrissey, Eduardo Vilaro, Yael Levitin, Donald Roman Lopez and Linda Caceres.


Villanova Survives After a Fight
Kerry Kittles scored 22 points as third-ranked Villanova survived a scare by  Bradley, winning by 70-63 tonight in a game marred by a fight.
Kittles, scoreless for the first 10 minutes of the first half, and Eric Eberz combined to score 10 of the Wildcats' last 12 points as Bradley (0-2) managed only one basket after taking a 61-60 lead with 1 minute 56 seconds left to play.


Dodgers Obtain Blowers From Mariners
The Los Angeles Dodgers ended their search for a third baseman yesterday, acquiring the power-hitting MIKE BLOWERS from the Seattle Mariners for two minor leaguers, second baseman MIGUEL CAIRO and third baseman WILLIS OTANEZ.
The Dodgers had said they would not exercise their option on 38-year-old Tim Wallach for the 1996 season.
Blowers, 30, hit .257 for the Mariners last season  with career-high totals in homers (23), runs batted in (96), doubles (24) and hits (113). (AP)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;The Metropolitan Museum of Art is beginning a campaign for its network of 36 stores.
SO competitive is holiday retailing that the largest art institution in the Western Hemisphere must advertise itself.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has created a $300,000 national advertising campaign, the first of its kind, for its network of 36 stores.
"There are so many other shops out there with the name 'museum' on them, that we wanted to remind people of the fact that we are here," William H. Luers, the  museum's president, said.
"We want people to remember that we're a low-cost supplier of elegant gifts. And by patronizing our shops, people are helping to support the Met."


Chinese Court Denies Appeal of Australian
In a case that has raised fears among foreigners doing business in China, an  Australian man lost his appeal this week to overturn a 16-year prison term for embezzlement and corruption.
The Higher People's Court in Canton said there was sufficient evidence that James Peng embezzled $180,000 from a textile company he founded in Shenzhen, an  economic development zone abutting Hong Kong.


When Push Comes to Shove, the Knicks Collapse
It began as one of those open-floor gems: Larry Johnson cuffing the ball and  dunking hard, John Starks putting his head down, threading his way through every crevice in the Charlotte front line.
But along the way everyone stopped running and started talking.
And then pushing, shoving and grabbing.
Finally, Johnson and Charles Oakley grabbed one another's jerseys underneath the basket by the Knicks' bench, and suddenly everyone was ready to take a swing.


Dollar Up vs. Pound and Mark As Traders Expect a Rate Cut
The dollar rose to a 16-month high against the British pound and gained against the German mark as expectations grew that interest rates in those two countries would soon be lowered.
The pound slumped on speculation that British policy makers would have to cut interest rates soon if they intended to meet the economic growth forecasts set forth in the Government's 1996-97 budget, which was announced on Tuesday.


Rubbermaid Adds Agency to Roster
The Rubbermaid home products division of Rubbermaid Inc. said yesterday that  it had added an agency to its roster as it shifted advertising strategies.
The billings were estimated at $12 million to $15 million.
The division added Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications in Cleveland to handle so-called integrated communications like sales promotion and retail advertising.
DDB Needham Chicago, part of the Omnicom Group, which has handled traditional brand advertising for the division for the last 13 years, remains as agency of record.
But Jeffrey Petit, a spokesman for Rubbermaid in Wooster, Ohio, said the company had shifted its focus to a heavier emphasis on the types  of assignments that Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith had been assigned to handle.


Aetna Selling 2 Businesses To Travelers
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company has agreed to sell its property and liability insurance businesses to Travelers Group Inc. for $4 billion in cash, the companies said yesterday.
Aetna now plans to concentrate on health care and life insurance, where it has a better record of success.
Travelers plans to merge the Aetna businesses with its own property and liability insurance units and create a new company which will sell stock to the public next year.


Despite U.S.-NATO Tensions, Troops Get Ready for Bosnia
Friction between the United States and its European allies over the Balkan peace accord have begun to emerge and could intensify once the 60,000-strong NATO force, which is to include 20,000 Americans, moves into Bosnia to enforce the agreement.
The allies object vigorously, for example, to an American plan to arm the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government Army while the NATO force tries simultaneously to keep the belligerents apart.
The Europeans also want a senior  official to oversee civilian relief efforts and coordinate with the peacekeepers, but Washington insists that such a supervisor have no authority over the NATO force and not be connected with the United Nations.


Ex-Senator Is Given A Year's Probation
Former Senator David Durenberger of Minnesota was sentenced today in Federal  District Court to a year's probation and fined $1,000 on five misdemeanor charges of stealing $425 in public funds by abusing his Congressional expense account.
Federal District Judge Stanley Harris refused a Justice Department request that Mr.
Durenberger, a Republican, serve home detention.
He had pleaded guilty  to the five misdemeanor charges.


Agents Digging For a Mobster
For decades, Thomas Spinelli was known by Gambino crime family members as an  associate, someone who worked for the mob but who was never inducted as a soldier.
In 1989, at the age of 77, Mr.
Spinelli disappeared.
Two years later, Salvatore Gravano, the Gambino family underboss, defected and told authorities that Mr.
Spinelli had been shot to death because family leaders believed he had testified before a grand jury about their crimes.


COMPANY NEWS


Panel of Experts Urges Government to Revamp Science Budget
A panel of scientists called on the Federal Government yesterday to reinvent  the way it finances science and technology research, describing the current system as a haphazard one that worked well for decades when budgets were growing but that could damage the nation now that science dollars are being cut.
In the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30, the Government spent $69 billion on scientific research, broadly defined, doing everything from fighting AIDS to probing distant planets.
The science budget is down from a peak of $73 billion in 1990, in dollars adjusted for inflation.


Asian Builder Seeks To Soothe Investors
Gordon Wu, the founder of Hopewell Holdings Ltd., one of Asia's biggest builders of bridges, highways and power plants, met with stock analysts today to lay out his plans to reduce the company's debt.
Hopewell has seen its shares fall 39 percent since July after cost overruns and delays at several of its projects.


Mayor Giuliani's Hall Monitors
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration is thinking about using welfare recipients in New York City's public schools to monitor students during recess,  lunch and class changes.
If this is done as a careful experiment involving a limited number of mothers and schools, it is worth trying.
But if welfare recipients are viewed as a way to plug a gap in school staffing, the plan seems  preposterously optimistic.
Maintaining order in the schools is a job for professionals or paraprofessionals -- not for people with no school experience who may be having trouble keeping their own lives in order.
The scheme seems designed to alleviate a problem created when City Hall negotiated a new labor contract that frees teachers from monitoring duties outside the classroom.
Instead the teachers are supposed to spend an extra period on projects like tutoring, consulting with parents and overseeing extracurricular activities.
In theory, the change is an excellent one.
Teachers  should not be wasted on functions that could be performed by aides and paraprofessionals.


Designer Rooms Measured In Inches, Not Feet
DESIGNERS may be used to creating elegant drawing rooms, lavish bathrooms and baronial bedrooms, but those who have participated in the annual Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club show houses have also applied their talents to a one-inch scale.
Their 16 miniature rooms, called "Small Wonders," will be on display tomorrow at Christie's, at 502 Park Avenue (near 59th Street), until Dec. 4, when they will  be auctioned to benefit Kips Bay.
The rooms are expected to raise $1,000 to $10,000 each.
A party at 6 P.M. will precede the auction; tickets are $60, at (718) 893-8600.
This year's rooms include a Ferrari repair shop by Anthony Antine, a ski lodge by Richard Ridge and Barbara Ostrom's classical gallery (above), complete  with two grandes dames -- and a lap dog, of course.


Why U.S. Troops Don't Belong in Bosnia
To the Editor:
After President Clinton's speech, I asked my 14-year-old grandson, by phone,  his opinion.


New Jersey Daily Briefing;Health-Care Merger Planned
Another day, another health-care merger.
The latest organizations seeking state permission to join forces are Community-Kimball Health Care System in Toms River, which has more than 800 physicians, and Saint Barnabas Health Care System in Livingston, which has over 1,800 doctors.
Just last week, another merger announcement -- involving Newark Beth Israel  Medical Center and the Saint Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston -- started a  scramble among Newark officials to make sure their city didn't lose a key part of its health-care services.


